Master Humphrey and Mr Pickwick
by Charles Dickens

Published by the Ex-Classics Project, 2020
Public Domain

Introduction

The Pickwick Papers is one of Dickens' most popular novels, but
few people know that it does not include everything that Dickens
wrote about Mr. Pickwick. In 1840, after the success of Oliver
Twist, Dickens started a magazine called Master Humphrey's
Clock. Master Humphrey was an old gentleman who kept a bundle of
stories in the bottom of his grandfather clock, and would read
them out to his friends at their weekly meetings. After a few
issues Dickens introduced Mr. Pickwick to the club, and also Sam
Weller and his father Tony. Shortly afterward he began to
publish The Old Curiosity Shop in the magazine; this soon took
over completely and no more was heard of Pickwick.
These stories are not included in the standard sets of Dickens'
work, and indeed have very rarely been republished. We present
them here with the original illustrations, which are taken from
a copy of the first edition, 1840.

MASTER HUMPHREY'S VISITOR

Illustration: Mr Pickwick Greets Master Humphrey
WHEN I am in a thoughtful mood, I often succeed in diverting the
current of some mournful reflections, by conjuring up a number 
of fanciful associations with the objects that surround me, and
dwelling upon the scenes and characters they suggest.
I have been led by this habit to assign to every room in my
house and every old staring portrait on its walls a separate
interest of its own. Thus, I am persuaded that a stately dame,
terrible to behold in her rigid modesty, who hangs above the
chimney-piece of my bedroom, is the former lady of the mansion.
In the courtyard below is a stone face of surpassing ugliness,
which I have somehow—in a kind of jealousy, I am afraid—
associated with her husband. Above my study is a little room
with ivy peeping through the lattice, from which I bring their
daughter, a lovely girl of eighteen or nineteen years of age,
and dutiful in all respects save one, that one being her devoted
attachment to a young gentleman on the stairs, whose grandmother
(degraded to a disused laundry in the garden) piques herself
upon an old family quarrel, and is the implacable enemy of their
love. With such materials as these I work out many a little
drama, whose chief merit is, that I can bring it to a happy end
at will. I have so many of them on hand, that if on my return
home one of these evenings I were to find some bluff old wight
of two centuries ago comfortably seated in my easy chair, and a
lovelorn damsel vainly appealing to his heart, and leaning her
white arm upon my clock itself, I verily believe I should only
express my surprise that they had kept me waiting so long, and
never honoured me with a call before.
I was in such a mood as this, sitting in my garden yesterday
morning under the shade of a favourite tree, revelling in all
the bloom and brightness about me, and feeling every sense of
hope and enjoyment quickened by this most beautiful season of
Spring, when my meditations were interrupted by the unexpected
appearance of my barber at the end of the walk, who I
immediately saw was coming towards me with a hasty step that
betokened something remarkable.
My barber is at all times a very brisk, bustling, active little
man,—for he is, as it were, chubby all over, without being stout
or unwieldy,—but yesterday his alacrity was so very uncommon
that it quite took me by surprise. For could I fail to observe
when he came up to me that his gray eyes were twinkling in a
most extraordinary manner, that his little red nose was in an
unusual glow, that every line in his round bright face was
twisted and curved into an expression of pleased surprise, and
that his whole countenance was radiant with glee? I was still
more surprised to see my housekeeper, who usually preserves a
very staid air, and stands somewhat upon her dignity, peeping
round the hedge at the bottom of the walk, and exchanging nods
and smiles with the barber, who twice or thrice looked over his
shoulder for that purpose. I could conceive no announcement to
which these appearances could be the prelude, unless it were
that they had married each other that morning.
I was, consequently, a little disappointed when it only came out
that there was a gentleman in the house who wished to speak with
me.
'And who is it?' said I.
The barber, with his face screwed up still tighter than before,
replied that the gentleman would not send his name, but wished
to see me. I pondered for a moment, wondering who this visitor
might be, and I remarked that he embraced the opportunity of
exchanging another nod with the housekeeper, who still lingered
in the distance.
'Well!' said I, 'bid the gentleman come here.'
This seemed to be the consummation of the barber's hopes, for he
turned sharp round, and actually ran away.
Now, my sight is not very good at a distance, and therefore when
the gentleman first appeared in the walk, I was not quite clear
whether he was a stranger to me or otherwise. He was an elderly
gentleman, but came tripping along in the pleasantest manner
conceivable, avoiding the garden-roller and the borders of the
beds with inimitable dexterity, picking his way among the
flower-pots, and smiling with unspeakable good humour. Before he
was half-way up the walk he began to salute me; then I thought I
knew him; but when he came towards me with his hat in his hand,
the sun shining on his bald head, his bland face, his bright
spectacles, his fawn-coloured tights, and his black gaiters,—
then my heart warmed towards him, and I felt quite certain that
it was Mr. Pickwick.
'My dear sir,' said that gentleman as I rose to receive him,
'pray be seated. Pray sit down. Now, do not stand on my account.
I must insist upon it, really.' With these words Mr. Pickwick
gently pressed me down into my seat, and taking my hand in his,
shook it again and again with a warmth of manner perfectly
irresistible. I endeavoured to express in my welcome something
of that heartiness and pleasure which the sight of him awakened,
and made him sit down beside me. All this time he kept
alternately releasing my hand and grasping it again, and
surveying me through his spectacles with such a beaming
countenance as I never till then beheld.
'You knew me directly!' said Mr. Pickwick. 'What a pleasure it
is to think that you knew me directly!'
I remarked that I had read his adventures very often, and his
features were quite familiar to me from the published portraits.
As I thought it a good opportunity of adverting to the
circumstance, I condoled with him upon the various libels on his
character which had found their way into print. Mr. Pickwick
shook his head, and for a moment looked very indignant, but
smiling again directly, added that no doubt I was acquainted
with Cervantes's introduction to the second part of Don Quixote,
and that it fully expressed his sentiments on the subject.
'But now,' said Mr. Pickwick, 'don't you wonder how I found you
out?'
'I shall never wonder, and, with your good leave, never know,'
said I, smiling in my turn. 'It is enough for me that you give
me this gratification. I have not the least desire that you
should tell me by what means I have obtained it.'
'You are very kind,' returned Mr. Pickwick, shaking me by the
hand again; 'you are so exactly what I expected! But for what
particular purpose do you think I have sought you, my dear sir?
Now what do you think I have come for?'
Mr. Pickwick put this question as though he were persuaded that
it was morally impossible that I could by any means divine the
deep purpose of his visit, and that it must be hidden from all
human ken. Therefore, although I was rejoiced to think that I
had anticipated his drift, I feigned to be quite ignorant of it,
and after a brief consideration shook my head despairingly.
'What should you say,' said Mr. Pickwick, laying the forefinger
of his left hand upon my coat-sleeve, and looking at me with his
head thrown back, and a little on one side,—'what should you say
if I confessed that after reading your account of yourself and
your little society, I had come here, a humble candidate for one
of those empty chairs?'
'I should say,' I returned, 'that I know of only one
circumstance which could still further endear that little
society to me, and that would be the associating with it my old
friend,—for you must let me call you so,—my old friend, Mr.
Pickwick.'
As I made him this answer every feature of Mr. Pickwick's face
fused itself into one all-pervading expression of delight. After
shaking me heartily by both hands at once, he patted me gently
on the back, and then—I well understood why—coloured up to the
eyes, and hoped with great earnestness of manner that he had not
hurt me.
If he had, I would have been content that he should have
repeated the offence a hundred times rather than suppose so; but
as he had not, I had no difficulty in changing the subject by
making an inquiry which had been upon my lips twenty times
already.
'You have not told me,' said I, 'anything about Sam Weller.'
'O! Sam,' replied Mr. Pickwick, 'is the same as ever. The same
true, faithful fellow that he ever was. What should I tell you
about Sam, my dear sir, except that he is more indispensable to
my happiness and comfort every day of my life?'
'And Mr. Weller senior?' said I.
'Old Mr. Weller,' returned Mr. Pickwick, 'is in no respect more
altered than Sam, unless it be that he is a little more
opinionated than he was formerly, and perhaps at times more
talkative. He spends a good deal of his time now in our
neighbourhood, and has so constituted himself a part of my
bodyguard, that when I ask permission for Sam to have a seat in
your kitchen on clock nights (supposing your three friends think
me worthy to fill one of the chairs), I am afraid I must often
include Mr. Weller too.'
I very readily pledged myself to give both Sam and his father a
free admission to my house at all hours and seasons, and this
point settled, we fell into a lengthy conversation which was
carried on with as little reserve on both sides as if we had
been intimate friends from our youth, and which conveyed to me 
the comfortable assurance that Mr. Pickwick's buoyancy of
spirit, and indeed all his old cheerful characteristics, were
wholly unimpaired. As he had spoken of the consent of my friends
as being yet in abeyance, I repeatedly assured him that his
proposal was certain to receive their most joyful sanction, and
several times entreated that he would give me leave to introduce
him to Jack Redburn and Mr. Miles (who were near at hand)
without further ceremony.
To this proposal, however, Mr. Pickwick's delicacy would by no
means allow him to accede, for he urged that his eligibility
must be formally discussed, and that, until this had been done,
he could not think of obtruding himself further. The utmost I
could obtain from him was a promise that he would attend upon
our next night of meeting, that I might have the pleasure of
presenting him immediately on his election.
Mr. Pickwick, having with many blushes placed in my hands a
small roll of paper, which he termed his 'qualification,' put a
great many questions to me touching my friends, and particularly
Jack Redburn, whom he repeatedly termed 'a fine fellow,' and in
whose favour I could see he was strongly predisposed. When I had
satisfied him on these points, I took him up into my room, that
he might make acquaintance with the old chamber which is our
place of meeting.
'And this,' said Mr. Pickwick, stopping short, 'is the clock!
Dear me! And this is really the old clock!'
I thought he would never have come away from it. After advancing
towards it softly, and laying his hand upon it with as much
respect and as many smiling looks as if it were alive, he set
himself to consider it in every possible direction, now mounting
on a chair to look at the top, now going down upon his knees to
examine the bottom, now surveying the sides with his spectacles
almost touching the case, and now trying to peep between it and
the wall to get a slight view of the back. Then he would retire
a pace or two and look up at the dial to see it go, and then
draw near again and stand with his head on one side to hear it
tick: never failing to glance towards me at intervals of a few
seconds each, and nod his head with such complacent
gratification as I am quite unable to describe. His admiration
was not confined to the clock either, but extended itself to
every article in the room; and really, when he had gone through
them every one, and at last sat himself down in all the six
chairs, one after another, to try how they felt, I never saw
such a picture of good-humour and happiness as he presented,
from the top of his shining head down to the very last button of
his gaiters.
I should have been well pleased, and should have had the utmost
enjoyment of his company, if he had remained with me all day,
but my favourite, striking the hour, reminded him that he must
take his leave. I could not forbear telling him once more how
glad he had made me, and we shook hands all the way down-stairs.
We had no sooner arrived in the Hall than my housekeeper,
gliding out of her little room (she had changed her gown and
cap, I observed), greeted Mr. Pickwick with her best smile and
courtesy; and the barber, feigning to be accidentally passing on
his way out, made him a vast number of bows. When the
housekeeper curtsied, Mr. Pickwick bowed with the utmost
politeness, and when he bowed, the housekeeper curtsied again;
between the housekeeper and the barber, I should say that Mr.
Pickwick faced about and bowed with undiminished affability
fifty times at least.
I saw him to the door; an omnibus was at the moment passing the
corner of the lane, which Mr. Pickwick hailed and ran after with
extraordinary nimbleness. When he had got about half-way, he
turned his head, and seeing that I was still looking after him
and that I waved my hand, stopped, evidently irresolute whether
to come back and shake hands again, or to go on. The man behind
the omnibus shouted, and Mr. Pickwick ran a little way towards
him: then he looked round at me, and ran a little way back
again. Then there was another shout, and he turned round once
more and ran the other way. After several of these vibrations,
the man settled the question by taking Mr. Pickwick by the arm
and putting him into the carriage; but his last action was to
let down the window and wave his hat to me as it drove off.


MR. PICKWICK'S TALE

I lost no time in opening the parcel Mr. Pickwick had left with
me. The following were its contents:—
A good many years have passed away since old John Podgers lived
in the town of Windsor, where he was born, and where, in course
of time, he came to be comfortably and snugly buried. You may be
sure that in the time of King James the First, Windsor was a
very quaint queer old town, and you may take it upon my
authority that John Podgers was a very quaint queer old fellow;
consequently he and Windsor fitted each other to a nicety, and
seldom parted company even for half a day.
John Podgers was broad, sturdy, Dutch-built, short, and a very
hard eater, as men of his figure often are. Being a hard sleeper
likewise, he divided his time pretty equally between these two
recreations, always falling asleep when he had done eating, and
always taking another turn at the trencher when he had done
sleeping, by which means he grew more corpulent and more drowsy
every day of his life. Indeed it used to be currently reported
that when he sauntered up and down the sunny side of the street
before dinner (as he never failed to do in fair weather), he
enjoyed his soundest nap; but many people held this to be a
fiction, as he had several times been seen to look after fat
oxen on market-days, and had even been heard, by persons of good
credit and reputation, to chuckle at the sight, and say to
himself with great glee, 'Live beef, live beef!' It was upon
this evidence that the wisest people in Windsor (beginning with
the local authorities of course) held that John Podgers was a
man of strong, sound sense, not what is called smart, perhaps,
and it might be of a rather lazy and apoplectic turn, but still
a man of solid parts, and one who meant much more than he cared
to show. This impression was confirmed by a very dignified way
he had of shaking his head and imparting, at the same time, a
pendulous motion to his double chin; in short, he passed for one
of those people who, being plunged into the Thames, would make
no vain efforts to set it afire, but would straightway flop down
to the bottom with a deal of gravity, and be highly respected in
consequence by all good men.
Being well to do in the world, and a peaceful widower,—having a
great appetite, which, as he could afford to gratify it, was a
luxury and no inconvenience, and a power of going to sleep,
which, as he had no occasion to keep awake, was a most enviable
faculty,—you will readily suppose that John Podgers was a happy
man. But appearances are often deceptive when they least seem
so, and the truth is that, notwithstanding his extreme
sleekness, he was rendered uneasy in his mind and exceedingly
uncomfortable by a constant apprehension that beset him night
and day.
You know very well that in those times there flourished divers
evil old women who, under the name of Witches, spread great
disorder through the land, and inflicted various dismal tortures
upon Christian men; sticking pins and needles into them when
they least expected it, and causing them to walk in the air with
their feet upwards, to the great terror of their wives and
families, who were naturally very much disconcerted when the
master of the house unexpectedly came home, knocking at the door
with his heels and combing his hair on the scraper. These were
their commonest pranks, but they every day played a hundred
others, of which none were less objectionable, and many were
much more so, being improper besides; the result was that
vengeance was denounced against all old women, with whom even
the king himself had no sympathy (as he certainly ought to have
had), for with his own most Gracious hand he penned a most
Gracious consignment of them to everlasting wrath, and devised
most Gracious means for their confusion and slaughter, in virtue
whereof scarcely a day passed but one witch at the least was
most graciously hanged, drowned, or roasted in some part of his
dominions. Still the press teemed with strange and terrible news
from the North or the South, or the East or the West, relative
to witches and their unhappy victims in some corner of the
country, and the Public's hair stood on end to that degree that
it lifted its hat off its head, and made its face pale with
terror.
You may believe that the little town of Windsor did not escape
the general contagion. The inhabitants boiled a witch on the
king's birthday and sent a bottle of the broth to court, with a
dutiful address expressive of their loyalty. The king, being
rather frightened by the present, piously bestowed it upon the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and returned an answer to the address,
wherein he gave them golden rules for discovering witches, and
laid great stress upon certain protecting charms, and especially
horseshoes. Immediately the towns-people went to work nailing up
horseshoes over every door, and so many anxious parents
apprenticed their children to farriers to keep them out of
harm's way, that it became quite a genteel trade, and flourished
exceedingly.
In the midst of all this bustle John Podgers ate and slept as
usual, but shook his head a great deal oftener than was his
custom, and was observed to look at the oxen less, and at the
old women more. He had a little shelf put up in his sitting-
room, whereon was displayed, in a row which grew longer every 
week, all the witchcraft literature of the time; he grew learned
in charms and exorcisms, hinted at certain questionable females
on broomsticks whom he had seen from his chamber window, riding
in the air at night, and was in constant terror of being
bewitched. At length, from perpetually dwelling upon this one
idea, which, being alone in his head, had all its own way, the
fear of witches became the single passion of his life. He, who
up to that time had never known what it was to dream, began to
have visions of witches whenever he fell asleep; waking, they
were incessantly present to his imagination likewise; and,
sleeping or waking, he had not a moment's peace. He began to set
witch-traps in the highway, and was often seen lying in wait
round the corner for hours together, to watch their effect.
These engines were of simple construction, usually consisting of
two straws disposed in the form of a cross, or a piece of a
Bible cover with a pinch of salt upon it; but they were
infallible, and if an old woman chanced to stumble over them (as
not unfrequently happened, the chosen spot being a broken and
stony place), John started from a doze, pounced out upon her,
and hung round her neck till assistance arrived, when she was 
immediately carried away and drowned. By dint of constantly
inveigling old ladies and disposing of them in this summary
manner, he acquired the reputation of a great public character;
and as he received no harm in these pursuits beyond a scratched 
face or so, he came, in the course of time, to be considered
witch-proof.
There was but one person who entertained the least doubt of John
Podgers's gifts, and that person was his own nephew, a wild,
roving young fellow of twenty who had been brought up in his
uncle's house and lived there still,—that is to say, when he was
at home, which was not as often as it might have been. As he was
an apt scholar, it was he who read aloud every fresh piece of
strange and terrible intelligence that John Podgers bought; and
this he always did of an evening in the little porch in front of
the house, round which the neighbours would flock in crowds to
hear the direful news,—for people like to be frightened, and
when they can be frightened for nothing and at another man's
expense, they like it all the better.


Illustration: Will Marks reading the Newspaper
One fine midsummer evening, a group of persons were gathered in
this place, listening intently to Will Marks (that was the
nephew's name), as with his cap very much on one side, his arm
coiled slyly round the waist of a pretty girl who sat beside
him, and his face screwed into a comical expression intended to
represent extreme gravity, he read—with Heaven knows how many
embellishments of his own—a dismal account of a gentleman down
in Northamptonshire under the influence of witchcraft and taken
forcible possession of by the Devil, who was playing his very
self with him. John Podgers, in a high sugar-loaf hat and short
cloak, filled the opposite seat, and surveyed the auditory with
a look of mingled pride and horror very edifying to see; while
the hearers, with their heads thrust forward and their mouths
open, listened and trembled, and hoped there was a great deal
more to come. Sometimes Will stopped for an instant to look
round upon his eager audience, and then, with a more comical
expression of face than before and a settling of himself
comfortably, which included a squeeze of the young lady before
mentioned, he launched into some new wonder surpassing all the
others.
The setting sun shed his last golden rays upon this little
party, who, absorbed in their present occupation, took no heed
of the approach of night, or the glory in which the day went
down, when the sound of a horse, approaching at a good round
trot, invading the silence of the hour, caused the reader to
make a sudden stop, and the listeners to raise their heads in
wonder. Nor was their wonder diminished when a horseman dashed
up to the porch, and abruptly checking his steed, inquired where
one John Podgers dwelt.
'Here!' cried a dozen voices, while a dozen hands pointed out
sturdy John, still basking in the terrors of the pamphlet.
The rider, giving his bridle to one of those who surrounded him,
dismounted, and approached John, hat in hand, but with great
haste.
'Whence come ye?' said John.
'From Kingston, master.'
'And wherefore?'
'On most pressing business.'
'Of what nature?'
'Witchcraft.'
Witchcraft! Everybody looked aghast at the breathless messenger,
and the breathless messenger looked equally aghast at everybody—
except Will Marks, who, finding himself unobserved, not only
squeezed the young lady again, but kissed her twice. Surely he
must have been bewitched himself, or he never could have done
it—and the young lady too, or she never would have let him.
'Witchcraft!' cried Will, drowning the sound of his last kiss,
which was rather a loud one.
The messenger turned towards him, and with a frown repeated the
word more solemnly than before; then told his errand, which was,
in brief, that the people of Kingston had been greatly terrified
for some nights past by hideous revels, held by witches beneath
the gibbet within a mile of the town, and related and deposed to
by chance wayfarers who had passed within ear-shot of the spot;
that the sound of their voices in their wild orgies had been
plainly heard by many persons; that three old women laboured
under strong suspicion, and that precedents had been consulted
and solemn council had, and it was found that to identify the
hags some single person must watch upon the spot alone; that no
single person had the courage to perform the task; and that he
had been despatched express to solicit John Podgers to undertake
it that very night, as being a man of great renown, who bore a
charmed life, and was proof against unholy spells.
John received this communication with much composure, and said
in a few words, that it would have afforded him inexpressible
pleasure to do the Kingston people so slight a service, if it
were not for his unfortunate propensity to fall asleep, which no
man regretted more than himself upon the present occasion, but
which quite settled the question. Nevertheless, he said, there
was a gentleman present (and here he looked very hard at a tall
farrier), who, having been engaged all his life in the
manufacture of horseshoes, must be quite invulnerable to the
power of witches, and who, he had no doubt, from his own
reputation for bravery and good-nature, would readily accept the
commission. The farrier politely thanked him for his good
opinion, which it would always be his study to deserve, but
added that, with regard to the present little matter, he
couldn't think of it on any account, as his departing on such an
errand would certainly occasion the instant death of his wife,
to whom, as they all knew, he was tenderly attached. Now, so far
from this circumstance being notorious, everybody had suspected
the reverse, as the farrier was in the habit of beating his lady
rather more than tender husbands usually do; all the married men
present, however, applauded his resolution with great vehemence,
and one and all declared that they would stop at home and die if
needful (which happily it was not) in defence of their lawful
partners.
This burst of enthusiasm over, they began to look, as by one
consent, toward Will Marks, who, with his cap more on one side
than ever, sat watching the proceedings with extraordinary
unconcern. He had never been heard openly to express his
disbelief in witches, but had often cut such jokes at their
expense as left it to be inferred; publicly stating on several
occasions that he considered a broomstick an inconvenient
charger, and one especially unsuited to the dignity of the
female character, and indulging in other free remarks of the
same tendency, to the great amusement of his wild companions.
As they looked at Will they began to whisper and murmur among
themselves, and at length one man cried, 'Why don't you ask Will
Marks?'
As this was what everybody had been thinking of, they all took
up the word, and cried in concert, 'Ah! why don't you ask Will?'
'He don't care,' said the farrier.
'Not he,' added another voice in the crowd.
'He don't believe in it, you know,' sneered a little man with a
yellow face and a taunting nose and chin, which he thrust out
from under the arm of a long man before him.
'Besides,' said a red-faced gentleman with a gruff voice, 'he's
a single man.'
'That's the point!' said the farrier; and all the married men
murmured, ah! that was it, and they only wished they were single
themselves; they would show him what spirit was, very soon.
The messenger looked towards Will Marks beseechingly.
'It will be a wet night, friend, and my grey nag is tired after
yesterday's work—'
Here there was a general titter.
'But,' resumed Will, looking about him with a smile, 'if nobody
else puts in a better claim to go, for the credit of the town I
am your man, and I would be, if I had to go afoot. In five
minutes I shall be in the saddle, unless I am depriving any
worthy gentleman here of the honour of the adventure, which I
wouldn't do for the world.'
But here arose a double difficulty, for not only did John
Podgers combat the resolution with all the words he had, which
were not many, but the young lady combated it too with all the
tears she had, which were very many indeed. Will, however, being
inflexible, parried his uncle's objections with a joke, and
coaxed the young lady into a smile in three short whispers. As
it was plain that he set his mind upon it, and would go, John
Podgers offered him a few first-rate charms out of his own
pocket, which he dutifully declined to accept; and the young
lady gave him a kiss, which he also returned.
'You see what a rare thing it is to be married,' said Will, 'and
how careful and considerate all these husbands are. There's not
a man among them but his heart is leaping to forestall me in
this adventure, and yet a strong sense of duty keeps him back.
The husbands in this one little town are a pattern to the world,
and so must the wives be too, for that matter, or they could
never boast half the influence they have!'
Waiting for no reply to this sarcasm, he snapped his fingers and
withdrew into the house, and thence into the stable, while some
busied themselves in refreshing the messenger, and others in
baiting his steed. In less than the specified time he returned
by another way, with a good cloak hanging over his arm, a good
sword girded by his side, and leading his good horse caparisoned
for the journey.
'Now,' said Will, leaping into the saddle at a bound, 'up and
away. Upon your mettle, friend, and push on. Good night!'
He kissed his hand to the girl, nodded to his drowsy uncle,
waved his cap to the rest—and off they flew pell-mell, as if all
the witches in England were in their horses' legs. They were out
of sight in a minute.
The men who were left behind shook their heads doubtfully,
stroked their chins, and shook their heads again. The farrier
said that certainly Will Marks was a good horseman, nobody
should ever say he denied that: but he was rash, very rash, and
there was no telling what the end of it might be; what did he go
for, that was what he wanted to know? He wished the young fellow
no harm, but why did he go? Everybody echoed these words, and
shook their heads again, having done which they wished John
Podgers good night, and straggled home to bed.
The Kingston people were in their first sleep when Will Marks
and his conductor rode through the town and up to the door of a
house where sundry grave functionaries were assembled, anxiously
expecting the arrival of the renowned Podgers. They were a
little disappointed to find a gay young man in his place; but
they put the best face upon the matter, and gave him full
instructions how he was to conceal himself behind the gibbet,
and watch and listen to the witches, and how at a certain time
he was to burst forth and cut and slash among them vigorously,
so that the suspected parties might be found bleeding in their
beds next day, and thoroughly confounded. They gave him a great
quantity of wholesome advice besides, and—which was more to the
purpose with Will—a good supper. All these things being done,
and midnight nearly come, they sallied forth to show him the
spot where he was to keep his dreary vigil.
The night was by this time dark and threatening. There was a
rumbling of distant thunder, and a low sighing of wind among the
trees, which was very dismal. The potentates of the town kept so
uncommonly close to Will that they trod upon his toes, or
stumbled against his ankles, or nearly tripped up his heels at
every step he took, and, besides these annoyances, their teeth
chattered so with fear, that he seemed to be accompanied by a
dirge of castanets.
At last they made a halt at the opening of a lonely, desolate
space, and, pointing to a black object at some distance, asked
Will if he saw that, yonder.
'Yes,' he replied. 'What then?'
Informing him abruptly that it was the gibbet where he was to
watch, they wished him good night in an extremely friendly
manner, and ran back as fast as their feet would carry them.
Will walked boldly to the gibbet, and, glancing upwards when he
came under it, saw—certainly with satisfaction—that it was
empty, and that nothing dangled from the top but some iron
chains, which swung mournfully to and fro as they were moved by
the breeze. After a careful survey of every quarter he
determined to take his station with his face towards the town;
both because that would place him with his back to the wind, and
because, if any trick or surprise were attempted, it would
probably come from that direction in the first instance. Having
taken these precautions, he wrapped his cloak about him so that
it left the handle of his sword free, and ready to his hand, and
leaning against the gallows-tree with his cap not quite so much
on one side as it had been before, took up his position for the
night.


SECOND CHAPTER OF MR. PICKWICK'S TALE


Illustration: Will Marks at the Gibbet
We left Will Marks leaning under the gibbet with his face
towards the town, scanning the distance with a keen eye, which
sought to pierce the darkness and catch the earliest glimpse of
any person or persons that might approach towards him. But all
was quiet, and, save the howling of the wind as it swept across
the heath in gusts, and the creaking of the chains that dangled
above his head, there was no sound to break the sullen stillness
of the night. After half an hour or so this monotony became more
disconcerting to Will than the most furious uproar would have
been, and he heartily wished for someone antagonist with whom he
might have a fair stand-up fight, if it were only to warm
himself.
Truth to tell, it was a bitter wind, and seemed to blow to the
very heart of a man whose blood, heated but now with rapid
riding, was the more sensitive to the chilling blast. Will was a
daring fellow, and cared not a jot for hard knocks or sharp
blades; but he could not persuade himself to move or walk about,
having just that vague expectation of a sudden assault which
made it a comfortable thing to have something at his back, even
though that something were a gallows-tree. He had no great faith
in the superstitions of the age, still such of them as occurred
to him did not serve to lighten the time, or to render his
situation the more endurable. He remembered how witches were
said to repair at that ghostly hour to churchyards and gibbets,
and such-like dismal spots, to pluck the bleeding mandrake or
scrape the flesh from dead men's bones, as choice ingredients
for their spells; how, stealing by night to lonely places, they
dug graves with their finger-nails, or anointed themselves
before riding in the air, with a delicate pomatum made of the
fat of infants newly boiled. These, and many other fabled
practices of a no less agreeable nature, and all having some
reference to the circumstances in which he was placed, passed
and repassed in quick succession through the mind of Will Marks,
and adding a shadowy dread to that distrust and watchfulness
which his situation inspired, rendered it, upon the whole,
sufficiently uncomfortable. As he had foreseen, too, the rain
began to descend heavily, and driving before the wind in a thick
mist, obscured even those few objects which the darkness of the
night had before imperfectly revealed.
'Look!' shrieked a voice. 'Great Heaven, it has fallen down, and
stands erect as if it lived!'
The speaker was close behind him; the voice was almost at his
ear. Will threw off his cloak, drew his sword, and darting
swiftly round, seized a woman by the wrist, who, recoiling from
him with a dreadful shriek, fell struggling upon her knees.
Another woman, clad, like her whom he had grasped, in mourning
garments, stood rooted to the spot on which they were, gazing
upon his face with wild and glaring eyes that quite appalled
him.
'Say,' cried Will, when they had confronted each other thus for
some time, 'what are ye?'
'Say what are you ,' returned the woman, 'who trouble even this
obscene resting-place of the dead, and strip the gibbet of its
honoured burden? Where is the body?'
He looked in wonder and affright from the woman who questioned
him to the other whose arm he clutched.
'Where is the body?' repeated the questioner more firmly than
before. 'You wear no livery which marks you for the hireling of
the government. You are no friend to us, or I should recognise
you, for the friends of such as we are few in number. What are
you then, and wherefore are you here?'
'I am no foe to the distressed and helpless,' said Will. 'Are ye
among that number? ye should be by your looks.'
'We are!' was the answer.
'Is it ye who have been wailing and weeping here under cover of
the night?' said Will.
'It is,' replied the woman sternly; and pointing, as she spoke,
towards her companion, 'she mourns a husband, and I a brother.
Even the bloody law that wreaks its vengeance on the dead does
not make that a crime, and if it did 'twould be alike to us who
are past its fear or favour.'
Will glanced at the two females, and could barely discern that
the one whom he addressed was much the elder, and that the other
was young and of a slight figure. Both were deadly pale, their
garments wet and worn, their hair dishevelled and streaming in
the wind, themselves bowed down with grief and misery; their
whole appearance most dejected, wretched, and forlorn. A sight
so different from any he had expected to encounter touched him
to the quick, and all idea of anything but their pitiable
condition vanished before it.
'I am a rough, blunt yeoman,' said Will. 'Why I came here is
told in a word; you have been overheard at a distance in the
silence of the night, and I have undertaken a watch for hags or
spirits. I came here expecting an adventure, and prepared to go
through with any. If there be aught that I can do to help or aid
you, name it, and on the faith of a man who can be secret and
trusty, I will stand by you to the death.'
'How comes this gibbet to be empty?' asked the elder female.
'I swear to you,' replied Will, 'that I know as little as
yourself. But this I know, that when I came here an hour ago or
so, it was as it is now; and if, as I gather from your question,
it was not so last night, sure I am that it has been secretly
disturbed without the knowledge of the folks in yonder town.
Bethink you, therefore, whether you have no friends in league
with you or with him on whom the law has done its worst, by whom
these sad remains have been removed for burial.'
The women spoke together, and Will retired a pace or two while
they conversed apart. He could hear them sob and moan, and saw
that they wrung their hands in fruitless agony. He could make
out little that they said, but between whiles he gathered enough
to assure him that his suggestion was not very wide of the mark,
and that they not only suspected by whom the body had been
removed, but also whither it had been conveyed. When they had
been in conversation a long time, they turned towards him once
more. This time the younger female spoke.
'You have offered us your help?'
'I have.'
'And given a pledge that you are still willing to redeem?'
'Yes. So far as I may, keeping all plots and conspiracies at
arm's length.'
'Follow us, friend.'
Will, whose self-possession was now quite restored, needed no
second bidding, but with his drawn sword in his hand, and his
cloak so muffled over his left arm as to serve for a kind of
shield without offering any impediment to its free action,
suffered them to lead the way. Through mud and mire, and wind
and rain, they walked in silence a full mile. At length they
turned into a dark lane, where, suddenly starting out from
beneath some trees where he had taken shelter, a man appeared,
having in his charge three saddled horses. One of these (his own
apparently), in obedience to a whisper from the women, he
consigned to Will, who, seeing that they mounted, mounted also.
Then, without a word spoken, they rode on together, leaving the
attendant behind.
They made no halt nor slackened their pace until they arrived
near Putney. At a large wooden house which stood apart from any
other they alighted, and giving their horses to one who was
already waiting, passed in by a side door, and so up some narrow
creaking stairs into a small panelled chamber, where Will was
left alone. He had not been here very long, when the door was
softly opened, and there entered to him a cavalier whose face
was concealed beneath a black mask.
Will stood upon his guard, and scrutinised this figure from head
to foot. The form was that of a man pretty far advanced in life,
but of a firm and stately carriage. His dress was of a rich and
costly kind, but so soiled and disordered that it was scarcely
to be recognised for one of those gorgeous suits which the
expensive taste and fashion of the time prescribed for men of
any rank or station.
He was booted and spurred, and bore about him even as many
tokens of the state of the roads as Will himself. All this he
noted, while the eyes behind the mask regarded him with equal
attention. This survey over, the cavalier broke silence.
'Thou'rt young and bold, and wouldst be richer than thou art?'
'The two first I am,' returned Will. 'The last I have scarcely
thought of. But be it so. Say that I would be richer than I am;
what then?'
'The way lies before thee now,' replied the Mask.
'Show it me.'
'First let me inform thee, that thou wert brought here to-night
lest thou shouldst too soon have told thy tale to those who
placed thee on the watch.'
'I thought as much when I followed,' said Will. 'But I am no
blab, not I.'
'Good,' returned the Mask. 'Now listen. He who was to have
executed the enterprise of burying that body, which, as thou
hast suspected, was taken down to-night, has left us in our
need.'
Will nodded, and thought within himself that if the Mask were to
attempt to play any tricks, the first eyelet-hole on the left-
hand side of his doublet, counting from the buttons up the
front, would be a very good place in which to pink him neatly.
'Thou art here, and the emergency is desperate. I propose his
task to thee. Convey the body (now coffined in this house), by
means that I shall show, to the Church of St. Dunstan in London
to-morrow night, and thy service shall be richly paid. Thou'rt
about to ask whose corpse it is. Seek not to know. I warn thee,
seek not to know. Felons hang in chains on every moor and heath.
Believe, as others do, that this was one, and ask no further.
The murders of state policy, its victims or avengers, had best
remain unknown to such as thee.'
'The mystery of this service,' said Will, 'bespeaks its danger.
What is the reward?'
'One hundred golden unities,' replied the cavalier. 'The danger
to one who cannot be recognised as the friend of a fallen cause
is not great, but there is some hazard to be run. Decide between
that and the reward.'
'What if I refuse?' said Will.
'Depart in peace, in God's name,' returned the Mask in a
melancholy tone, 'and keep our secret, remembering that those
who brought thee here were crushed and stricken women, and that
those who bade thee go free could have had thy life with one
word, and no man the wiser.'
Men were readier to undertake desperate adventures in those
times than they are now. In this case the temptation was great,
and the punishment, even in case of detection, was not likely to
be very severe, as Will came of a loyal stock, and his uncle was
in good repute, and a passable tale to account for his
possession of the body and his ignorance of the identity might
be easily devised.
The cavalier explained that a covered cart had been prepared for
the purpose; that the time of departure could be arranged so
that he should reach London Bridge at dusk, and proceed through
the City after the day had closed in; that people would be ready
at his journey's end to place the coffin in a vault without a
minute's delay; that officious inquirers in the streets would be
easily repelled by the tale that he was carrying for interment
the corpse of one who had died of the plague; and in short
showed him every reason why he should succeed, and none why he
should fail. After a time they were joined by another gentleman,
masked like the first, who added new arguments to those which
had been already urged; the wretched wife, too, added her tears
and prayers to their calmer representations; and in the end,
Will, moved by compassion and good-nature, by a love of the
marvellous, by a mischievous anticipation of the terrors of the
Kingston people when he should be missing next day, and finally,
by the prospect of gain, took upon himself the task, and devoted
all his energies to its successful execution.
The following night, when it was quite dark, the hollow echoes
of old London Bridge responded to the rumbling of the cart which
contained the ghastly load, the object of Will Marks' care.
Sufficiently disguised to attract no attention by his garb, Will
walked at the horse's head, as unconcerned as a man could be who
was sensible that he had now arrived at the most dangerous part
of his undertaking, but full of boldness and confidence.
It was now eight o'clock. After nine, none could walk the
streets without danger of their lives, and even at this hour,
robberies and murder were of no uncommon occurrence. The shops
upon the bridge were all closed; the low wooden arches thrown
across the way were like so many black pits, in every one of
which ill-favoured fellows lurked in knots of three or four;
some standing upright against the wall, lying in wait; others
skulking in gateways, and thrusting out their uncombed heads and
scowling eyes: others crossing and recrossing, and constantly
jostling both horse and man to provoke a quarrel; others
stealing away and summoning their companions in a low whistle.
Once, even in that short passage, there was the noise of
scuffling and the clash of swords behind him, but Will, who knew
the City and its ways, kept straight on and scarcely turned his
head.
The streets being unpaved, the rain of the night before had
converted them into a perfect quagmire, which the splashing
water-spouts from the gables, and the filth and offal cast from
the different houses, swelled in no small degree. These odious
matters being left to putrefy in the close and heavy air,
emitted an insupportable stench, to which every court and
passage poured forth a contribution of its own. Many parts, even
of the main streets, with their projecting stories tottering
overhead and nearly shutting out the sky, were more like huge
chimneys than open ways. At the corners of some of these, great
bonfires were burning to prevent infection from the plague, of
which it was rumoured that some citizens had lately died; and
few, who availing themselves of the light thus afforded paused
for a moment to look around them, would have been disposed to
doubt the existence of the disease, or wonder at its dreadful
visitations.
But it was not in such scenes as these, or even in the deep and
miry road, that Will Marks found the chief obstacles to his
progress. There were kites and ravens feeding in the streets
(the only scavengers the City kept), who, scenting what he
carried, followed the cart or fluttered on its top, and croaked
their knowledge of its burden and their ravenous appetite for
prey. There were distant fires, where the poor wood and plaster
tenements wasted fiercely, and whither crowds made their way,
clamouring eagerly for plunder, beating down all who came within
their reach, and yelling like devils let loose. There were
single-handed men flying from bands of ruffians, who pursued
them with naked weapons, and hunted them savagely; there were
drunken, desperate robbers issuing from their dens and
staggering through the open streets where no man dared molest
them; there were vagabond servitors returning from the Bear
Garden, where had been good sport that day, dragging after them
their torn and bleeding dogs, or leaving them to die and rot
upon the road. Nothing was abroad but cruelty, violence, and
disorder.
Many were the interruptions which Will Marks encountered from
these stragglers, and many the narrow escapes he made. Now some
stout bully would take his seat upon the cart, insisting to be
driven to his own home, and now two or three men would come down
upon him together, and demand that on peril of his life he
showed them what he had inside. Then a party of the city watch,
upon their rounds, would draw across the road, and not satisfied
with his tale, question him closely, and revenge themselves by a
little cuffing and hustling for maltreatment sustained at other
hands that night. All these assailants had to be rebutted, some
by fair words, some by foul, and some by blows. But Will Marks
was not the man to be stopped or turned back now he had
penetrated so far, and though he got on slowly, still he made
his way down Fleet-street and reached the church at last.
As he had been forewarned, all was in readiness. Directly he
stopped, the coffin was removed by four men, who appeared so
suddenly that they seemed to have started from the earth. A
fifth mounted the cart, and scarcely allowing Will time to
snatch from it a little bundle containing such of his own
clothes as he had thrown off on assuming his disguise, drove
briskly away. Will never saw cart or man again.


Illustration: The Burial of the Hanged Man
He followed the body into the church, and it was well he lost no
time in doing so, for the door was immediately closed. There was
no light in the building save that which came from a couple of
torches borne by two men in cloaks, who stood upon the brink of
a vault. Each supported a female figure, and all observed a
profound silence.
By this dim and solemn glare, which made Will feel as though
light itself were dead, and its tomb the dreary arches that
frowned above, they placed the coffin in the vault, with
uncovered heads, and closed it up. One of the torch-bearers then
turned to Will, and stretched forth his hand, in which was a
purse of gold. Something told him directly that those were the
same eyes which he had seen beneath the mask.
'Take it,' said the cavalier in a low voice, 'and be happy.
Though these have been hasty obsequies, and no priest has
blessed the work, there will not be the less peace with thee
thereafter, for having laid his bones beside those of his little
children. Keep thy own counsel, for thy sake no less than ours,
and God be with thee!'
'The blessing of a widowed mother on thy head, good friend!'
cried the younger lady through her tears; 'the blessing of one
who has now no hope or rest but in this grave!'
Will stood with the purse in his hand, and involuntarily made a
gesture as though he would return it, for though a thoughtless
fellow, he was of a frank and generous nature. But the two
gentlemen, extinguishing their torches, cautioned him to be
gone, as their common safety would be endangered by a longer
delay; and at the same time their retreating footsteps sounded
through the church. He turned, therefore, towards the point at
which he had entered, and seeing by a faint gleam in the
distance that the door was again partially open, groped his way
towards it and so passed into the street.
Meantime the local authorities of Kingston had kept watch and
ward all the previous night, fancying every now and then that
dismal shrieks were borne towards them on the wind, and
frequently winking to each other, and drawing closer to the fire
as they drank the health of the lonely sentinel, upon whom a
clerical gentleman present was especially severe by reason of
his levity and youthful folly. Two or three of the gravest in
company, who were of a theological turn, propounded to him the
question, whether such a character was not but poorly armed for
single combat with the Devil, and whether he himself would not
have been a stronger opponent; but the clerical gentleman,
sharply reproving them for their presumption in discussing such
questions, clearly showed that a fitter champion than Will could
scarcely have been selected, not only for that being a child of
Satan, he was the less likely to be alarmed by the appearance of
his own father, but because Satan himself would be at his ease
in such company, and would not scruple to kick up his heels to
an extent which it was quite certain he would never venture
before clerical eyes, under whose influence (as was notorious)
he became quite a tame and milk-and-water character.
But when next morning arrived, and with it no Will Marks, and
when a strong party repairing to the spot, as a strong party
ventured to do in broad day, found Will gone and the gibbet
empty, matters grew serious indeed. The day passing away and no
news arriving, and the night going on also without any
intelligence, the thing grew more tremendous still; in short,
the neighbourhood worked itself up to such a comfortable pitch
of mystery and horror, that it is a great question whether the
general feeling was not one of excessive disappointment, when,
on the second morning, Will Marks returned.
However this may be, back Will came in a very cool and collected
state, and appearing not to trouble himself much about anybody
except old John Podgers, who, having been sent for, was sitting
in the Town Hall crying slowly, and dozing between whiles.
Having embraced his uncle and assured him of his safety, Will
mounted on a table and told his story to the crowd.
And surely they would have been the most unreasonable crowd that
ever assembled together, if they had been in the least respect
disappointed with the tale he told them; for besides describing
the Witches' Dance to the minutest motion of their legs, and
performing it in character on the table, with the assistance of
a broomstick, he related how they had carried off the body in a
copper cauldron, and so bewitched him, that he lost his senses
until he found himself lying under a hedge at least ten miles
off, whence he had straightway returned as they then beheld. The
story gained such universal applause that it soon afterwards
brought down express from London the great witch-finder of the
age, the Heaven-born Hopkins, who having examined Will closely
on several points, pronounced it the most extraordinary and the
best accredited witch-story ever known, under which title it was
published at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, in small quarto,
with a view of the cauldron from an original drawing, and a
portrait of the clerical gentleman as he sat by the fire.
On one point Will was particularly careful: and that was to
describe for the witches he had seen, three impossible old
females, whose likenesses never were or will be. Thus he saved
the lives of the suspected parties, and of all other old women
who were dragged before him to be identified.
This circumstance occasioned John Podgers much grief and sorrow,
until happening one day to cast his eyes upon his housekeeper,
and observing her to be plainly afflicted with rheumatism, he
procured her to be burnt as an undoubted witch. For this service
to the state he was immediately knighted, and became from that
time Sir John Podgers.
Will Marks never gained any clue to the mystery in which he had
been an actor, nor did any inscription in the church, which he
often visited afterwards, nor any of the limited inquiries that
he dared to make, yield him the least assistance. As he kept his
own secret, he was compelled to spend the gold discreetly and
sparingly. In the course of time he married the young lady of
whom I have already told you, whose maiden name is not recorded,
with whom he led a prosperous and happy life. Years and years
after this adventure, it was his wont to tell her upon a stormy
night that it was a great comfort to him to think those bones,
to whomsoever they might have once belonged, were not bleaching
in the troubled air, but were mouldering away with the dust of
their own kith and kindred in a quiet grave.


FURTHER PARTICULARS OF MASTER HUMPHREY'S VISITOR

Being very full of Mr. Pickwick's application, and highly
pleased with the compliment he had paid me, it will be readily
supposed that long before our next night of meeting I
communicated it to my three friends, who unanimously voted his
admission into our body. We all looked forward with some
impatience to the occasion which would enrol him among us, but I
am greatly mistaken if Jack Redburn and myself were not by many
degrees the most impatient of the party.
At length the night came, and a few minutes after ten Mr.
Pickwick's knock was heard at the street-door. He was shown into
a lower room, and I directly took my crooked stick and went to
accompany him upstairs, in order that he might be presented with
all honour and formality.
'Mr. Pickwick,' said I, on entering the room, 'I am rejoiced to
see you,—rejoiced to believe that this is but the opening of a
long series of visits to this house, and but the beginning of a
close and lasting friendship.'
That gentleman made a suitable reply with a cordiality and
frankness peculiarly his own, and glanced with a smile towards
two persons behind the door, whom I had not at first observed,
and whom I immediately recognised as Mr. Samuel Weller and his
father.
It was a warm evening, but the elder Mr. Weller was attired,
notwithstanding, in a most capacious greatcoat, and his chin
enveloped in a large speckled shawl, such as is usually worn by
stage coachmen on active service. He looked very rosy and very
stout, especially about the legs, which appeared to have been
compressed into his top-boots with some difficulty. His broad-
brimmed hat he held under his left arm, and with the forefinger
of his right hand he touched his forehead a great many times in
acknowledgment of my presence.
'I am very glad to see you in such good health, Mr. Weller,'
said I.
'Why, thankee, sir,' returned Mr. Weller, 'the axle an't broke
yet. We keeps up a steady pace,—not too sewere, but vith a
moderate degree o' friction,—and the consekens is that ve're
still a runnin' and comes in to the time reg'lar.—My son
Samivel, sir, as you may have read on in history,' added Mr.
Weller, introducing his first-born.
I received Sam very graciously, but before he could say a word
his father struck in again.
'Samivel Veller, sir,' said the old gentleman, 'has conferred
upon me the ancient title o' grandfather vich had long laid
dormouse, and wos s'posed to be nearly hex-tinct in our family.
Sammy, relate a anecdote o' vun o' them boys,—that 'ere little
anecdote about young Tony sayin' as he would smoke a pipe
unbeknown to his mother.'
'Be quiet, can't you?' said Sam; 'I never see such a old magpie—
never!'

 
Illustration: Tony Weller and his Grandson
'That 'ere Tony is the blessedest boy,' said Mr. Weller,
heedless of this rebuff, 'the blessedest boy as ever I see in my
days! of all the charmin'est infants as ever I heerd tell on,
includin' them as was kivered over by the robin-redbreasts arter
they'd committed sooicide with blackberries, there never wos any
like that 'ere little Tony. He's alvays a playin' vith a quart
pot, that boy is! To see him a settin' down on the doorstep
pretending to drink out of it, and fetching a long breath
artervards, and smoking a bit of firevood, and sayin', "Now I'm
grandfather,"—to see him a doin' that at two year old is better
than any play as wos ever wrote. "Now I'm grandfather!" He
wouldn't take a pint pot if you wos to make him a present on it,
but he gets his quart, and then he says, "Now I'm grandfather!"'
Mr. Weller was so overpowered by this picture that he
straightway fell into a most alarming fit of coughing, which
must certainly have been attended with some fatal result but for
the dexterity and promptitude of Sam, who, taking a firm grasp
of the shawl just under his father's chin, shook him to and fro
with great violence, at the same time administering some smart
blows between his shoulders. By this curious mode of treatment
Mr. Weller was finally recovered, but with a very crimson face,
and in a state of great exhaustion.
'He'll do now, Sam,' said Mr. Pickwick, who had been in some
alarm himself.
'He'll do, sir!' cried Sam, looking reproachfully at his parent.
'Yes, he will do one o' these days,—he'll do for his-self and
then he'll wish he hadn't. Did anybody ever see sich a
inconsiderate old file,—laughing into conwulsions afore company,
and stamping on the floor as if he'd brought his own carpet vith
him and wos under a wager to punch the pattern out in a given
time? He'll begin again in a minute. There—he's a goin' off—I
said he would!'
In fact, Mr. Weller, whose mind was still running upon his
precocious grandson, was seen to shake his head from side to
side, while a laugh, working like an earthquake, below the
surface, produced various extraordinary appearances in his face,
chest, and shoulders,—the more alarming because unaccompanied by
any noise whatever. These emotions, however, gradually subsided,
and after three or four short relapses he wiped his eyes with
the cuff of his coat, and looked about him with tolerable
composure.
'Afore the governor vith-draws,' said Mr. Weller, 'there is a
pint, respecting vich Sammy has a qvestion to ask. Vile that
qvestion is a perwadin' this here conwersation, p'raps the
genl'men vill permit me to re-tire.'
'Wot are you goin' away for?' demanded Sam, seizing his father
by the coat-tail.
'I never see such a undootiful boy as you, Samivel,' returned
Mr. Weller. 'Didn't you make a solemn promise, amountin' almost
to a speeches o' wow, that you'd put that 'ere qvestion on my
account?'
'Well, I'm agreeable to do it,' said Sam, 'but not if you go
cuttin' away like that, as the bull turned round and mildly
observed to the drover ven they wos a goadin' him into the
butcher's door. The fact is, sir,' said Sam, addressing me,
'that he wants to know somethin' respectin' that 'ere lady as is
housekeeper here.'
'Ay. What is that?'
'Vy, sir,' said Sam, grinning still more, 'he wishes to know
vether she—'
'In short,' interposed old Mr. Weller decisively, a perspiration
breaking out upon his forehead, 'vether that 'ere old creetur is
or is not a widder.'
Mr. Pickwick laughed heartily, and so did I, as I replied
decisively, that 'my housekeeper was a spinster.'
'There!' cried Sam, 'now you're satisfied. You hear she's a
spinster.'
'A wot?' said his father, with deep scorn.
'A spinster,' replied Sam.
Mr. Weller looked very hard at his son for a minute or two, and
then said,
'Never mind vether she makes jokes or not, that's no matter. Wot
I say is, is that 'ere female a widder, or is she not?'
'Wot do you mean by her making jokes?' demanded Sam, quite
aghast at the obscurity of his parent's speech.
'Never you mind, Samivel,' returned Mr. Weller gravely; 'puns
may be wery good things or they may be wery bad 'uns, and a
female may be none the better or she may be none the vurse for
making of 'em; that's got nothing to do vith widders.'
'Wy now,' said Sam, looking round, 'would anybody believe as a
man at his time o' life could be running his head agin spinsters
and punsters being the same thing?'
'There an't a straw's difference between 'em,' said Mr. Weller.
'Your father didn't drive a coach for so many years, not to be
ekal to his own langvidge as far as that goes, Sammy.'
Avoiding the question of etymology, upon which the old
gentleman's mind was quite made up, he was several times assured
that the housekeeper had never been married. He expressed great
satisfaction on hearing this, and apologised for the question,
remarking that he had been greatly terrified by a widow not long
before, and that his natural timidity was increased in
consequence.
'It wos on the rail,' said Mr. Weller, with strong emphasis; 'I
wos a goin' down to Birmingham by the rail, and I wos locked up
in a close carriage vith a living widder. Alone we wos; the
widder and me wos alone; and I believe it wos only because we
wos alone and there wos no clergyman in the conwayance, that
that 'ere widder didn't marry me afore ve reached the half-way
station. Ven I think how she began a screaming as we wos a goin'
under them tunnels in the dark,—how she kept on a faintin' and
ketchin' hold o' me,—and how I tried to bust open the door as
was tight-locked and perwented all escape—Ah! It was a awful
thing, most awful!'
Mr. Weller was so very much overcome by this retrospect that he
was unable, until he had wiped his brow several times, to return
any reply to the question whether he approved of railway
communication, notwithstanding that it would appear from the
answer which he ultimately gave, that he entertained strong
opinions on the subject.
'I con-sider,' said Mr. Weller, 'that the rail is
unconstitootional and an inwaser o' priwileges, and I should
wery much like to know what that 'ere old Carter as once stood
up for our liberties and wun 'em too,—I should like to know wot
he vould say, if he wos alive now, to Englishmen being locked up
vith widders, or with anybody again their wills. Wot a old
Carter would have said, a old Coachman may say, and I as-sert
that in that pint o' view alone, the rail is an inwaser. As to
the comfort, vere's the comfort o' sittin' in a harm-cheer
lookin' at brick walls or heaps o' mud, never comin' to a
public-house, never seein' a glass o' ale, never goin' through a
pike, never meetin' a change o' no kind (horses or othervise),
but alvays comin' to a place, ven you come to one at all, the
wery picter o' the last, vith the same p'leesemen standing
about, the same blessed old bell a ringin', the same unfort'nate
people standing behind the bars, a waitin' to be let in; and
everythin' the same except the name, vich is wrote up in the
same sized letters as the last name, and vith the same colours.
As to the honour and dignity o' travellin', vere can that be
vithout a coachman; and wot's the rail to sich coachmen and
guards as is sometimes forced to go by it, but a outrage and a
insult? As to the pace, wot sort o' pace do you think I, Tony
Veller, could have kept a coach goin' at, for five hundred
thousand pound a mile, paid in adwance afore the coach was on
the road? And as to the ingein,—a nasty, wheezin', creakin',
gaspin', puffin', bustin' monster, alvays out o' breath, vith a
shiny green-and-gold back, like a unpleasant beetle in that 'ere
gas magnifier,—as to the ingein as is alvays a pourin' out red-
hot coals at night, and black smoke in the day, the sensiblest
thing it does, in my opinion, is, ven there's somethin' in the
vay, and it sets up that 'ere frightful scream vich seems to
say, "Now here's two hundred and forty passengers in the wery
greatest extremity o' danger, and here's their two hundred and
forty screams in vun!"'
By this time I began to fear that my friends would be rendered
impatient by my protracted absence. I therefore begged Mr.
Pickwick to accompany me up-stairs, and left the two Mr. Wellers
in the care of the housekeeper, laying strict injunctions upon
her to treat them with all possible hospitality.


THE CLOCK

AS we were going up-stairs, Mr. Pickwick put on his spectacles,
which he had held in his hand hitherto; arranged his
neckerchief, smoothed down his waistcoat, and made many other
little preparations of that kind which men are accustomed to be
mindful of, when they are going among strangers for the first
time, and are anxious to impress them pleasantly. Seeing that I
smiled, he smiled too, and said that if it had occurred to him
before he left home, he would certainly have presented himself
in pumps and silk stockings.
'I would, indeed, my dear sir,' he said very seriously; 'I would
have shown my respect for the society, by laying aside my
gaiters.'
'You may rest assured,' said I, 'that they would have regretted
your doing so very much, for they are quite attached to them.'
'No, really!' cried Mr. Pickwick, with manifest pleasure. 'Do
you think they care about my gaiters? Do you seriously think
that they identify me at all with my gaiters?'
'I am sure they do,' I replied.
'Well, now,' said Mr. Pickwick, 'that is one of the most
charming and agreeable circumstances that could possibly have
occurred to me!'
I should not have written down this short conversation, but that
it developed a slight point in Mr. Pickwick's character, with
which I was not previously acquainted. He has a secret pride in
his legs. The manner in which he spoke, and the accompanying
glance he bestowed upon his tights, convince me that Mr.
Pickwick regards his legs with much innocent vanity.
'But here are our friends,' said I, opening the door and taking
his arm in mine; 'let them speak for themselves.—Gentlemen, I
present to you Mr. Pickwick.'
Mr. Pickwick and I must have been a good contrast just then. I,
leaning quietly on my crutch-stick, with something of a care-
worn, patient air; he, having hold of my arm, and bowing in
every direction with the most elastic politeness, and an
expression of face whose sprightly cheerfulness and good-humour
knew no bounds. The difference between us must have been more
striking yet, as we advanced towards the table, and the amiable
gentleman, adapting his jocund step to my poor tread, had his
attention divided between treating my infirmities with the
utmost consideration, and affecting to be wholly unconscious
that I required any.
I made him personally known to each of my friends in turn.
First, to the deaf gentleman, whom he regarded with much
interest, and accosted with great frankness and cordiality. He
had evidently some vague idea, at the moment, that my friend
being deaf must be dumb also; for when the latter opened his
lips to express the pleasure it afforded him to know a gentleman
of whom he had heard so much, Mr. Pickwick was so extremely
disconcerted, that I was obliged to step in to his relief.
His meeting with Jack Redburn was quite a treat to see. Mr.
Pickwick smiled, and shook hands, and looked at him through his
spectacles, and under them, and over them, and nodded his head
approvingly, and then nodded to me, as much as to say, 'This is
just the man; you were quite right;' and then turned to Jack and
said a few hearty words, and then did and said everything over
again with unimpaired vivacity. As to Jack himself, he was quite
as much delighted with Mr. Pickwick as Mr. Pickwick could
possibly be with him. Two people never can have met together
since the world began, who exchanged a warmer or more
enthusiastic greeting.
It was amusing to observe the difference between this encounter
and that which succeeded, between Mr. Pickwick and Mr. Miles. It
was clear that the latter gentleman viewed our new member as a
kind of rival in the affections of Jack Redburn, and besides
this, he had more than once hinted to me, in secret, that
although he had no doubt Mr. Pickwick was a very worthy man,
still he did consider that some of his exploits were unbecoming
a gentleman of his years and gravity. Over and above these
grounds of distrust, it is one of his fixed opinions, that the
law never can by possibility do anything wrong; he therefore
looks upon Mr. Pickwick as one who has justly suffered in purse
and peace for a breach of his plighted faith to an unprotected
female, and holds that he is called upon to regard him with some
suspicion on that account. These causes led to a rather cold and
formal reception; which Mr. Pickwick acknowledged with the same
stateliness and intense politeness as was displayed on the other
side. Indeed, he assumed an air of such majestic defiance, that
I was fearful he might break out into some solemn protest or
declaration, and therefore inducted him into his chair without a
moment's delay.
This piece of generalship was perfectly successful. The instant
he took his seat, Mr. Pickwick surveyed us all with a most
benevolent aspect, and was taken with a fit of smiling full five
minutes long. His interest in our ceremonies was immense. They
are not very numerous or complicated, and a description of them
may be comprised in very few words. As our transactions have
already been, and must necessarily continue to be, more or less
anticipated by being presented in these pages at different
times, and under various forms, they do not require a detailed
account.
Our first proceeding when we are assembled is to shake hands all
round, and greet each other with cheerful and pleasant looks.
Remembering that we assemble not only for the promotion of our
happiness, but with the view of adding something to the common
stock, an air of languor or indifference in any member of our
body would be regarded by the others as a kind of treason. We
have never had an offender in this respect; but if we had, there
is no doubt that he would be taken to task pretty severely.
Our salutation over, the venerable piece of antiquity from which
we take our name is wound up in silence. The ceremony is always
performed by Master Humphrey himself (in treating of the club, I
may be permitted to assume the historical style, and speak of
myself in the third person), who mounts upon a chair for the
purpose, armed with a large key. While it is in progress, Jack
Redburn is required to keep at the farther end of the room under
the guardianship of Mr. Miles, for he is known to entertain
certain aspiring and unhallowed thoughts connected with the
clock, and has even gone so far as to state that if he might
take the works out for a day or two, he thinks he could improve
them. We pardon him his presumption in consideration of his good
intentions, and his keeping this respectful distance, which last
penalty is insisted on, lest by secretly wounding the object of
our regard in some tender part, in the ardour of his zeal for
its improvement, he should fill us with dismay and
consternation.
This regulation afforded Mr. Pickwick the highest delight, and
seemed, if possible, to exalt Jack in his good opinion.
The next ceremony is the opening of the clock-case (of which
Master Humphrey has likewise the key), the taking from it as
many papers as will furnish forth our evening's entertainment,
and arranging in the recess such new contributions as have been
provided since our last meeting. This is always done with
peculiar solemnity. The deaf gentleman then fills and lights his
pipe, and we once more take our seats round the table before
mentioned, Master Humphrey acting as president,—if we can be
said to have any president, where all are on the same social
footing,—and our friend Jack as secretary. Our preliminaries
being now concluded, we fall into any train of conversation that
happens to suggest itself, or proceed immediately to one of our
readings. In the latter case, the paper selected is consigned to
Master Humphrey, who flattens it carefully on the table and
makes dog's ears in the corner of every page, ready for turning
over easily; Jack Redburn trims the lamp with a small machine of
his own invention which usually puts it out; Mr. Miles looks on
with great approval notwithstanding; the deaf gentleman draws in
his chair, so that he can follow the words on the paper or on
Master Humphrey's lips as he pleases; and Master Humphrey
himself, looking round with mighty gratification, and glancing
up at his old clock, begins to read aloud.

Illustration: Master Humphrey reads Mr. Pickwick's Tale
Mr. Pickwick's face, while his tale was being read, would have
attracted the attention of the dullest man alive. The complacent
motion of his head and forefinger as he gently beat time, and
corrected the air with imaginary punctuation, the smile that
mantled on his features at every jocose passage, and the sly
look he stole around to observe its effect, the calm manner in
which he shut his eyes and listened when there was some little
piece of description, the changing expression with which he
acted the dialogue to himself, his agony that the deaf gentleman
should know what it was all about, and his extraordinary anxiety
to correct the reader when he hesitated at a word in the
manuscript, or substituted a wrong one, were alike worthy of
remark. And when at last, endeavouring to communicate with the
deaf gentleman by means of the finger alphabet, with which he
constructed such words as are unknown in any civilised or savage
language, he took up a slate and wrote in large text, one word
in a line, the question, 'How—do—you—like—it?'—when he did this,
and handing it over the table awaited the reply, with a
countenance only brightened and improved by his great
excitement, even Mr. Miles relaxed, and could not forbear
looking at him for the moment with interest and favour.
'It has occurred to me,' said the deaf gentleman, who had
watched Mr. Pickwick and everybody else with silent
satisfaction—'it has occurred to me,' said the deaf gentleman,
taking his pipe from his lips, 'that now is our time for filling
our only empty chair.'
As our conversation had naturally turned upon the vacant seat,
we lent a willing ear to this remark, and looked at our friend
inquiringly.
'I feel sure,' said he, 'that Mr. Pickwick must be acquainted
with somebody who would be an acquisition to us; that he must
know the man we want. Pray let us not lose any time, but set
this question at rest. Is it so, Mr. Pickwick?'
The gentleman addressed was about to return a verbal reply, but
remembering our friend's infirmity, he substituted for this kind
of answer some fifty nods. Then taking up the slate and printing
on it a gigantic 'Yes,' he handed it across the table, and
rubbing his hands as he looked round upon our faces, protested
that he and the deaf gentleman quite understood each other,
already.
'The person I have in my mind,' said Mr. Pickwick, 'and whom I
should not have presumed to mention to you until some time
hence, but for the opportunity you have given me, is a very
strange old man. His name is Bamber.'
'Bamber!' said Jack. 'I have certainly heard the name before.'
'I have no doubt, then,' returned Mr. Pickwick, 'that you
remember him in those adventures of mine (the Posthumous Papers
of our old club, I mean), although he is only incidentally
mentioned; and, if I remember right, appears but once.'
'That's it,' said Jack. 'Let me see. He is the person who has a
grave interest in old mouldy chambers and the Inns of Court, and
who relates some anecdotes having reference to his favourite
theme,—and an odd ghost story,—is that the man?'
'The very same. Now,' said Mr. Pickwick, lowering his voice to a
mysterious and confidential tone, 'he is a very extraordinary
and remarkable person; living, and talking, and looking, like
some strange spirit, whose delight is to haunt old buildings;
and absorbed in that one subject which you have just mentioned,
to an extent which is quite wonderful. When I retired into
private life, I sought him out, and I do assure you that the
more I see of him, the more strongly I am impressed with the
strange and dreamy character of his mind.'
'Where does he live?' I inquired.
'He lives,' said Mr. Pickwick, 'in one of those dull, lonely old
places with which his thoughts and stories are all connected;
quite alone, and often shut up close for several weeks together.
In this dusty solitude he broods upon the fancies he has so long
indulged, and when he goes into the world, or anybody from the
world without goes to see him, they are still present to his
mind and still his favourite topic. I may say, I believe, that
he has brought himself to entertain a regard for me, and an
interest in my visits; feelings which I am certain he would
extend to Master Humphrey's Clock if he were once tempted to
join us. All I wish you to understand is, that he is a strange,
secluded visionary, in the world but not of it; and as unlike
anybody here as he is unlike anybody elsewhere that I have ever
met or known.'
Mr. Miles received this account of our proposed companion with
rather a wry face, and after murmuring that perhaps he was a
little mad, inquired if he were rich.
'I never asked him,' said Mr. Pickwick.
'You might know, sir, for all that,' retorted Mr. Miles,
sharply.
'Perhaps so, sir,' said Mr. Pickwick, no less sharply than the
other, 'but I do not. Indeed,' he added, relapsing into his
usual mildness, 'I have no means of judging. He lives poorly,
but that would seem to be in keeping with his character. I never
heard him allude to his circumstances, and never fell into the
society of any man who had the slightest acquaintance with them.
I have really told you all I know about him, and it rests with
you to say whether you wish to know more, or know quite enough
already.'
We were unanimously of opinion that we would seek to know more;
and as a sort of compromise with Mr. Miles (who, although he
said 'Yes—O certainly—he should like to know more about the
gentleman—he had no right to put himself in opposition to the
general wish,' and so forth, shook his head doubtfully and
hemmed several times with peculiar gravity), it was arranged
that Mr. Pickwick should carry me with him on an evening visit
to the subject of our discussion, for which purpose an early
appointment between that gentleman and myself was immediately
agreed upon; it being understood that I was to act upon my own
responsibility, and to invite him to join us or not, as I might
think proper. This solemn question determined, we returned to
the clock-case (where we have been forestalled by the reader),
and between its contents, and the conversation they occasioned,
the remainder of our time passed very quickly.
When we broke up, Mr. Pickwick took me aside to tell me that he
had spent a most charming and delightful evening. Having made
this communication with an air of the strictest secrecy, he took
Jack Redburn into another corner to tell him the same, and then
retired into another corner with the deaf gentleman and the
slate, to repeat the assurance. It was amusing to observe the
contest in his mind whether he should extend his confidence to
Mr. Miles, or treat him with dignified reserve. Half a dozen
times he stepped up behind him with a friendly air, and as often
stepped back again without saying a word; at last, when he was
close at that gentleman's ear and upon the very point of
whispering something conciliating and agreeable, Mr. Miles
happened suddenly to turn his head, upon which Mr. Pickwick
skipped away, and said with some fierceness, 'Good night, sir—I
was about to say good night, sir,—nothing more;' and so made a
bow and left him.
'Now, Sam,' said Mr. Pickwick, when he had got down-stairs.
'All right, sir,' replied Mr. Weller. 'Hold hard, sir. Right arm
fust—now the left—now one strong conwulsion, and the great-
coat's on, sir.'
Mr. Pickwick acted upon these directions, and being further
assisted by Sam, who pulled at one side of the collar, and Mr.
Weller, who pulled hard at the other, was speedily enrobed. Mr.
Weller, senior, then produced a full-sized stable lantern, which
he had carefully deposited in a remote corner, on his arrival,
and inquired whether Mr. Pickwick would have 'the lamps alight.'
'I think not to-night,' said Mr. Pickwick.
'Then if this here lady vill per-mit,' rejoined Mr. Weller,
'we'll leave it here, ready for next journey. This here lantern,
mum,' said Mr. Weller, handing it to the housekeeper, 'vunce
belonged to the celebrated Bill Blinder as is now at grass, as
all on us vill be in our turns. Bill, mum, wos the hostler as
had charge o' them two vell-known piebald leaders that run in
the Bristol fast coach, and vould never go to no other tune but
a sutherly vind and a cloudy sky, which wos consekvently played
incessant, by the guard, wenever they wos on duty. He wos took
wery bad one arternoon, arter having been off his feed, and wery
shaky on his legs for some veeks; and he says to his mate,
"Matey," he says, "I think I'm a-goin' the wrong side o' the
post, and that my foot's wery near the bucket. Don't say I
an't," he says, "for I know I am, and don't let me be
interrupted," he says, "for I've saved a little money, and I'm
a-goin' into the stable to make my last vill and testymint."
"I'll take care as nobody interrupts," says his mate, "but you
on'y hold up your head, and shake your ears a bit, and you're
good for twenty years to come." Bill Blinder makes him no
answer, but he goes avay into the stable, and there he soon
artervards lays himself down a'tween the two piebalds, and
dies,—previously a writin' outside the corn-chest, "This is the
last vill and testymint of Villiam Blinder." They wos nat'rally
wery much amazed at this, and arter looking among the litter,
and up in the loft, and vere not, they opens the corn-chest, and
finds that he'd been and chalked his vill inside the lid; so the
lid was obligated to be took off the hinges, and sent up to
Doctor Commons to be proved, and under that 'ere wery instrument
this here lantern was passed to Tony Veller; vich circumstarnce,
mum, gives it a wally in my eyes, and makes me rekvest, if you
vill be so kind, as to take partickler care on it.'


Illustration: Bill Blinder Writing his Will
The housekeeper graciously promised to keep the object of Mr.
Weller's regard in the safest possible custody, and Mr.
Pickwick, with a laughing face, took his leave. The bodyguard
followed, side by side; old Mr. Weller buttoned and wrapped up
from his boots to his chin; and Sam with his hands in his
pockets and his hat half off his head, remonstrating with his
father, as he went, on his extreme loquacity.
I was not a little surprised, on turning to go upstairs, to
encounter the barber in the passage at that late hour; for his
attendance is usually confined to some half-hour in the morning.
But Jack Redburn, who finds out (by instinct, I think)
everything that happens in the house, informed me with great
glee, that a society in imitation of our own had been that night
formed in the kitchen, under the title of 'Mr. Weller's Watch,'
of which the barber was a member; and that he could pledge
himself to find means of making me acquainted with the whole of
its future proceedings, which I begged him, both on my own
account and that of my readers, by no means to neglect doing.


MR. WELLER'S WATCH

IT seems that the housekeeper and the two Mr. Wellers were no
sooner left together on the occasion of their first becoming
acquainted, than the housekeeper called to her assistance Mr.
Slithers the barber, who had been lurking in the kitchen in
expectation of her summons; and with many smiles and much
sweetness introduced him as one who would assist her in the
responsible office of entertaining her distinguished visitors.
'Indeed,' said she, 'without Mr. Slithers I should have been
placed in quite an awkward situation.'
'There is no call for any hock'erdness, mum,' said Mr. Weller
with the utmost politeness; 'no call wotsumever. A lady,' added
the old gentleman, looking about him with the air of one who
establishes an incontrovertible position,—'a lady can't be
hock'erd. Natur' has otherwise purwided.'
The housekeeper inclined her head and smiled yet more sweetly.
The barber, who had been fluttering about Mr. Weller and Sam in
a state of great anxiety to improve their acquaintance, rubbed
his hands and cried, 'Hear, hear! Very true, sir;' whereupon Sam
turned about and steadily regarded him for some seconds in
silence.
'I never knew,' said Sam, fixing his eyes in a ruminative manner
upon the blushing barber,—'I never knew but vun o' your trade,
but he wos worth a dozen, and wos indeed dewoted to his
callin'!'
'Was he in the easy shaving way, sir,' inquired Mr. Slithers;
'or in the cutting and curling line?'
'Both,' replied Sam; 'easy shavin' was his natur', and cuttin'
and curlin' was his pride and glory. His whole delight wos in
his trade. He spent all his money in bears, and run in debt for
'em besides, and there they wos a growling avay down in the
front cellar all day long, and ineffectooally gnashing their
teeth, vile the grease o' their relations and friends wos being
re-tailed in gallipots in the shop above, and the first-floor
winder wos ornamented vith their heads; not to speak o' the
dreadful aggrawation it must have been to 'em to see a man
alvays a walkin' up and down the pavement outside, vith the
portrait of a bear in his last agonies, and underneath in large
letters, "Another fine animal wos slaughtered yesterday at
Jinkinson's!" Hows'ever, there they wos, and there Jinkinson
wos, till he wos took wery ill with some inn'ard disorder, lost
the use of his legs, and wos confined to his bed, vere he laid a
wery long time, but sich wos his pride in his profession, even
then, that wenever he wos worse than usual the doctor used to go
down-stairs and say, "Jinkinson's wery low this mornin'; we must
give the bears a stir;" and as sure as ever they stirred 'em up
a bit and made 'em roar, Jinkinson opens his eyes if he wos ever
so bad, calls out, "There's the bears!" and rewives agin.'
'Astonishing!' cried the barber.
'Not a bit,' said Sam, 'human natur' neat as imported. Vun day
the doctor happenin' to say, "I shall look in as usual to-morrow
mornin'," Jinkinson catches hold of his hand and says, "Doctor,"
he says, "will you grant me one favour?" "I will, Jinkinson,"
says the doctor. "Then, doctor," says Jinkinson, "vill you come
unshaved, and let me shave you?" "I will," says the doctor. "God
bless you," says Jinkinson. Next day the doctor came, and arter
he'd been shaved all skilful and reg'lar, he says, "Jinkinson,"
he says, "it's wery plain this does you good. Now," he says,
"I've got a coachman as has got a beard that it 'ud warm your
heart to work on, and though the footman," he says, "hasn't got
much of a beard, still he's a trying it on vith a pair o'
viskers to that extent that razors is Christian charity. If they
take it in turns to mind the carriage when it's a waitin'
below," he says, "wot's to hinder you from operatin' on both of
'em ev'ry day as well as upon me? you've got six children," he
says, "wot's to hinder you from shavin' all their heads and
keepin' 'em shaved? you've got two assistants in the shop down-
stairs, wot's to hinder you from cuttin' and curlin' them as
often as you like? Do this," he says, "and you're a man agin."
Jinkinson squeedged the doctor's hand and begun that wery day;
he kept his tools upon the bed, and wenever he felt his-self
gettin' worse, he turned to at vun o' the children who wos a
runnin' about the house vith heads like clean Dutch cheeses, and
shaved him agin. Vun day the lawyer come to make his vill; all
the time he wos a takin' it down, Jinkinson was secretly a
clippin' avay at his hair vith a large pair of scissors. "Wot's
that 'ere snippin' noise?" says the lawyer every now and then;
"it's like a man havin' his hair cut." "It is wery like a man
havin' his hair cut," says poor Jinkinson, hidin' the scissors,
and lookin' quite innocent. By the time the lawyer found it out,
he was wery nearly bald. Jinkinson wos kept alive in this vay
for a long time, but at last vun day he has in all the children
vun arter another, shaves each on 'em wery clean, and gives him
vun kiss on the crown o' his head; then he has in the two
assistants, and arter cuttin' and curlin' of 'em in the first
style of elegance, says he should like to hear the woice o' the
greasiest bear, vich rekvest is immediately complied with; then
he says that he feels wery happy in his mind and vishes to be
left alone; and then he dies, previously cuttin' his own hair
and makin' one flat curl in the wery middle of his forehead.'
This anecdote produced an extraordinary effect, not only upon
Mr. Slithers, but upon the housekeeper also, who evinced so much
anxiety to please and be pleased, that Mr. Weller, with a manner
betokening some alarm, conveyed a whispered inquiry to his son
whether he had gone 'too fur.'
'Wot do you mean by too fur?' demanded Sam.
'In that 'ere little compliment respectin' the want of
hock'erdness in ladies, Sammy,' replied his father.
'You don't think she's fallen in love with you in consekens o'
that, do you?' said Sam.
'More unlikelier things have come to pass, my boy,' replied Mr.
Weller in a hoarse whisper; 'I'm always afeerd of inadwertent
captiwation, Sammy. If I know'd how to make myself ugly or
unpleasant, I'd do it, Samivel, rayther than live in this here
state of perpetival terror!'
Mr. Weller had, at that time, no further opportunity of dwelling
upon the apprehensions which beset his mind, for the immediate
occasion of his fears proceeded to lead the way down-stairs,
apologising as they went for conducting him into the kitchen,
which apartment, however, she was induced to proffer for his
accommodation in preference to her own little room, the rather
as it afforded greater facilities for smoking, and was
immediately adjoining the ale-cellar. The preparations which
were already made sufficiently proved that these were not mere
words of course, for on the deal table were a sturdy ale-jug and
glasses, flanked with clean pipes and a plentiful supply of
tobacco for the old gentleman and his son, while on a dresser
hard by was goodly store of cold meat and other eatables. At
sight of these arrangements Mr. Weller was at first distracted
between his love of joviality and his doubts whether they were
not to be considered as so many evidences of captivation having
already taken place; but he soon yielded to his natural impulse,
and took his seat at the table with a very jolly countenance.
'As to imbibin' any o' this here flagrant veed, mum, in the
presence of a lady,' said Mr. Weller, taking up a pipe and
laying it down again, 'it couldn't be. Samivel, total
abstinence, if you please.'
'But I like it of all things,' said the housekeeper.
'No,' rejoined Mr. Weller, shaking his head,—'no.'
'Upon my word I do,' said the housekeeper. 'Mr. Slithers knows I
do.'
Mr. Weller coughed, and notwithstanding the barber's
confirmation of the statement, said 'No' again, but more feebly
than before. The housekeeper lighted a piece of paper, and
insisted on applying it to the bowl of the pipe with her own
fair hands; Mr. Weller resisted; the housekeeper cried that her
fingers would be burnt; Mr. Weller gave way. The pipe was
ignited, Mr. Weller drew a long puff of smoke, and detecting
himself in the very act of smiling on the housekeeper, put a
sudden constraint upon his countenance and looked sternly at the
candle, with a determination not to captivate, himself, or
encourage thoughts of captivation in others. From this iron
frame of mind he was roused by the voice of his son.
'I don't think,' said Sam, who was smoking with great composure
and enjoyment, 'that if the lady wos agreeable it 'ud be wery
far out o' the vay for us four to make up a club of our own like
the governors does up-stairs, and let him,' Sam pointed with the
stem of his pipe towards his parent, 'be the president.'
The housekeeper affably declared that it was the very thing she
had been thinking of. The barber said the same. Mr. Weller said
nothing, but he laid down his pipe as if in a fit of
inspiration, and performed the following manœuvres.
Unbuttoning the three lower buttons of his waistcoat and pausing
for a moment to enjoy the easy flow of breath consequent upon
this process, he laid violent hands upon his watch-chain, and
slowly and with extreme difficulty drew from his fob an immense
double-cased silver watch, which brought the lining of the
pocket with it, and was not to be disentangled but by great
exertions and an amazing redness of face. Having fairly got it
out at last, he detached the outer case and wound it up with a
key of corresponding magnitude; then put the case on again, and
having applied the watch to his ear to ascertain that it was
still going, gave it some half-dozen hard knocks on the table to
improve its performance.

Illustration: Mr. Weller's Watch
'That,' said Mr. Weller, laying it on the table with its face
upwards, 'is the title and emblem o' this here society. Sammy,
reach them two stools this vay for the wacant cheers. Ladies and
gen'lmen, Mr. Weller's Watch is vound up and now a-goin'.
Order!'
By way of enforcing this proclamation, Mr. Weller, using the
watch after the manner of a president's hammer, and remarking
with great pride that nothing hurt it, and that falls and
concussions of all kinds materially enhanced the excellence of
the works and assisted the regulator, knocked the table a great
many times, and declared the association formally constituted.
'And don't let's have no grinnin' at the cheer, Samivel,' said
Mr. Weller to his son, 'or I shall be committin' you to the
cellar, and then p'r'aps we may get into what the 'Merrikins
call a fix, and the English a qvestion o' privileges.'
Having uttered this friendly caution, the President settled
himself in his chair with great dignity, and requested that Mr.
Samuel would relate an anecdote.
'I've told one,' said Sam.
'Wery good, sir; tell another,' returned the chair.
'We wos a talking jist now, sir,' said Sam, turning to Slithers,
'about barbers. Pursuing that 'ere fruitful theme, sir, I'll
tell you in a wery few words a romantic little story about
another barber as p'r'aps you may never have heerd.'
'Samivel!' said Mr. Weller, again bringing his watch and the
table into smart collision, 'address your obserwations to the
cheer, sir, and not to priwate indiwiduals!'
'And if I might rise to order,' said the barber in a soft voice,
and looking round him with a conciliatory smile as he leant over
the table, with the knuckles of his left hand resting upon it,—
'if I might rise to order, I would suggest that "barbers" is not
exactly the kind of language which is agreeable and soothing to
our feelings. You, sir, will correct me if I'm wrong, but I
believe there is such a word in the dictionary as hairdressers.'
'Well, but suppose he wasn't a hairdresser,' suggested Sam.
'Wy then, sir, be parliamentary and call him vun all the more,'
returned his father. 'In the same vay as ev'ry gen'lman in
another place is a honourable, ev'ry barber in this place is a
hairdresser. Ven you read the speeches in the papers, and see as
vun gen'lman says of another, "the honourable member, if he vill
allow me to call him so," you vill understand, sir, that that
means, "if he vill allow me to keep up that 'ere pleasant and
uniwersal fiction."'
It is a common remark, confirmed by history and experience, that
great men rise with the circumstances in which they are placed.
Mr. Weller came out so strong in his capacity of chairman, that
Sam was for some time prevented from speaking by a grin of
surprise, which held his faculties enchained, and at last
subsided in a long whistle of a single note. Nay, the old
gentleman appeared even to have astonished himself, and that to
no small extent, as was demonstrated by the vast amount of
chuckling in which he indulged, after the utterance of these
lucid remarks.
'Here's the story,' said Sam. 'Vunce upon a time there wos a
young hairdresser as opened a wery smart little shop vith four
wax dummies in the winder, two gen'lmen and two ladies—the
gen'lmen vith blue dots for their beards, wery large viskers,
oudacious heads of hair, uncommon clear eyes, and nostrils of
amazin' pinkness; the ladies vith their heads o' one side, their
right forefingers on their lips, and their forms deweloped
beautiful, in vich last respect they had the adwantage over the
gen'lmen, as wasn't allowed but wery little shoulder, and
terminated rayther abrupt in fancy drapery. He had also a many
hair-brushes and tooth-brushes bottled up in the winder, neat
glass-cases on the counter, a floor-clothed cuttin'-room up-
stairs, and a weighin'-macheen in the shop, right opposite the
door. But the great attraction and ornament wos the dummies,
which this here young hairdresser wos constantly a runnin' out
in the road to look at, and constantly a runnin' in again to
touch up and polish; in short, he wos so proud on 'em, that ven
Sunday come, he wos always wretched and mis'rable to think they
wos behind the shutters, and looked anxiously for Monday on that
account. Vun o' these dummies wos a favrite vith him beyond the
others; and ven any of his acquaintance asked him wy he didn't
get married—as the young ladies he know'd, in partickler, often
did—he used to say, "Never! I never vill enter into the bonds of
vedlock," he says, "until I meet vith a young 'ooman as realises
my idea o' that 'ere fairest dummy vith the light hair. Then,
and not till then," he says, "I vill approach the altar." All
the young ladies he know'd as had got dark hair told him this
wos wery sinful, and that he wos wurshippin' a idle; but them as
wos at all near the same shade as the dummy coloured up wery
much, and wos observed to think him a wery nice young man.'
'Samivel,' said Mr. Weller, gravely, 'a member o' this
associashun bein' one o' that 'ere tender sex which is now
immedetly referred to, I have to rekvest that you vill make no
reflections.'
'I ain't a makin' any, am I?' inquired Sam.
'Order, sir!' rejoined Mr. Weller, with severe dignity. Then,
sinking the chairman in the father, he added, in his usual tone
of voice: 'Samivel, drive on!'
Sam interchanged a smile with the housekeeper, and proceeded:
'The young hairdresser hadn't been in the habit o' makin' this
avowal above six months, ven he en-countered a young lady as wos
the wery picter o' the fairest dummy. "Now," he says, "it's all
up. I am a slave!" The young lady wos not only the picter o' the
fairest dummy, but she was wery romantic, as the young
hairdresser was, too, and he says, "O!" he says, "here's a
community o' feelin', here's a flow o' soul!" he says, "here's a
interchange o' sentiment!" The young lady didn't say much, o'
course, but she expressed herself agreeable, and shortly
artervards vent to see him vith a mutual friend. The hairdresser
rushes out to meet her, but d'rectly she sees the dummies she
changes colour and falls a tremblin' wiolently. "Look up, my
love," says the hairdresser, "behold your imige in my winder,
but not correcter than in my art!" "My imige!" she says.
"Yourn!" replies the hairdresser. "But whose imige is that ?"
she says, a pinting at vun o' the gen'lmen. "No vun's, my love,"
he says, "it is but a idea." "A idea!" she cries: "it is a
portrait, I feel it is a portrait, and that 'ere noble face must
be in the millingtary!" "Wot do I hear!" says he, a crumplin'
his curls. "Villiam Gibbs," she says, quite firm, "never renoo
the subject. I respect you as a friend," she says, "but my
affections is set upon that manly brow." "This," says the
hairdresser, "is a reg'lar blight, and in it I perceive the hand
of Fate. Farevell!" Vith these vords he rushes into the shop,
breaks the dummy's nose vith a blow of his curlin'-irons, melts
him down at the parlour fire, and never smiles artervards.'
'The young lady, Mr. Weller?' said the housekeeper.
'Why, ma'am,' said Sam, 'finding that Fate had a spite agin her,
and everybody she come into contact vith, she never smiled
neither, but read a deal o' poetry and pined avay,—by rayther
slow degrees, for she ain't dead yet. It took a deal o' poetry
to kill the hairdresser, and some people say arter all that it
was more the gin and water as caused him to be run over; p'r'aps
it was a little o' both, and came o' mixing the two.'
The barber declared that Mr. Weller had related one of the most
interesting stories that had ever come within his knowledge, in
which opinion the housekeeper entirely concurred.
'Are you a married man, sir?' inquired Sam.
The barber replied that he had not that honour.
'I s'pose you mean to be?' said Sam.
'Well,' replied the barber, rubbing his hands smirkingly, 'I
don't know, I don't think it's very likely.'
'That's a bad sign,' said Sam; 'if you'd said you meant to be
vun o' these days, I should ha' looked upon you as bein' safe.
You're in a wery precarious state.'
'I am not conscious of any danger, at all events,' returned the
barber.
'No more wos I, sir,' said the elder Mr. Weller, interposing;
'those vere my symptoms, exactly. I've been took that vay twice.
Keep your vether eye open, my friend, or you're gone.'
There was something so very solemn about this admonition, both
in its matter and manner, and also in the way in which Mr.
Weller still kept his eye fixed upon the unsuspecting victim,
that nobody cared to speak for some little time, and might not
have cared to do so for some time longer, if the housekeeper had
not happened to sigh, which called off the old gentleman's
attention and gave rise to a gallant inquiry whether 'there wos
anythin' wery piercin' in that 'ere little heart?'
'Dear me, Mr. Weller!' said the housekeeper, laughing.
'No, but is there anythin' as agitates it?' pursued the old
gentleman. 'Has it always been obderrate, always opposed to the
happiness o' human creeturs? Eh? Has it?'
At this critical juncture for her blushes and confusion, the
housekeeper discovered that more ale was wanted, and hastily
withdrew into the cellar to draw the same, followed by the
barber, who insisted on carrying the candle. Having looked after
her with a very complacent expression of face, and after him
with some disdain, Mr. Weller caused his glance to travel slowly
round the kitchen, until at length it rested on his son.
'Sammy,' said Mr. Weller, 'I mistrust that barber.'
'Wot for?' returned Sam; 'wot's he got to do with you? You're a
nice man, you are, arter pretendin' all kinds o' terror, to go a
payin' compliments and talkin' about hearts and piercers.'
The imputation of gallantry appeared to afford Mr. Weller the
utmost delight, for he replied in a voice choked by suppressed
laughter, and with the tears in his eyes,
'Wos I a talkin' about hearts and piercers,—wos I though, Sammy,
eh?'
'Wos you? of course you wos.'
'She don't know no better, Sammy, there ain't no harm in it,—no
danger, Sammy; she's only a punster. She seemed pleased, though,
didn't she? O' course, she wos pleased, it's nat'ral she should
be, wery nat'ral.'
'He's wain of it!' exclaimed Sam, joining in his father's mirth.
'He's actually wain!'
'Hush!' replied Mr. Weller, composing his features, 'they're a
comin' back,—the little heart's a comin' back. But mark these
wurds o' mine once more, and remember 'em ven your father says
he said 'em. Samivel, I mistrust that 'ere deceitful barber.


MASTER HUMPHREY, FROM HIS CLOCK-SIDE IN THE
CHIMNEY CORNER.
TWO or three evenings after the institution of Mr. Weller's
Watch, I thought I heard, as I walked in the garden, the voice
of Mr. Weller himself at no great distance; and stopping once or
twice to listen more attentively, I found that the sounds
proceeded from my housekeeper's little sitting-room, which is at
the back of the house. I took no further notice of the
circumstance at that time, but it formed the subject of a
conversation between me and my friend Jack Redburn next morning,
when I found that I had not been deceived in my impression. Jack
furnished me with the following particulars; and as he appeared
to take extraordinary pleasure in relating them, I have begged
him in future to jot down any such domestic scenes or
occurrences that may please his humour, in order that they may
be told in his own way. I must confess that, as Mr. Pickwick and
he are constantly together, I have been influenced, in making 
this request, by a secret desire to know something of their
proceedings.
On the evening in question, the housekeeper's room was arranged
with particular care, and the housekeeper herself was very
smartly dressed. The preparations, however, were not confined to
mere showy demonstrations, as tea was prepared for three
persons, with a small display of preserves and jams and sweet
cakes, which heralded some uncommon occasion. Miss Benton (my
housekeeper bears that name) was in a state of great 
expectation, too, frequently going to the front door and looking
anxiously down the lane, and more than once observing to the
servant-girl that she expected company, and hoped no accident
had happened to delay them.
A modest ring at the bell at length allayed her fears, and Miss
Benton, hurrying into her own room and shutting herself up, in
order that she might preserve that appearance of being taken by
surprise which is so essential to the polite reception of
visitors, awaited their coming with a smiling countenance.
'Good ev'nin', mum,' said the older Mr. Weller, looking in at
the door after a prefatory tap. 'I'm afeerd we've come in
rayther arter the time, mum, but the young colt being full o'
wice, has been' a boltin' and shyin' and gettin' his leg over
the traces to sich a extent that if he an't wery soon broke in,
he'll wex me into a broken heart, and then he'll never be
brought out no more except to learn his letters from the writin'
on his grandfather's tombstone.'
With these pathetic words, which were addressed to something
outside the door about two feet six from the ground, Mr. Weller
introduced a very small boy firmly set upon a couple of very
sturdy legs, who looked as if nothing could ever knock him down.
Besides having a very round face strongly resembling Mr.
Weller's, and a stout little body of exactly his build, this
young gentleman, standing with his little legs very wide apart,
as if the top-boots were familiar to them, actually winked upon
the housekeeper with his infant eye, in imitation of his
grandfather.


Illustration: Tony Weller Introduces his Grandson to the
Housekeeper
'There's a naughty boy, mum,' said Mr. Weller, bursting with
delight, 'there's a immoral Tony. Wos there ever a little chap
o' four year and eight months old as vinked his eye at a strange
lady afore?'
As little affected by this observation as by the former appeal
to his feelings, Master Weller elevated in the air a small model
of a coach whip which he carried in his hand, and addressing the
housekeeper with a shrill 'ya—hip!' inquired if she was 'going
down the road;' at which happy adaptation of a lesson he had
been taught from infancy, Mr. Weller could restrain his feelings
no longer, but gave him twopence on the spot.
'It's in wain to deny it, mum,' said Mr. Weller, 'this here is a
boy arter his grandfather's own heart, and beats out all the
boys as ever wos or will be. Though at the same time, mum,'
added Mr. Weller, trying to look gravely down upon his
favourite, 'it was wery wrong on him to want to over all the
posts as we come along, and wery cruel on him to force poor
grandfather to lift him cross-legged over every vun of 'em. He
wouldn't pass vun single blessed post, mum, and at the top o'
the lane there's seven-and-forty on 'em all in a row, and wery
close together.'
Here Mr. Weller, whose feelings were in a perpetual conflict
between pride in his grandson's achievements and a sense of his
own responsibility, and the importance of impressing him with
moral truths, burst into a fit of laughter, and suddenly
checking himself, remarked in a severe tone that little boys as
made their grandfathers put 'em over posts never went to heaven
at any price.
By this time the housekeeper had made tea, and little Tony,
placed on a chair beside her, with his eyes nearly on a level
with the top of the table, was provided with various delicacies
which yielded him extreme contentment. The housekeeper (who
seemed rather afraid of the child, notwithstanding her caresses)
then patted him on the head, and declared that he was the finest
boy she had ever seen.
'Wy, mum,' said Mr. Weller, 'I don't think you'll see a many
sich, and that's the truth. But if my son Samivel vould give me
my vay, mum, and only dis-pense vith his— might I wenter to say
the vurd?'
'What word, Mr. Weller?' said the housekeeper, blushing
slightly.
'Petticuts, mum,' returned that gentleman, laying his hand upon
the garments of his grandson. 'If my son Samivel, mum, vould
only dis-pense vith these here, you'd see such a alteration in
his appearance, as the imagination can't depicter.'
'But what would you have the child wear instead, Mr. Weller?'
said the housekeeper.
'I've offered my son Samivel, mum, agen and agen,' returned the
old gentleman, 'to purwide him at my own cost vith a suit o'
clothes as 'ud be the makin' on him, and form his mind in
infancy for those pursuits as I hope the family o' the Vellers
vill alvays dewote themselves to. Tony, my boy, tell the lady
wot them clothes are, as grandfather says, father ought to let
you vear.'
'A little white hat and a little sprig weskut and little knee
cords and little top-boots and a little green coat with little
bright buttons and a little welwet collar,' replied Tony, with
great readiness and no stops.
'That's the cos-toom, mum,' said Mr. Weller, looking proudly at
the housekeeper. 'Once make sich a model on him as that, and
you'd say he wos an angel!'
Perhaps the housekeeper thought that in such a guise young Tony
would look more like the angel at Islington than anything else
of that name, or perhaps she was disconcerted to find her
previously-conceived ideas disturbed, as angels are not commonly
represented in top-boots and sprig waistcoats. She coughed
doubtfully, but said nothing.
'How many brothers and sisters have you, my dear?' she asked,
after a short silence.
'One brother and no sister at all,' replied Tony. 'Sam his name
is, and so's my father's. Do you know my father?'
'O yes, I know him,' said the housekeeper, graciously.
'Is my father fond of you?' pursued Tony.
'I hope so,' rejoined the smiling housekeeper.
Tony considered a moment, and then said, 'Is my grandfather fond
of you?'
This would seem a very easy question to answer, but instead of
replying to it, the housekeeper smiled in great confusion, and
said that really children did ask such extraordinary questions
that it was the most difficult thing in the world to talk to
them. Mr. Weller took upon himself to reply that he was very
fond of the lady; but the housekeeper entreating that he would
not put such things into the child's head, Mr. Weller shook his
own while she looked another way, and seemed to be troubled with
a misgiving that captivation was in progress. It was, perhaps,
on this account that he changed the subject precipitately.
'It's wery wrong in little boys to make game o' their
grandfathers, an't it, mum?' said Mr. Weller, shaking his head
waggishly, until Tony looked at him, when he counterfeited the
deepest dejection and sorrow.
'O, very sad!' assented the housekeeper. 'But I hope no little
boys do that?'
'There is vun young Turk, mum,' said Mr. Weller, 'as havin' seen
his grandfather a little overcome vith drink on the occasion of
a friend's birthday, goes a reelin' and staggerin' about the
house, and makin' believe that he's the old gen'lm'n.'
'O, quite shocking!' cried the housekeeper,
'Yes, mum,' said Mr. Weller; 'and previously to so doin', this
here young traitor that I'm a speakin' of, pinches his little
nose to make it red, and then he gives a hiccup and says, "I'm
all right," he says; "give us another song!" Ha, ha! "Give us
another song," he says. Ha, ha, ha!'
In his excessive delight, Mr. Weller was quite unmindful of his
moral responsibility, until little Tony kicked up his legs, and
laughing immoderately, cried, 'That was me, that was;' whereupon
the grandfather, by a great effort, became extremely solemn.
'No, Tony, not you,' said Mr. Weller. 'I hope it warn't you,
Tony. It must ha' been that 'ere naughty little chap as comes
sometimes out o' the empty watch-box round the corner,—that same
little chap as wos found standing on the table afore the
looking-glass, pretending to shave himself vith a oyster-knife.'
'He didn't hurt himself, I hope?' observed the housekeeper.
'Not he, mum,' said Mr. Weller proudly; 'bless your heart, you
might trust that 'ere boy vith a steam-engine a'most, he's such
a knowin' young'—but suddenly recollecting himself and observing
that Tony perfectly understood and appreciated the compliment,
the old gentleman groaned and observed that 'it wos all wery
shockin'—wery.'
'O, he's a bad 'un,' said Mr. Weller, 'is that 'ere watch-box
boy, makin' such a noise and litter in the back yard, he does,
waterin' wooden horses and feedin' of 'em vith grass, and
perpetivally spillin' his little brother out of a veelbarrow and
frightenin' his mother out of her vits, at the wery moment wen
she's expectin' to increase his stock of happiness vith another
play-feller,—O, he's a bad one! He's even gone so far as to put
on a pair of paper spectacles as he got his father to make for
him, and walk up and down the garden vith his hands behind him
in imitation of Mr. Pickwick,—but Tony don't do sich things, O
no!'
'O no!' echoed Tony.
'He knows better, he does,' said Mr. Weller. 'He knows that if
he wos to come sich games as these nobody wouldn't love him, and
that his grandfather in partickler couldn't abear the sight on
him; for vich reasons Tony's always good.'
'Always good,' echoed Tony; and his grandfather immediately took
him on his knee and kissed him, at the same time, with many nods
and winks, slyly pointing at the child's head with his thumb, in
order that the housekeeper, otherwise deceived by the admirable
manner in which he (Mr. Weller) had sustained his character,
might not suppose that any other young gentleman was referred
to, and might clearly understand that the boy of the watch-box
was but an imaginary creation, and a fetch of Tony himself,
invented for his improvement and reformation.
Not confining himself to a mere verbal description of his
grandson's abilities, Mr. Weller, when tea was finished, invited
him by various gifts of pence and halfpence to smoke imaginary
pipes, drink visionary beer from real pots, imitate his
grandfather without reserve, and in particular to go through the
drunken scene, which threw the old gentleman into ecstasies and
filled the housekeeper with wonder. Nor was Mr. Weller's pride
satisfied with even this display, for when he took his leave he
carried the child, like some rare and astonishing curiosity,
first to the barber's house and afterwards to the tobacconist's,
at each of which places he repeated his performances with the
utmost effect to applauding and delighted audiences. It was
half-past nine o'clock when Mr. Weller was last seen carrying
him home upon his shoulder, and it has been whispered abroad
that at that time the infant Tony was rather intoxicated.

The End
