
The Necromancer

By

"Lorenz Flammenberg"
(Karl Friedrich Kahlert )

Translated by T. Dutton







First published 1793
Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2021
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain





Introduction

In Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey the central character, Catherine
Morland, has read too many Gothic novels, and under their influence
imagines the abbey to conceal lurid secrets. She discusses them with
her friend:
“Dear creature! how much I am obliged to you; and when you have
finished Udolpho, we will read The Italian together; and I have
made out a list of ten or twelve more of the same kind for you.”
“Have you, indeed! How glad I am! — What are they all?”
“I will read you their names directly; here they are, in my
pocket-book. Castle of Wolfenbach, Clermont, Mysterious
Warnings, Necromancer of the Black Forest, Midnight Bell, Orphan
of the Rhine, and Horrid Mysteries. Those will last us some
time.”
“Yes, pretty well; but are they all horrid, are you sure they
are all horrid?”
“Yes, quite sure; for a particular friend of mine, a Miss
Andrews, a sweet girl, one of the sweetest creatures in the
world, has read every one of them.”

Our friend Nina Zumel has tracked down the original English version
of The Necromancer of the Black Forest, translated by T. Dutton. She
has given its complex publication history on her blog, at
https://darktalessleuth.wordpress.com/2021/01/17/notes-on-the-
astrologer-of-the-nineteenth-century/

?

THE NECROMANCER
COMPRISING A SERIES OF
WONDERFUL EVENTS,
FOUNDED ON FACT,
Translated from a New German Work, purposely for this Magazine,
By T. DUTTON, Esq.



Frontispiece: The Necromancer


Blustering winds and chilling rain proclaimed the unwelcome approach
of winter; yellow Autumn saw her leafy honours fall to the ground;
loud roared the storm across the Elbe, whose ruffled waves curled to
the boisterous breath of Æolus. No more the silent grove resounded
with the voice of harmony and love. In hollow trees or moss-bemantled
walls the feathered songsters sought shelter from the rude unfriendly
blast. The raven alone, from some sequestered tower, mixed his hoarse
notes with the hoarser cries of the ominous bird of night. Safe in
his peaceful cot, the honest husbandman relaxed his wonted toils,
and, whilst his well-fed fire defended him from the inclemency of the
weather, enjoyed in sweet tranquillity the fruits of his former
labour.

After a long-lamented absence of more than thirty years, Herrman had
the satisfaction of welcoming his friend Cronheim to his house.
Educated together from their infancy, they had early formed a mutual
attachment, which gradually ripened into the sincerest friendship,
and united their hearts by the most endearing ties; ties not less
binding, not less sacred and invincible, than those of blood. Great,
therefore, was the reluctance with which they parted from each other,
after having completed their studies at the University of Gottingen.
Herrman engaged himself as private tutor to a nobleman of
distinction, with whom he made the tour of Europe, whilst Cronheim,
being of a more gay and volatile disposition, sought his fortune in
the wars.

The feeling heart alone can picture to itself the mutual pleasure and
rapturous delights which our two friends experienced at embracing
each other, after an absence of so many years. Time had not yet
extinguished the fire of youth and the wonted impetuosity of
Cronheim's temper. "Brother," cried he, giving his hand to his
friend,—"Brother, let us forget the dull counsels of age; let us,
whilst indulgent fortune still grants me to enjoy your company, live
as in the former days that are passed; let us live as if the thirty
years we have spent separated from each other had never been
registered in the iron calendar of time."

Eagerly did Herrman assent to this proposal of his friend. His estate
lay on the pleasant banks of the Elbe, and was, for situation,
unrivalled. Woods, meadows, brooks, warrens, hills, and dales,
relieving each other, incessantly diversified the scene; Nature had
thrown the whole into such agreeable confusion and disorder, that it
required very little improvement to render his abode the most
delightful, picturesque, and romantic spot that can possibly be
conceived. Cronheim, who, for hunting, was at least a second Nimrod,
had here the fairest opportunity of gratifying his favourite passion;
nor was Herrman a whit behind him in his pursuits. Pleasing was it to
behold the youthful ardour with which our sturdy veterans, at peep of
dawn, would bound over hill and dale, to chase the flying stag or
bristled boar.

Already had a week elapsed in these delightful health-bestowing
exercises: every morning was devoted to the chase; and when, spent
and languid, they returned from the pleasing sport, a rural repast
and good old Rhenish wine refreshed their weary limbs; nor was the
bottle or the pipe laid aside till evening long had spread her sable
mantle over the globe, and steeped their eyelids in the dews of
sleep.

But now a change of weather put a stop to their sports. Loud, as we
have already observed, loud roared the bleak tempestuous storm; the
rattling hailstones beat violently against the windows, threatening
destruction to these brittle channels of light. Herrman and Cronheim
saw themselves obliged to relinquish the chase: in pleasing
conversation they endeavoured to beguile the tedious hours, whilst
they recapitulated the deeds of former times, and rehearsed the past
adventures of youth. Evening approached, and found them still
indulging the talkative disposition of age.

Louder and louder roared the storm, fierce and more wild raged the
conflicting elements; Herrman, with lavish hand, heaped fresh logs
upon his friendly fire, and, pushing round the mirth-inspiring glass:
"Whilst angry elements do quarrel,
Be theirs (he cried) the bustle, ours, the barrel—"

Pleased with the cheerful humour of his friend, Cronheim recruited
his pipe, and, after a short pause,—"Brother," he began, "hast thou
any faith in supernatural agency? Dost thou believe in ghosts?"

Herrman replied only with a negative shake of his head.

"Neither am I a perfect believer in such strange appearances,"
resumed Cronheim; "and yet, during my travels through a certain part
of Germany, it was my fate to experience a strange mysterious series
of adventures, which I have never been able to explain to my entire
satisfaction."

This address excited Herrman's most serious attention; his curiosity
was raised to the highest pitch. Cronheim did not long hold him in
suspense, but began his narrative, to the following effect:—

My arrival at Frankfurt happened to be just at the commencement of
the fair. [Note 1] The bustle of the place, the incredible concourse of people
from every part of Europe, the ceaseless and diversified round of
shows, entertainments, and every possible sort of pleasure and
pastime, seemed to promise that my time would not easily hang heavy
upon my hands; for which reason I determined to pass a few weeks in
that place.

The inn in which I lodged being one of the first in the town, was
crowded with strangers in every part; among whom an elderly gentleman
distinguished himself, and attracted universal notice, by the
singularity of his dress, the bluntness of his manners, and a kind of
mystical reserve in all his actions. His appearance commanded
respect: no Brahmin could exceed him in gravity of countenance; no
Quaker in plainness of apparel. He occupied the best apartments in
the inn, was attended by his own servants, took no notice of, much
less entered into conversation with, any of his fellow lodgers, went
out regularly every day after dinner, and seldom returned home till
midnight. Though he frequented all public places of resort, he was
never once seen to associate with a single individual, but walked up
and down, solitary and pensive, like a man burdened with a heavy load
upon his spirits, and distracted with care.

The extraordinary character of this stranger excited my curiosity to
be better acquainted with him: for this purpose I began my inquiries
with the landlord; but who, shrugging up his shoulders, answered me
only with a significant shake of his head. My next application was to
the waiters; but they likewise shrugged up their shoulders, and were
as ignorant as the landlord. In short, I found it impossible to
procure the smallest intelligence about the stranger. Nobody seemed
to know anything about him.

I had not been a week in Frankfurt before I had the misfortune to
lose my purse. This loss I attributed to my carelessness; and not
doubting but some of the professors of legerdemain had been dexterous
enough to lighten my pocket, either as I entered or came out of a
booth where wild beasts were exhibited, I prudently determined to be
more cautious and circumspect in future.

Next morning, however, in spite of all my care, I perceived a fresh
loss which gave me infinitely more concern, than I had experienced
for my purse. The miniature picture of my Eliza, which I wore
suspended by a riband round my neck, and never took off, except when
I undressed for bed, was nowhere to be found. I therefore took the
waiters pretty sharply to task: these, however, not only disclaimed
all knowledge of the picture, but manifested, at the same time, no
small displeasure at the injustice of my suspicions.

In hopes of dissipating my chagrin, I went in the evening to the
theatre: a handsome female, at a distant part of the house, caught my
eye; I put my hand into my pocket, and began to feel for my opera-
glass, rummaging first one pocket, then the other; but all to no 
purpose,—the opera-glass was fairly gone. "Damn it!," thought I,
"this is very extraordinary! and with that began to congratulate
myself that, contrary to my usual practice, I had left my pocketbook
at home.

A boy with a link lighted me to a neighbouring tavern, after the
conclusion of the performance. At the door, I gave my conductor the
usual gratuity; and, putting my hand at the same time, instinctively,
to my fob, discovered that my watch was missing.

"May I be damned, if I spend another night in Frankfurt! I exclaimed,
firmly persuaded, that I had been singled out as their mark by some
of the light-fingered gentry; who, actuated by the same principle as
other traders—"the sacred thirst of gain,"—are equally punctual in
their attendance at fairs, and every other opportunity of making
money. Resolved, therefore, to pack up my things early the next
morning, and leave a place where I had experienced nothing but
misfortunes, I seated myself in sullen despondency, without taking
the least notice of the company around. Already had I finished my
supper, and was preparing to depart, when, in the very moment that I
pushed back my seat,—" Pray, Sir, what o'clock is it?" demanded a
neighbouring voice. I made no answer to this question, which so
unseasonably reminded me of my new loss.

"What o'clock is it, Sir?" interrogated the same voice a second time.
"I cannot tell;" I replied with peevish impatience, still advancing
towards the door.

"Have you no watch, then?" was the next demand. Vexed at the
officious impertinence of the stranger, I turned round to look at
him, and oh! heavens! what was my surprise at beholding, in the
person of my inquirer, no other than my fellow lodger in the inn,—the
elderly unsociable gentleman, whose character had before so much
excited my curiosity.

The serious look with which he regarded me sufficiently indicated
that he expected an answer to his question.

"My watch," I began —

"Has been stolen from you," interrupted the stranger; "however, give
yourself no uneasiness. I have been fortunate enough to discover the
thief. Here, Sir, is your watch, and take better care of it in
future."

I stood for some time mute with astonishment. The same hands which
purloined my watch had, I made no doubt, exercised their ingenuity on
the other articles I had lately lost. This rendered me extremely
anxious to know the offender, but, before I was sufficiently
recovered from my surprise to commence my inquiries, the stranger had
left the room.

I immediately hurried back to the inn: the stranger did not return
till midnight. The moment I heard his footsteps on the stairs, I flew
to meet him; and, making a low bow, began to thank him for the
recovery of my watch. But the unsociable gentleman, without deigning
to take the least notice of my discourse, passed abruptly by me, and,
entering his own apartment, locked the door after him.

All subsequent attempts to enter into conversation with the wonderful
stranger proved equally abortive. In the inn he constantly kept
himself locked in his own apartment, and, in places of public resort,
seemed assiduously to avoid me. Three days passed in fruitless
endeavours; at length, provoked with the old gentleman's
unaccountable reserve, I determined to give myself no further trouble
about him, but, packing up my portmanteau, fixed upon the following
day for my departure, although I had met with no fresh loss or
disaster since the recovery of my watch.

Previous to my leaving Holstein, I had been supplied by my uncle, Mr.
Vander Laer of Hamburg, with bills for a considerable amount, drawn
upon a certain house in Leipzig, with which my uncle transacted
business. Being low in cash, I resolved to get these bills negotiated
in Frankfurt, and therefore set out, immediately after breakfast, in
quest of a merchant to whom I had been recommended for that purpose.
I met with little difficulty in finding out the house, but had so
much the more in finding my pocket-book, which, after feeling for it
first in the right pocket, then in the left, then in the right again,
and so on alternately for a full half hour, was actually missing.

"I certainly must have left it at home!" cried I: and, posting back 
to the inn, unpacked my trunk, and emptied its contents a dozen times
at least; but all to no purpose,—pocket-book and notes were
irrecoverably lost.

How I passed the remainder of the day after this discovery, I shall
not attempt to describe. Evening approached, and found me still busy
in rummaging every hole and corner in quest of my pocketbook, which,
however, did not think proper to be forthcoming. The greatness of my
loss hardly suffered me to be convinced of its reality; after one of
the most uneasy nights that can possibly be conceived, I renewed the
search next morning, but with no better success than before.

Stranger in a foreign land, without money, without friends, I now
beheld myself the slave of necessity; and, with my eyes fixed
sullenly upon the ground, stood wringing my hands, and calling down
curses upon myself, and the unknown author of my calamity, when I was
roused from my painful reflections by a sudden knock at the door.
"Walk in," I cried with peevish impatience: the door flew open, and
who should make his appearance but my fellow lodger, the strange
unsociable gentleman!

"Young man,"—presenting a bill to me, "here is sufficient to carry
you home to your friends; the post sets out to-morrow morning. I wish
you a pleasant journey: farewell!"

In an instant lay the draft upon the table, and away hurried the
donor, before I had time to recover from my surprise, or to utter a
single syllable. Astonishment long held me, as it were, chained to my
seat; but curiosity to be acquainted with the nature of the
stranger's bounty getting, at length, the better of my amazement, I
proceeded to examine the paper, which I found to be a bill for one
hundred and twenty dollars, [Note 2] drawn upon a merchant in Frankfurt, and
payable at sight.

If I was before confounded and surprised, I was now not less vexed
and chagrined at this adventure, in consequence of which I saw myself
debtor to the generosity of a stranger, whom nobody seemed to know,
whose very name and place of abode I had in vain attempted to
discover: what probability, therefore, had I of ever acquitting
myself of my obligations by making restitution? "I must and will
learn his address" was my final determination; accordingly, I
repaired to the stranger's apartment, knocked at the door, but, to my
great disappointment, found him not at home. In hopes of dissipating
my uneasiness, I likewise resolved upon a walk, and hurried to join
the busy scenes of tumult and confusion which the fair exhibited.

It was late when I returned back to the inn. The stranger was not
arrived: his usual hour was midnight; I therefore proposed to wait
his return, and either to insist on knowing his address, or else
compel him to take his present back again. For this purpose, leaving
my door ajar, I seated myself on a sofa, and endeavoured to beguile
the tedious hours of expectation by reading a German translation of
Ossian.

Midnight approached without any signs of the stranger's return. I
still continued stretched upon the sofa; at length I grew drowsy,
Ossian dropped out of my hands, my eye-lids closed involuntarily,
and, overpowered by sleep, I already nodded, when I was suddenly
roused by a noise at the door of my room. I started up—all was
silent. I opened the door—could hear nothing—see nothing. It
certainly must have been imagination—I must have fancied or dreamed
that I heard a noise. Resuming, therefore, my book, I rubbed my eyes,
wiped them with a wet cloth, and, that I might be in less danger of
giving way to slumber, began to read aloud:

"Docs the wind touch thee, O harp, or is it some passing ghost?"—
Hardly had I pronounced the last words, when the noise returned. I
could plainly distinguish the tread of human feet along the passage:
the noise drew nearer and nearer. Presently I believed I heard a
trembling hand groping for the lock of the door, which, opening
gradually, discovered a female figure dressed in white, with a veil
over her face, that reached half way down her shoulders.

Slow and solemn, with her back turned to me, she drew near the table,
took up my watch, examined it attentively, sighed thrice and deeply,
replaced my watch upon the table, and continued her walk to the
opposite corner of the room. In repassing, she rested her head upon
her left hand, and, drawing her veil aside with her right hand, I
beheld, with horror and astonishment, the very features of Eliza; but
her countenance pale, her eyes sunk and hollow, and her brow
contracted with indignation.

After a short pause, she drew nearer, cast an angry look at me, held
up her hand in a threatening attitude, and, thrice beating her
breast, whilst heart-piercing groans burst from her bosom, regained
the door, and disappeared.

On recovering from my surprise, I found myself still seated upon the
sofa, and, revolving in my mind every concomitant circumstance of
this extraordinary apparition, was firmly persuaded that the whole
adventure could be nothing but a dream. I looked at my watch—it was
exactly one o'clock. Impatient at the stranger's delay, I threw
myself, dressed as I was, upon the bed, and slept till late in the
morning. My first care, upon awaking, was to inquire of the waiter
whether the strange gentleman had returned to the inn last night. I
was answered in the negative. "Has he left Frankfurt?—Did he make any
mention of travelling?"

"To have taken any notice to us of his intended journey," replied the
waiter, "would be contrary to the mysterious reserve of his
character; it is, however, probable enough that he is gone. His
reckoning he settles regularly every day after dinner; and, as to
trunks or baggage, he never carries anything of the kind along with
him."

"Suppose we step to his apartment; I am curious to satisfy myself
whether he be actually gone or not."

The key stood in the door; but, excepting the usual furniture of the
room, not the smallest trace was there of any person having lodged in
it.

This was to me a very unwelcome discovery. What hope could I now have
of ever being able to acquit myself of my obligations to my unknown
benefactor? More than once I felt myself tempted to destroy the bill
for which I stood indebted to his bounty; but this, as I justly
reflected, could in no shape cancel or lessen my obligation. Suddenly
the thought shot across my mind, that perhaps the bill might be of no
value; it might be fictitious,—might be drawn upon a person that was
nowhere to be found. Though this supposition, in case it should prove
true, threatened to involve me in my former embarrassment, I took a
strange delight in cherishing the idea, and, that I might put an end
to my suspense, showed the note to my landlord, under pretence of
inquiring after the merchant on whom it was drawn. The innkeeper
instantly described the street and house, offering to send his boy
with me to show me the way: this, however, I thought proper to
decline.

I went therefore alone, and tendered my bill for payment the same
morning. The merchant ran over the draft, and then fixed his eyes
with uncommon significance upon me. His looks seemed expressive of
something more than mere astonishment. This I considered as a
confirmation of my suspicions, and expected every moment to hear the
validity of my bill called in question. I found myself, however,
mistaken; the merchant, still eyeing me with the same significant
attention, opened his desk, and counted me the money. This seemed a
favourable opportunity to obtain some intelligence concerning the
stranger from whom I had received the note; I ventured, therefore, to
question the merchant about the drawer of the bill. Evidently
disconcerted at this demand, the merchant shrugged his shoulders,
and, without making any reply, locked his desk and departed! I found
his conduct strangely mysterious: a confused train of ideas rushed
upon my mind; a walk seemed best calculated to drive away the
vapours; I repaired, therefore, to a neighbouring tea-garden.

The beauty of the weather had enticed a large concourse of people to
the place. I took my seat in a pleasant arbour, where woodbine and
whitethorn interwove their friendly branches, and, calling for
chocolate, began, whilst this was preparing, to give free scope to my
meditations, and to ruminate on the strange occurrences which I had
witnessed during my short abode at Frankfurt. Above all, my dream
engrossed my most serious thoughts; the more I reflected upon every 
particular, the more extraordinary I found it. Eliza's look, her
wrathful countenance, the threatening manner in which she held up her
hand—and but too well I knew how justly I deserved her anger—all
appeared so natural, so suited to my present circumstances, that
sometimes I inclined to consider last night's adventure as more than
a mere dream. But against this opinion reason and incredulity raised
a thousand unanswerable objections. I endeavoured to banish the whole
idea from my mind; in vain,—my dream returned, revolted, recoiled
upon my imagination; opposition only served to give it additional
force. Painful was the struggle between contending sentiments; I
could support the conflict no longer: forgetful of the place—
forgetful of the company, I broke out into a loud exclamation—" Yes!
it must have been a dream."—"Twas no dream," rejoined a voice,
familiar to my ear. Astonished and confounded, I lifted up my eyes:
the strange gentleman, my unknown friend and benefactor, stood before
me.

"Young man," he continued, "if you wish to be satisfied relative to
what you saw last night, meet me at ten o'clock this evening, at the
corner of .Frederic Street, facing the Dolphin." Without waiting my
reply, the stranger hurried out of the arbour, and in an instant lost
himself among the crowd.

Soon after, the waiter made his appearance with the chocolate, but my
appetite was gone. I traversed the garden, wandered up and down its
walks, searched everywhere for the wonderful stranger, inquired after
him of the waiters, described him, characterized him, offered a
reward to anyone that should discover him, but all to no purpose;
none of the waiters had seen any person that answered his
description.

Chagrined at the ill success of my inquiries, I returned to the inn,
and, with a kind of secret horror, entered my apartment, where the
image of Eliza seemed still to hover round me. Painful conjectures
tortured my mind: her pallid countenance, hollow eyes, and the signs
of mortality portrayed in her looks, filled me with the most gloomy
apprehensions. The place became insupportable: restless and uneasy, I
wandered from one scene of bustling impertinence to another; from the
inn to the coffee-house, from the coffee-house to the mall, from the
mall to the exhibition-room, from the exhibition room to the fair, to
the booths, to puppet-shows, merry Andrews, wild beasts, &. Nothing
could restore me to tranquillity—nothing afford me relief—nothing
calm the tempest of my thoughts.

With the approach of evening, my assignation with the wonderful
incognito engrossed my meditations. Strange ideas, unaccountable
forebodings, harassed my mind. The time, the place of meeting, seemed
equally mysterious and alarming. "Why not fix upon an earlier hour?
Why not upon his own apartment at the inn? Go I, or go I not?" I
incessantly put the question to myself, whilst my wavering
resolution, like a pair of balances, preponderated this way, then
that, alternately. "What risk, what danger, mayest thou expose
thyself to by going?" demanded Prudence. "What discoveries mayest
thou not make?" replied Curiosity: "to-morrow is the day appointed
for thy departure from Frankfurt, and this very night an opportunity 
offers of obtaining light, and satisfactory information, concerning
all the strange and intricate occurrences which have lately taken
place. How will it repent thee to neglect so favourable an
opportunity? And of whom standest thou in dread? Shame upon thy
manhood, to tremble at an old grey-headed gentleman." "A gentleman to
whom thou art, moreover, under obligations," added Pride, "which this
very evening thou mayest learn to acquit thyself of"—Yes, I go— was
the conclusion of my deliberations.

It was now within half an hour of ten o'clock. I returned to the inn
to prepare for my intended expedition. The landlord meeting me at the
door, accosted me with more than usual gaiety.

"Sir," he began, "I have an agreeable piece of news to communicate,
that will, I make no doubt, afford you equal pleasure and surprise."

"What is it?" I demanded with astonishment.

"During your abode in my house, you have had the misfortune to lose,
at different times, sundry valuable articles."

"That, indeed, is but too true," I replied, with a look that seemed
to ask, whether this was the pleasant and surprising news my landlord
had announced.

"These losses," continued the innkeeper, "have been productive of
much trouble and uneasiness to me, as well as to yourself, Sir. For
the credit of an inn, you know, Sir" —

"To the point, if you please," (I interrupted him, being impatient to
be gone.)

"It seems, Sir, you lost your purse, the miniature picture of a young
lady, an opera-glass, and likewise your pocket-book."

"Your inventory of my loss is very exact, very accurate, indeed!"

"All these articles," resumed the innkeeper, "you will find
faithfully restored; they lie this present moment upon the table in
your apartment."

"Explain yourself!" I exclaimed, trifle with my impatience no
longer."

"The matter is even as I relate. It is hardly an hour ago since a
stranger brought these things to my house."

"A stranger, do you say? He can be no stranger to you, I should
suppose?"

"Who, then, do you imagine it to be, Sir?" demanded the innkeeper."

"Who else," I replied, "but the elderly gentleman, your former
lodger?"

The innkeeper shook his head; at the same instant he was called off
to attend some company. I hurried upstairs; everything corresponded
with the landlord's relation. On the table lay my purse, the
miniature-picture, opera-glass, and pocket-book; I examined the
latter, and found my notes safe and untouched. I stood petrified with
amazement.

That this was a fresh obligation conferred upon me by my unknown
benefactor I had little room to doubt. "But how," thought I; "by what
means can he have been enabled to effect this restoration? Why
anticipate, as it were, his own appointed time of meeting? Can he
have entertained any doubts of my punctuality in attending his
assignation? or has he, perhaps, been compelled, by unavoidable
unforeseen necessity, to accelerate his departure from Frankfurt?"
The latter conjecture, whilst it appeared the most plausible, was
likewise the most unpleasant, since it deprived me of all possibility
of repaying the sum for which I stood indebted to the stranger's
bounty, at the very time when the recovery of my own notes put this
restitution in my power. However, as the stranger's departure was not
positively certain; as the whole of his character and conduct had
been in the highest degree mysterious; as his disinterested
benevolence, inflexible integrity, and unexampled philanthropy,
rendered it improbable that he should fail in his promise of meeting
me, without the most cogent reasons, I determined to repair to the
appointed place of rendezvous.

"Did the bearer of the lost articles, which I have thus unexpectedly
regained, leave no message relative to the author, the place, the
manner, of their recovery?" addressing myself to the innkeeper, in my
way to the door.

"None in the world," (replied the innkeeper) "he said neither more
nor less than what I have already told you. 'Here are the things
which M. Cronheim has lost during his abode in your house;' and,
without leaving me a moment's time to question him further upon the
subject, laid them down upon the table, and departed."

"Take care of this till my return," said I, delivering the key of my
apartment to the landlord: my effects I have regained; for the future
I leave them in your custody,—from you I shall expect them." The time
of assignation drew near: I hurried away from the inn.

The clock struck ten; I kept my post at the corner of Frederic
Street. Dark was the night; loud and hollow roared the wind; not a
star shone in the firmament; every distant sound, every approaching
footstep, announced to my fond imagination the arrival of my unknown
benefactor. I ran to meet the coming passenger, accosted every one
that fell in my way, but found myself continually mistaken. Repeated
disappointments served to confirm me in the opinion which I had
already formed on recovering my pocket-book, with the other articles
of my loss, as above related. My generous friend, thought I, must
have left Frankfurt; must have been under a sudden indispensable
necessity of travelling. I grew tired of waiting—the sound of the
church-clock again saluted my ears; it was eleven, and the stranger
had not yet made his appearance. Passengers were no longer heard at a
distance; midnight, silence, impenetrable darkness, surrounded me;
vexed and discontented, I sat out on my return to the inn.

Hardly, however, had I advanced ten paces, before I fancied I heard
somebody endeavouring to overtake me. "Stop, Sir," exclaimed the
well-known voice of my long-expected friend. I instantly turned
round, and ran to meet him.

"Sorry am I," began the courteous stranger, "to have detained you so
long."

"Longer, Sir, would I have waited with pleasure, had I been certain
of meeting you; had I not been apprehensive that you had left
Frankfurt. I burn with impatience to see myself extricated from my
doubts; to obtain your promised explanation relative to the
mysterious adventures which I have lately experienced."

"That explanation you shall soon receive," was the stranger's reply:
"follow me."

With long and hasty strides he now began to lead the way, displaying
more activity than could have been expected from his years. I
followed him—not a single word passed between us. We soon approached
the city gates: these were in an instant thrown open by the guard,
and now our way led across the suburbs.

At the extremity stood a lonely antiquated house or castle,
surrounded with a high wall, and apparently in a very ruinous
condition. The stranger stopped short; three times he struck with his
staff against the massy gates: hollow sounded his knocks through the
solitary apartments. An old grey-headed porter gave us admittance.
The stranger demanded a light; a lantern was brought: in mysterious
silence he traversed the rooms, where desolation seemed to have taken
up her abode; all was waste, empty, uninhabited; the old grey-headed
porter excepted, I saw no signs of a single living animal. After
passing through a long narrow passage, we came into a spacious
garden, if a place overgrown with briars and thorns may deserve that
title. Here, however, the former picture of silent solitary
desolation was quite reversed: bats and owls swarmed in every part,
and filled the air with their doleful lamentable cries. A ruinous
antique summer-house, built of flint and granite, stood at the
bottom; thither I followed my conductor.

"Time and place," began the latter, carefully re-locking the door the
moment I had entered,—" time and place are here equally favourable
for our purpose: explain the nature of your doubts, and those
intricate events concerning which you desire better information."

I began with a brief relation of the extraordinary manner in which my
pocket-book, notes, &c. had been restored to me, and was just
proceeding to inquire whether my conductor was not the author of this
fortunate discovery, when I was interrupted by the latter.

"I am perfectly acquainted with the whole transaction; ask whatever
question you please, but let it comprise the sum of all your wishes."

This command involved me in the utmost perplexity. How was it
possible for me, in my present state of surprise, to consolidate, to
concentrate, as it were, my desires instantaneously into one focus,
into one object, one point?

The stranger perceived my embarrassment. "Ask, then," he resumed,
"who the friend is that interests himself so faithfully in your
concerns."

"The very question," I replied, "that I most devoutly wish to have
resolved."

"Well, then, you shall soon have an opportunity of seeing this
friend—of being personally acquainted with him."

"Soon have an opportunity!" I repeated with astonishment. "Am I not
acquainted with him already? Are not you, yourself, Sir, that friend,
that generous benefactor?"

"No!" replied the stranger, with a negative shake of his head; I am
nothing more than his instrument; and that—here he paused a moment—
and that only at the third hand."

At these words I regarded him with silent amazement. Of this the
stranger seemed to take but little notice, but, drawing from his
pocket a small box filled with red sand, began to scatter its
contents about the floor; then describing with his wand two circles,
he placed me in one, whilst himself occupied the other, and, with his
hands crossed upon his breast, and his eyes directed upwards, stood
for a long time motionless like a statue.

"What, (thought I to myself) will be the end of these mysterious
preparations?"

The stranger still continued motionless, till a distant church clock
announced the solemn hour of midnight. Hardly had the last stroke
ceased to vibrate on our ears, when, suddenly turning himself round
in his circle, he pronounced, with an audible voice, at full length,
the name of Eliza. I started with horror and astonishment. Instantly
was heard a subterraneous noise, like the thunder underground that
forebodes an earthquake, or when it rattles with aggravated peals,
re-echoing from the mountains.

The stranger pronounced the name of Eliza the second time, and louder
and more awful than before. A flash of lightning shot across the
room, which shook with the roaring of the deep-mouthed thunder.

Louder, and still more dreadful, the stranger pronounced the name of
Eliza the third time. A sudden trembling seized upon me—the whole
summer-house seemed to be on fire—the ground gave way under my feet—I
sunk down—the spirit of Eliza hovered over me—my senses forsook me.

A violent rocking gradually restored me to the use of my faculties.
At first I fancied myself tossed to and fro by invisible hands,
whilst a loud rattling noise invaded my ears. The jolting still
increased. Presently, I perceived myself seated in a vehicle that
rolled along with surprising velocity. Impenetrable darkness
surrounded me—it was impossible for me to distinguish a single
object. I found myself terribly confined and straightened for want of
room: somebody sat at my right hand, but whether my companion
belonged to the spiritual or corporeal race of beings, I was not
sufficiently recovered from my surprise to determine.

Meanwhile the carriage rolled along with increasing rapidity, but
either the roads must have been extremely rugged and uneven, or my
driver, being unacquainted with the country, was unable to select his
way in the dark, for we encountered such terrible shocks from loose
stones, the roots and broken branches of trees, &c. that I expected,
every moment, to see the vehicle overset, and dashed in pieces. How
long I continued in this miserable situation it is difficult to
ascertain, as you may reasonably suppose that one hour's travelling
in this mode might well seem longer than a journey from Leipzig to
Dresden in a stagecoach. At length a most tremendous shock put a
period to our expedition: the charioteer drove fiercely over a
prostrate milestone—off flew one of the wheels—and down came the
carriage in an instant.

"Jesus! Maria!" exclaimed my companion; who, falling right upon me,
pressed me with such true, unequivocal, and substantial weight, that,
had I been capable of the least reflection, I might soon have
satisfied my former doubts, whether my associate belonged to the
immaterial or corporeal race of beings.

Excruciating torments awakened me from the state of stupefaction in
which I had lain several minutes. Rough voices repeatedly called out
for help, and presently a countryman, with a lantern, ran to our
assistance. On opening my eyes, I perceived two men standing over me,
each holding a horse apparently just unharnessed from the broken
carriage. They attempted to lift me up; my agonies increased—I found
myself unable to stand, and entreated them, for God's sake, to let me
lie. A second attempt was made to raise me on my feet: in vain—it
appeared that my thigh was broken. No sooner was this discovery made,
than the two men swung themselves upon their horses, and, promising
to procure assistance in the first town or village they should meet,
galloped off at full speed, leaving me to the care of the peasant,
who kindly did all in his power to comfort and encourage me.

The night was piercing cold, which greatly added to the poignancy of
my torments. A whole hour elapsed—no help made its appearance—the men
with the horses seemed to be in no hurry to return. At length the
distant rattling of a carriage was heard: the countryman with his
lantern ran to meet it; it proved to be a coach and four.

"Stop, for the love of Christ!" he exclaimed, and briefly related the
disaster which had just befallen me. A middle-aged gentleman sprang
out, and, with the assistance of the countryman and his own
attendants, conveyed me to the carriage, where having seated me as
conveniently as circumstances would admit, he gave orders to drive as
gently as possible.

Hardly had the morning began to dawn, when we entered a populous
village on the estate of Baron von Kampenhausen, such was the
gentleman's name who afforded me protection in my present calamity. I
was immediately conveyed to the manor-house. A servant, despatched
for that purpose, soon returned with a surgeon; the necessary
operations were performed, after which I was put to bed. My kind and
noble benefactor paid me all possible attention, sat hours together
by my bed-side, and, as soon as I was sufficiently recovered to enter
into conversation, entertained me alternately with his discourse, and
reading extracts from the best French and German authors.

At the expiration of nine weeks I was able to lay my crutches aside,
and, taking an affectionate leave of Baron von Kampenhausen, returned
to Frankfurt. My sudden disappearance from that place had greatly
alarmed the landlord of the inn where I lodged; who, having made many
fruitless inquiries after me, gave me entirely up for lost. Great,
therefore, was his surprise at my unexpected return, after so long an
absence. Hardly would he credit his own eyes, when I first made my
appearance, but, crossing himself, and adjuring me in the name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, began the usual preamble which, from
time immemorial, has been deemed an infallible charm against
hobgoblins of every description. However, after I had with some
difficulty satisfied him that it was no apparition, but a bona fide
flesh and bone inhabitant of this terraqueous globe, I received my
effects at his hands, and, the day following, set out from Frankfurt,
on my way to Switzerland.

Here ended Cronheim his wonderful narrative, and, anxiously fixing
his eyes on Herrman, seemed at once to wish, and yet dread, to hear
the judgment which his friend would pass upon it.

After a short pause, "Marvellous," began Herrman, "is the relation I
have just heard—marvellous to such a degree, that had I not myself
experienced adventures of a similar, or even more wonderful nature,
and which probably may be more intimately connected with your own
history than you would at first imagine, I must candidly acknowledge
I should be apt to call the authenticity of your narrative into
question."

Cronheim, who fully expected to find, not only a severe critic, but
an incredulous hearer, in the person of his friend, was all
impatience to be made acquainted with the wonders which Herrman had
announced; but the latter, observing that the night was already far
spent, and that, as he was only a partial actor in the drama, it
would be necessary for him to consult some papers in which the
history was continued and brought to its catastrophe, begged leave to
postpone his relation till the following day, to which demand
Cronheim readily acquiesced.

Aurora, with rosy fingers unlocking the crystal gates of light,
ushered in the sprightly morn. Clear and unclouded shone the sky,
hushed was the storm, the weather appeared the very reverse of what
it had been the preceding day. Cronheim, notwithstanding, manifested
no inclination for the chase; but, at breakfast, took occasion to
remind his friend of last night's promise, and anxiously inquired
whether he had found the papers to which he then alluded.

Herrman replied in the affirmative, and at the same time gave him to
understand that, on account of the immoderate length of his history,
his design was to relate at present only as far as himself had been
an acting person in the drama. The remainder, which formed by far the
greatest part of his history, he promised to deliver to him in
writing, but not before the time fixed for his departure; lest, he
added, ghosts and necromancers should so entirely engross their
thoughts, as to leave no time for the more rational solaces of
friendship.

Cronheim declared himself satisfied with this proposal, and Herrman,
as soon as he had reloaded his pipe, began his promised narrative, to
the following effect:

"Soon after our separation on leaving Gottingen, I engaged myself as
private tutor to the young Count von Einsiedel, a nobleman not less
distinguished by his virtues than by his illustrious descent, with
whom I travelled through the greatest part of Europe. Our tour lasted
three years, and, though it may be supposed that, in the course of so
long a journey, in which, like Ulysses, we had occasion to see
This immense forest is situated in Swabia, and is by far the largest
in all Germany; known to the ancients by the name of Sylva Hercynia.
Caesar gives a description of it in his Commentaries, where he
affirms it to be nine days' journey in breadth, and three score in
length.
"Mores hominum multorum et urbes,"[Note 3]
we could not fail of meeting with many extraordinary adventures: the
most wonderful as well as the most dangerous of all seems to have
been reserved for our return to Germany from Switzerland.

We had already nearly cleared the Black Forest,[Note 4] when, on a sudden,
the sky became overcast, the rain poured down in torrents, and the
livid flashes of lightning, bursting right over our heads, succeeded
one another with such rapidity, that the thunder, re-echoing from the
woods, the rocks, and mountains, seemed but one continued peal. To
add to our distress, night how began to approach: not such a night as
tender lovers choose to wander in by the moon's pale lamp, and
breathe their amorous vows—but rather a night, such as poets have
conceived, when Lapland witches [Note 5] charm the labouring moon, and bring
her down to earth, whilst darkness, with her raven wings outspread,
hovering beneath the fair expanse of heaven, forbids the starry host
their mild effulgence to diffuse, and cheer the traveller with their
silver light.

We had not travelled many miles in this dismal condition, before our
postilion had the misfortune to lose his way; and, what still
aggravated our calamity, he did not perceive his mistake till it was
already too late to rectify it. I shall not attempt to describe the
gloomy apprehensions which filled our minds on his communicating to
us this unwelcome intelligence. Our postilion was naturally a lad of
humour, and, agreeably to the laudable practice of his profession,
had entertained us all day with a recital of the numberless murders,
robberies, rapes, &c. which had been perpetrated in this immense
forest. We had likewise, in many instances, received ocular
demonstrations of the truth of his reports from the numberless
crosses which in this country are erected on the spot where any
murder has been committed, partly with a view to put travellers upon
their guard, and partly to entreat their prayers for the rest of the
souls of the defunct. Hardly an hour passed without our meeting one
or more of these crosses, with the following inscription:







As we wished for nothing more ardently than to extricate ourselves
from this dismal situation as soon as possible (being not less in
purgatory ourselves than the souls of those for whom our prayers were
desired), we ordered the postilion to lose no time in fruitless
attempts to regain the right road to the town we had originally
designed to put up at, but rather to drive straight forward with the
utmost expedition, till we should have the good fortune to light on
some human habitation, where we might pass the remainder of the night
in safety. With this request our Jehu willingly complied, and, after
exercising his whip for a full hour with all the fury of his
illustrious predecessor of that name, we found ourselves emerging
from our worse than Cimmerian forest, upon the entrance of a large
plain or common.

"Blessed Virgin-mother of God!" exclaimed the postilion, with a
degree of ecstasy not to be conceived, "we are at last in open
country, and, if I am not mistaken, my Lord, at no great distance
from a village.

The music of the spheres could not have sounded more delightful and
harmonious to the Count and myself than this intelligence from our
postilion: nor was it long before his conjectures were confirmed by a
hideous howl which half a score of dogs set up on our nearer
approach.

Great was our joy at beholding once more the peaceful abodes of man.
The village we found to be of considerable extent, but the inn, if
such it may be called, was one of the most execrable that ever I set
foot in in the whole course of my life. "Benedicite!" exclaimed the
landlord, all astonishment at seeing a post-chaise draw up before his
door,—a phenomenon which caused him to stare as much as if the Grand
Turk in person had come to pay him a visit. It was no wonder,
therefore, if the bill of fare of the house contained nothing more
than a few smoked sausages, some rusty bacon, and a stale loaf of
brown bread. Wine or beer, he assured us, was not to be had in the
whole neighbourhood; and such was the goodness of his brandy, that
even our postilion was glad to wash his mouth after swallowing a
glass of it.

I inquired whether the lord of the manor resided on his estate,
hoping to meet with better accommodation from the hospitality of a
stranger; but received for answer, that the manor-house was entirely
waste and uninhabited, nobody having been able to live in it for this
century past, and upwards—I demanded the reason.

"Why, as to matter of that, look ye, gentlemen," replied the
landlord, "it is an affair which nobody much cares to speak about—
neither dare I, on any account, give you any item of the business
tonight; but wait," he added, "till to-morrow morning, and then, if
you are not able to divine the cause yourselves, why I will even let
you into particulars."

As little satisfied with this reply as myself, the Count pressed the
landlord to be more explicit, and even insisted on having a
categorical answer to the question I had put: but our landlord was
not to be prevailed upon; he continued shaking his head as sturdy as
a mule, and, when he found that we would not desist from our
inquiries, left the room with evident signs of displeasure, grumbling
something about unlawful curiosity and divine judgments, with other
obscure hints, which to us were quite unintelligible.

Vexed as we were at what we considered a most unpardonable instance
of rudeness, we were fain to make the best of our present
circumstances, and to digest our coarse unsavoury fare as well as we
could. Indeed, the black Spartan broth of Leonidas would have been a
downright luxury, compared to the miserable entertainment we partook
of on this occasion; but experience verified the old proverb, that
"Hunger is the best sauce."

After we had finished our homely repast, and somewhat appeased the
cravings of nature, we laid ourselves down upon some clean fresh
straw, which here supplied the place of a bed to our weary limbs. The
Count was presently buried in a profound sleep; whilst I kept turning
from side to side, and, harassed by a thousand unaccountable
apprehensions, found it impossible to close my eyes. In this state of
uneasiness I continued till the watchman, with hoarse voice,
announced the solemn hour of midnight. My ears were instantaneously
alarmed with the distant sound of horses' hoofs, and the echoing
thunder of trumpets, horns, and other wind instruments. The noise
drew near, and presently a whole troop of horse seemed to pass in
full gallop by the window, the air at the same time resounding with
such a full band of music, that, had it not been for the unseasonable
hour, added to the disagreeableness of the night, I should have
imagined his Serene Highness the Elector, with his whole court and
retinue, had marched through the place on a royal hunting party. The
Count awoke with the noise, and, abruptly starting up —

"What can be the meaning of all this?" he demanded, with a mixture of
fear and astonishment.

To this question I was as little able to give a satisfactory answer
as himself. I continued, therefore, to listen with the greatest
attention to what was transacting, and perceived, to my no small
surprise, that these nocturnal Nimrods had hardly passed our inn,
before the noise of their horses and instruments died away, and the
whole place was as silent as before. This appeared to me exceedingly
singular. I began afresh to give free scope to the workings of a
disturbed imagination, and, comparing in my mind the strange scene I
had just witnessed with the unaccountable reserve and dark innuendos
of our landlord, I attempted to unravel the mystery that seemed to
envelop this adventure. As for the Count, he soon relapsed into a
profound slumber, and snored away as heartily as ever.

Setting aside the inclemency of the weather, it appeared to me very
improbable that any person should ride out on a hunting-party at 
midnight. This reflection induced me for some time to regard the
noise I had heard as the consequence of my having dreamed to that
effect: but when I took into serious consideration the behaviour of
our landlord, and the sudden awaking of the Count, I found myself
greatly staggered, and cannot deny but a secret horror invaded my
whole frame.

Lost and bewildered in a painful labyrinth of conjecture and doubt, I
insensibly grew weary of the strife between contending opinions. A
gentle slumber, the welcome forerunner of the somniferous deity, had
already closed my eyelids, when I was roused from my lethargy by the
hoarse cry of the watchman, who, with the whole collected force of
his lungs, gave notice that the clock had just gone one in the
morning. His voice, however, though powerful enough to entitle him a
second Boanerges, was soon drowned by the return of the same alarming
noise I had before heard. I immediately arose, and, hastening to the
window, which shook with the echoing thunder of horns, trumpets, &c.
resolved to satisfy my curiosity relative to this nocturnal troop of
Nimrods by ocular demonstration; but, before I had time to throw the
window open, the whole squadron had passed the house in full gallop,
with a noise equal to the loudest whirlwind, and a few minutes after
the former silence succeeded, and all was quiet as the grave.

I was now fain to banish all further thoughts of sleep, for the
present night at least, and, not able to wait till breakfast, at
which time the landlord had promised to satisfy our inquiries
relative to the uninhabited mansion, I ran to the window the moment I
heard the watchman begin to cry two o'clock.

"Friend," I accosted him, "what can be the meaning of -the noise and
racket that alarmed our ears at the hours of twelve and one?"

"Why, truly," was his answer, "your honour must certainly be a
stranger in this neighbourhood. There is not a child in the village
but knows all about it. We have this noise, as you call it, every
night for weeks together: after that, we are quiet again for a
season."

"Well, but," I replied, "what whimsical gentleman is it that hunts at
midnight?"

"Nay, that, indeed, I am not at liberty to tell you; inquire of your
landlord, who can inform you of every particular. For my part, I am
only doing my duty, and my trust is in God. But not a syllable of
what I see and hear will I betray to any living soul; nor should the
king's ransom tempt me to it." And with that the watchman took
himself off.

I wrapped myself up in my great-coat, and, drawing a chair to the
window, awaited, with anxious impatience, the tardy return of day. At
length the morning began to dawn; the whole village re-echoed with
the crowing of cocks, which, I may truly say, never sounded more
grateful in my ears. The Count at the same time awaking, and seeing
me already dressed:—

"Why, you are up by times, to-day, Sir," he began, rubbing his eyes.
"Pray tell me what noise that was which disturbed us last night?"

"Indeed, my Lord," I replied, "my curiosity in this respect is at
least equal to your own; and hardly can I wait till we receive the
promised information from our landlord. And," added I, "if your
lordship had not slept so soundly, you would have heard the troop
gallop past us at one in the morning with the same dreadful
impetuosity and noise as they did at twelve."

The sound of horses' hoofs in the yard put a stop to our
conversation. I ran to the window, and saw an officer with his
servant alight before the inn door. They presently joined us, and
having, like ourselves, had the misfortune to be benighted and lose
their way, our acquaintance was soon formed. The officer was a
spirited young fellow, about three and twenty, wore Danish uniform,
and had, it seems, been sent upon a recruiting-party. The Count
related our last night's adventure, which the Lieutenant for some
time regarded as a mere joke. But, upon my positive assurance that
what he had just heard was a real fact, he testified a strong desire
to be better acquainted with the midnight hunters.

"That honour you may easily have," replied the baron; only pass the
night here, and we will bear you company."

"Done!" cried the Lieutenant; "I hold you to your word, and who knows
but our hunting gentry may be civil enough to admit us of their
party. In that case," added he, laughing, "we come in for our share
of a haunch of venison."

Hardly had he pronounced these words when the landlord made his
appearance—" Well, gentlemen," he began (after previously bidding us
good morrow), "did your honours hear anything extraordinary last
night?"

"But too much!" was my reply; however, pray inform me who, and what
kind of hunters, they are that seem so fond of exercising their sport
at midnight?"

"Why yes, to be sure," resumed the landlord, "these are matters, as I
said before, which one don't much care to talk about. I was unwilling
to satisfy your inquiries yesterday, lest your incredulous curiosity
should precipitate you into mischief, which, God above knows, has
been the case with many; however, as I promised to give you a
relation of the whole affair this morning, you shall find me as good
as my word.

"Here, at the bottom of the village, stands a large house, which
formerly was the residence of the lord of the manor. Now, you must
know, it so happened that, a great many years back, one of these
lords was a terribly wicked man, who cared neither for God nor devil,
and treated his subjects, [Note 6] worse than his cattle. Nobody could do
anything to please him. Even his own children he would bang and kick
about like dogs, and, for the least trifle, order them to be thrown
into a dark filthy hole or dungeon, where they were at last starved
to death. His subjects he never called by any other name than his
beasts, and as such he treated them. In short, he was a true devil
incarnate!

"Now, this wicked man delighted in nothing so much as in hunting. In
his woods he harboured all kinds of game, even the most savage—wild
boars especially—which made terrible havoc and ruination in the
fields and gardens of his peasants: and yet, if any of the latter
only offered to drive away one of those furious animals, that was,
perhaps, treading down his corn or devouring his turnips, he was sure
to be confined for weeks together upon bread and water. [Note 7]

"Whenever this nobleman thought proper to go a hunting, the whole
village was obliged to draw out and accompany him; and on these
occasions he would make them supply the place of dogs, and set them
upon the game, which whenever they were not able to catch, he would
horsewhip and worry them with his hounds till they fell down dead at
his feet.

"One time, as he was indulging in these cruel practices till late at
night, he was thrown from his horse, and broke his neck upon the
spot. The clergy would not suffer him to be interred in the
churchyard like a Christian, for which reason he was buried in a
corner of his park. But now the terrible judgments of divine
vengeance became manifest; for to the present day his wretched soul
is not suffered to rest. At certain stated times and seasons the
wrath of Almighty God obliges him every night, the moment it strikes
twelve, to ride through the village, and, with Beelzebub and his
hellish train, to drive into the manor-house, where he is fain to
stay till one o'clock in the morning, which no sooner is heard to
strike, than the whole infernal troop of them are remanded back to
the bottomless pit.

"Since his death the manor-house has always been untenantable. Many
who have foolishly attempted to sleep in it have paid for their
temerity with their lives. Nay, I know it to be a fact, that several
who have slept in my house, and who, on hearing the noise of his
approach, have been daring enough to look out at window, have been
punished with a swelled face, or even a particular cast in their eye,
if not with a total deprivation of sight, for their rash curiosity."

With these words our landlord concluded his long-winded harangue;
and, wistfully eyeing us all round, regaled his delighted optics with
the astonishment portrayed in our countenances. His pleasure was,
however, of short duration; the Lieutenant instantly bursting out
into a loud fit of laughter, for which, from the silence he observed
during the landlord's narration, he seemed to have purposely reserved
the whole collected force of his lungs.

"Nay, Sir, you may laugh as you please," replied the latter, with no
small degree of impatience; "but I'll venture to lay the last
farthing I'm worth in the world, that you laugh on the other side of
your mouth by to-morrow morning, provided you have heart sufficient
to stay here over night."

"That you shall soon see," was the Lieutenant's reply; "not only
here, my good friend, but in the very castle itself: and, were it
haunted with a whole legion of devils—were it the very palace and
Pandemonium of Beelzebub!—will I pass the ensuing night. These
gentlemen, I make no doubt," addressing his discourse to the Count
and myself, "will gladly favour me with their company."

My young nobleman was a man of honour. Not to accept this challenge
would have appeared to him an indelible stain upon his character. His
assent, therefore, was quickly given. For my part, I started a
thousand objections, and, representing to the Lieutenant the danger
we might expose ourselves to, uncertain as we were what kind of
spirits we should have to deal with, left no argument untried to
dissuade him from his project: but the Lieutenant, cutting me short:

"I am a soldier, and wear a sword; and for gentlemen of our
profession, ghosts of every description, both with bodies and
without, have always the most prodigious respect!"

In short, I plainly saw that, by pretending to assert my magisterial
authority over the Count, I should only render myself ridiculous
without effecting my purpose; for so resolutely bent was he upon
accompanying the Lieutenant at all events, that I am convinced he
would have gone without me, had I persisted in my refusal. Forced,
therefore, however reluctantly, to comply, I at length gave way to
their entreaties; for to desert my pupil would have appeared to me an
unpardonable breach of trust.

But how shall I describe the behaviour of our landlord when he found
us fully determined upon this adventure! His astonishment exceeded
all conception, and, with uplifted eyes and hands, he conjured us, in
the name of the ever blessed Virgin Mary, and all the holy saints, to
desist from so rash an enterprise. "I'll answer for it with my
head,"—was his repeated declaration,—"that not one of you will live
to see the light of another day."

The Lieutenant, however, turning all his pious remonstrances into
ridicule, soon worked upon the irritability of his temper to that
degree, that he left us to our fate, grumbling some hearty curses as
he hurried out of the room.

Our conversation, as may easily be imagined, turned more upon
spiritual than political subjects; when, after having pretty well
exhausted our stock of ghostly knowledge, the Lieutenant proposed a
walk to the haunted castle, very judiciously observing, that it might
not, perhaps, be altogether amiss to take a nearer view, by daylight,
of those formidable premises which we had fixed upon for our
nocturnal rendezvous. This proposal meeting with universal
approbation, we hurried to put it into immediate execution.

An enormous pile of building in the Gothic taste, but terribly ruined
and demolished, presented itself to our eyes. The castle was
surrounded with a high wall, besides a wide and deep ditch in front,
over which a drawbridge afforded us an easy passage. We had no
occasion to stand knocking at the gate, for thrown, as it was, wide
open, a troop of horse might have entered it in full gallop. The
appearance of the place had something wonderfully awful and romantic.
We drew, as with one common consent, our hangers,[Note 8] the moment we set
foot in the hall. The pavement was of brick, but overgrown with weeds
and mouldering grass. From thence we continued our way through a
flight of empty desolate apartments, where spiders, rats, and owls,
appeared to be the only tenants. Windows covered with dirt, with
cobwebs, and even moss itself, afforded no other light than what
found admission through the broken panes of glass: just sufficient to
discover to our view the mouldering remains of several ancient pieces
of furniture; broken tables; chairs without backs; part of the iron-
work of a large lamp suspended by a chain of the same metal, from the
ceiling of one of the rooms; with two or three rickety benches, that
seemed ready to fall to pieces under the touch: these were the sole
signs of the place ever having been inhabited by man.

Curiosity now prompted us to take a view of the subterraneous
apartments of this antique building. Previous to our setting out on
this expedition, we had the precaution to provide ourselves with a
lantern and the necessary apparatus for procuring fire, which we now
found exceedingly serviceable. A stone staircase, at the further
extremity of the hall, conducted us to a long, narrow, winding
passage, arched over with brick-work, and terminating in a door cased
over with iron. The Lieutenant still leading the way, with his
lantern in one hand, and his drawn sword in the other, boldly
advanced towards the door, which, yielding to his push, discovered a
large vaulted place, resembling a cellar, but entirely empty, waste,
and darker than the shades of midnight. A tainted air, impregnated
with baneful vapours and pestilential dews, almost deprived us of the
faculty of breathing, when first we set foot in this subterraneous
dungeon. On each side, facing the entrance, we perceived a pair of
folding doors, secured with enormous bolts and a prodigious
portcullis of massy iron. In vain was it for us to attempt further
entrance. We hastened therefore from this loathsome scene back to the
hall, where, like fishes restored to their native element, we felt
our hearts expand on once more breathing fresh air.

As this appeared to us the most eligible place for passing the night,
and giving our ghostly friends the meeting, in case they should think
proper to pay us a visit, we endeavoured to fit it up for their
reception and our own as conveniently as possible. For this purpose,
with the help of some rusty nails and detached pieces of wood, which
we found in abundance in the solitary apartments, we at length
contrived to make one of the old broken tables stand pretty decently
upon its legs. We next essayed our ingenuity upon a couple of the
rickety benches, which were likewise, with much trouble, put in a
condition that promised to secure us from all danger of their
breaking down under us.

Not yet satisfied, however, with the discoveries we had made, we
wandered once more through the spacious untenanted apartments of the
castle, but everywhere could meet with nothing but mouldering
monuments of ruin and decay. The garden was the next place that
curiosity prompted us to visit. Melancholy, indeed, was the prospect
that here presented itself.—Here was literally a place for dragons,
for beasts and birds obscene, and for everything that is filthy and
abominable. Overgrown as it was with thorns and briers, with
thistles, weeds, nettles, and long grass that whistled in the wind,
our feet were not seldom entangled in the mazy labyrinth, whilst our
hangers were fain to open us a passage, which the spreading branches,
indissolubly twisted and interwoven with each other, seemed unwilling
to afford us. Thus we continued our toilsome march through a long
winding alley, formed of a double row of beech-trees, that led to the
extremity of the garden, at the upper end of which we discovered,
emerging from the confused mass of briers, thorns, &c. that
surrounded and almost concealed it from our view, a black marble urn,
supported by a column of red porphyry. The workmanship was truly
exquisite, but our eyes searched in vain for any inscription; and
already were we proceeding on our return, when the Count's foot
stumbled against some hard body, buried among the weeds, at no great
distance from the urn: on inspection, it proved to be a wooden cross,
on which the following words were barely legible:
HIC JACET
GODOFREDUS HAUSSINGERUS,
PECCATOR.[Note 9]

The date, if I mistake not, was 1603.

After gazing on each other for some time in silent astonishment,
"What, gentlemen, "demanded the Lieutenant, "is your opinion of this
curious epitaph?"

"For my part," replied the Count hastily, "I consider it as a
convincing evidence of the truth of our landlord's narration."

Fatigued as we already were with the arduous task of opening to
ourselves a passage with our hangers through the mazy windings and
intricate labyrinths of this desolated place (for garden it certainly
could no longer be called, with any propriety), we felt little
inclination to extend our painful researches to its remoter parts,
but hurried back to the main hall, where meeting with no fresh
objects to excite our curiosity, we set out on our return to the inn.

Our landlord, from whom we had cautiously concealed our projected
visit to the castle, was, on our return, almost petrified with horror
and astonishment at our bold, and, as he called it, astonishing
presumption. At the same time, conceiving it his duty to deter us, if
possible, from rushing on certain and immediate destruction, lest our
blood, he observed, might peradventure fall upon him, he fairly
washed his hands of us, giving us the second edition of his morning
lecture, enriched with various additions, emendations, and
improvements. But, alas! his pious intentions met with no better
success than before. The Lieutenant, indulging his natural propensity
for satire, soon rallied him out of all temper; wherefore, giving us
up for a precious triumvirate of stiff-necked incorrigible
blockheads, he only requested of us to settle the reckoning before
our departure; and, wishing us that success which he dared not to
hope, took his leave of us as of persons no longer designed for this
world.

It was between nine and ten at night that we sallied from the inn,
all three well-armed with a hanger and a couple of pistols per man;
excepting the Lieutenant's servant, who, though he carried fire-arms,
(being provided with a lantern) acted chiefly in the capacity of
sutler to the troop. Heroes in all ages have ever found an empty
stomach a great drawback upon valour, for which reason, the
Lieutenant, who understood the whole art of war, both theory and
practice, as well as Caesar or Alexander the Great, and very
sagaciously reflected that, in a place where ghosts were supposed to
inhabit, little store of belly-timber was to be expected, took care
to clap a basket with a couple of roast fowls and three or four
bottles of wine upon his servant's shoulders, and, thus equipped at
all points, we began our march.

On our arrival at the appointed place of rendezvous, we found
everything exactly in the same order as we had left it. Table and
benches were still standing as firm as ever; we took our seats, and,
encouraged by the Lieutenant's example, ate as heartily as any pious
Catholic may be supposed to do previously to a seven weeks' Lent, not
forgetting to do justice to the wine, which circulated briskly
enough. This time, however, good cheer was found to fail of the
desired effect; for, instead of inspiriting our drooping valour, it
acted rather like a leaden weight upon our eyelids, which with
difficulty were kept from closing, although the clock had not yet
struck eleven. The intermediate space between this and the canonical
hour of meeting our ghostly friends we endeavoured to beguile by
reading Hagedorn's Poems, of which I fortunately happened to have a
copy with me. In this office I was alternately assisted by the Count
and the Lieutenant, till the latter, on examining his watch, and
finding it within a quarter of twelve, closed the book, and, briskly
running upstairs to a front room in the first floor, took his stand
facing the window, which commanded as fair a view of the forecourt,
and the circumjacent plain, as a dark unfriendly night would admit.
The Count and myself followed his example, and in this posture we
awaited the scenes that were to follow, leaving the Lieutenant's
servant fast asleep in the hall.

At length the ominous hour began to strike,—more awful, in our
present circumstances, than the funeral knell of some departed
friend. Dreadful was the midnight silence that reigned around us. The
very pulse of nature seemed suspended; even the faculty of breathing
was almost taken from us. And now the last stroke ceased to vibrate
on our ears. Instantly shook the whole fabric with the sound of
horns, trumpets, &c. that seemed to rend the echoing air; whilst the
dashing of horses' hoofs made the solid ground tremble as with an
earthquake: the rams' horns of Jericho were mere pop-guns—the
downfall of its walls a mere crash, compared with the dreadful
thunder that now assailed our ears. Impenetrable darkness, however,
added to the velocity of their course, prevented us from gratifying
our curiosity, and distinguishing the authors of all this wild and
terrible uproar.

Swift as the winged whirlwind, and with equal impetuosity, advanced
the sable troop. Three times they made the circuit of the walls;
then, suddenly halting, drew up at no great distance from the castle,
facing the drawbridge. In an instant died away the noise, like the
doubtful blast still quivering on the trees, "when the rude storm has
blown its fill." Silence resumed her wonted empire; but not the less
impossible was it for us to discover either horse or rider.

Whilst we stood bewildered in thought, and forming conjectures on the
scene we had just witnessed, a more immediate subject of alarm
presented itself in the court. The rattling of spurs; the sound of
footsteps, whether human or not, was uncertain; and a confused noise,
as from a multitude passing and repassing, gave us reason to
apprehend that the troop had dismounted, and were preparing to pay us
a visit. Involuntary horror seized upon me: a cold sweat overran my
whole frame; my knees tottered: I feared, I trembled, I knew not why.
This noise, however, was of short duration; for, like the former, it
gradually died away, and was succeeded by gloomy and profound
silence.

"Shall we rush into the court? Shall we seek to join them?" demanded
the Lieutenant with his usual firmness and intrepidity. I shook my
head by way of reply; the Count did the same.

"Then am I like to go alone, it seems!" returned the fiery youth, and
immediately sallied down stairs, holding a pistol on full cock in
each hand, and his drawn sword under his left arm. He was not long
before he joined us again.

"There must be some mystery in all this," he exclaimed; "not the
smallest trace of either horse or rider to be found!"

No answer on our part sufficiently showed that we were equally at a
loss to account for so strange and singular an adventure. The
Lieutenant seated himself, and, with his eyes fixed immovably upon
the ground, seemed lost in a deep reverie: the Count endeavoured to
banish more unwelcome ideas with reading; whilst I, giving way to the
calls of nature, soon lay buried in a profound sleep.

The report of a pistol awakened me; I started up incontinently. The
sound of horns and trumpets again saluted my ears, but presently the
noise died away as before. At the same instant the Lieutenant and the
Count entered the room. They had, it seems, like myself, been
overpowered with sleep, from which they were roused by the return of
the uproar in the court, that had so greatly alarmed us at twelve.
Eager, therefore, to discover the authors, they had sallied out with
their pistols. They met, however, with little success: the whole
troop was off before they reached the court. The Lieutenant, dashing
one of the panes of the hall window in pieces with his pistol, sent a
bullet after them; but, some white horses excepted, could discover
nothing through the impenetrable gloom that surrounded them.

"Ghosts or not," he concluded his narration, "they seem to stand in
great awe of us; and, for the present, my advice is, that we rather
spend the remainder of the night upon some clean straw in the inn,
than continue here upon rotten benches of wood, which we hardly dare
trust with our weight."

This proposal was gladly accepted, and away we trudged to the inn,
greatly to the satisfaction of John, the Lieutenant's groom, who, it
seems, took little delight in hunting after ghosts.

Long had we to stand knocking at the inn-door before entrance was
granted. At length our landlord in person made his appearance.

"What! and are your honours still alive?" he began with fluttering
voice, crossing himself all the time: "or rather are ye come from
purgatory, to upbraid me with your destruction? Holy Father
Romboldus! [Note 10]  and all ye blessed saints, defend me; and witness for me,
how much I tried to dissuade them from their impious undertaking!"
With these words he banged the door without any further ceremony
right in our face.

Vexed as we were with this inhospitable reception, we could not
refrain from laughing, and that heartily, at the superstitious fears
and ludicrous grimaces of our landlord: till the Lieutenant, out of
all patience (for the night was none of the warmest), resolved to
stand kicking his heels no longer. Thundering, therefore, at the
door, as though he designed to pull the house down over the owner's
head, he swore by all the saints in Christendom, that he would reduce
the place to ashes, and utterly annihilate every soul within it,
unless immediate admittance was afforded us. This menace failed not
of the desired effect; our Cerberus presently relented, and, with
many awkward apologies begging pardon, for what in fact we had no
right to be offended at, spread some clean straw upon the floor, and,
wishing us a good repose, retired to his own apartment.

On our getting up, which was not till nearly noon, the Lieutenant
declared himself by no means satisfied with the result of last
night's adventure; and, signifying to us his intention of keeping
watch the ensuing night in the forecourt of the castle, concluded
with desiring us to bear him company.

The Count's eyes immediately reverted to me, seeming to expect from
my reply that denial which he was unwilling to deliver himself. I
accordingly represented to the Lieutenant the impossibility of our
complying with his request; that the nature of our affairs would not
suffer us to throw away any more time than had been lost already; not
to mention the danger of such an undertaking; four men being, at the
best, but a sorry match against a whole troop of horse, as we had
every reason, from the evidence of our own ears, to believe them.

"As to the danger of the frolic," replied the Lieutenant, "if that's
your main objection, it is easily removed. We need only take a dozen
stout raw-boned fellows along with us. A few shillings and a bottle
of brandy (which, though not to be had here, may easily be procured
from some neighbouring town) will entitle us to pick and choose our
gang from the whole village; and take my word for it, Sir, we shall
have a frolic, the like of which was never seen. Tomorrow morning, if
you think proper to depart, you may depend upon my company as your
fellow traveller."

The Count was easily prevailed upon; neither, indeed, was the
proposal displeasing to myself. The groom, therefore, was immediately
despatched to the next town to procure brandy, and other
refreshments, whilst our postilion received commission to sound his
horn,[Note 11]  as a signal. In a few minutes we had the whole village
assembled before the door, when, silence being ordered, the
Lieutenant, from the superior eminence of a deal table, addressed his
wondering congregation to the following effect: —

"Brave, gallant, and aspiring heroes! Such of you as have heart
sufficient to offer your services to accompany us to the haunted
castle, well known to all inhabitants of this village, there to
remain, and spend the night with us, and in all respects to act
obedient to the orders which you shall then and there receive; such,
I say, as shall willingly offer their services for this purpose, and
who, on inspection, shall be judged worthy of being employed in so
glorious a cause, shall receive the sum of sixpence per man, over and
above a plentiful supply of brandy and other necessary refreshments,
to keep your noble hearts from fainting."

Laughable was it to see the effects which this harangue produced. Not
a man in the whole assembly but immediately offered his services with
so much zeal, that we had reason to apprehend a premature exertion of
their valour. To prevent, therefore, as much as in us lay, the
effusion of human blood (for they seemed ready to go to blows for the
preference), fifteen of the stoutest and most promising were drafted
from this heroic corps, and the residue, in order to atone for their
disappointment, were promised a proper reward, provided they demeaned
themselves lovingly and peaceably. Hereupon our troop received
commission to attend us at the inn by ten o'clock precisely. As to
the choice of their weapons, that was left to their own discretion.

Such vigorous preparations could not fail of exciting the utmost
astonishment in our landlord, who, now regarding us as something more
than human—as sorcerers and magicians at least, if not devils
incarnate—seemed himself half willing to accompany us, and assist in
purging the haunted castle of the foul spirits that inhabited it.

With the approach of evening, however, his courage began to cool;
wherefore, pretending some urgent business, that rendered his
presence at home indispensably necessary, he contented himself with
wishing us success to our undertaking.

Our brave troop, on the other hand, neglected not to attend their
appointment with great punctuality; and formidable indeed was the
appearance they made, armed with scythes, pickaxes, flails,
bludgeons, pitchforks, pruning-hooks, spades, and whatever weapons
chance or fancy put into their hands. Having drawn ourselves up in
battle-array before the inn-door, we began our march to the castle,
headed by the Lieutenant. In the rear followed our provision, camp
equipage, and military stores; consisting of brandy, cold roast beef,
half a dozen peck loaves, together with some benches, which we
borrowed from the tap-room; a large deal table, the same on which the
Lieutenant made his famous harangue, and lastly an iron lamp, with
the necessary apparatus for procuring fire. These were conveyed in
wheelbarrows, and in this gallant order we made our triumphant entry
into the castle.

The court having been marked out for the place of encampment, we
pitched our tents between the gate and the drawbridge. A plentiful
libation was then made to the god of brandy, whose nostrils must have
been highly regaled with the grateful fumes of incense and burnt
offerings, every hero replenishing his pipe with a potent supply of
India's salutary weed; and, as our victory in this ghostly crusade,
though unfought, was none the less certain, hymns of triumph were
sung beforehand on the occasion.

In proportion as the contents of the brandy-bottle diminished, the
courage and musical disposition of our company increased. We had,
therefore, no need, as on the preceding night, to read ourselves
hoarse, in order to repulse the encroaching advances of sleep. The
wonderful assistance which valour reaps from military music—fifes,
trumpets, drums, and kettle-drums, &c.—is too plain and obvious to
stand in need of any comment or illustration; otherwise, we might
refer our readers to the history of the Lacedaemonians, who, after
suffering repeated defeats from the Messenians, proved at length
victorious,—not by their own inherent valour, or the merit and skill
of their commanders, but by choosing the Athenian songster and poet,
Tyrtaeus, for their general; although the said Tyrtaeus cut but a
sorry figure for a militia captain, inasmuch as he was blind of one
eye, lame, and, in fact, passed for little better than an idiot. If
such, then, were the effects produced by one songster, in a whole
army, what must we suppose to have been the case with our brave
troop, consisting, as it did, of vocal performers from first to last?
To so high a pitch was their valour wound up, by the noble songs
which they rehearsed, not forgetting to whet their whistle, as
occasion required, with plentiful draughts of brandy, that they
laughed at, challenged, and defied, the whole infernal host of hell,
with Beelzebub, their leader, at the head!

It was now within a few minutes of twelve. The Lieutenant, pointing
to his watch, beckoned with his hand: instantly the military concert
was suspended; awful silence succeeded in its place; expectation
stood a tiptoe; and astonishment, mixed with horror, appeared visibly
portrayed in every countenance. Thus we kept our post till the
church-bell began to strike, at which our country boobies pricked up
their ears, and, with gaping mouths, seemed to swallow the sound. But
when they heard the distant dashing of horses' hoofs, and the
thundering echo of trumpets, that followed immediately upon the last
strokes, nothing can convey an adequate idea of their terror and
surprise. They no longer dared to regard one another, except with
stolen looks; and had not fear effectually chained them to their
seat, there is little room to doubt but a precipitate flight, on
their part, would soon have deprived us of our worthy comrades and
protectors.

Meanwhile the noise, increasing as it approached, drew nearer and
nearer, and presently was heard distinctly in the subterraneous
apartments of the castle. Suddenly, however, it subsided: all was
perfectly still and silent as before. But, in less than ten minutes,
the uproar returned more powerful than ever; and, swift as lightning,
though still invisible, retreated the ghostly cavalcade, in full
gallop, from the castle.

The Lieutenant, followed by the Count and myself, rushed out in
pursuit of them. But though we flew, as it were, upon wings, being
fully determined to gratify our curiosity, it was impossible for us
to discover any other object than the distant glare of some white
horses. We returned, therefore, hopeless and dissatisfied, to our
companions.

These we found, on our entrance into the court, stretched out like
dead, with their faces to the ground. Table, lamp, benches,
wheelbarrows,—in short, our whole camp-equipage, together with the
brandy-bottle and provisions which we had brought with us, were gone.
The moon, shining but dimly through the opposing clouds, barely
reflected light sufficient to make this discovery. Great, as may
reasonably be supposed, was our astonishment. The Lieutenant, seizing
one of our prostrate companions by the shoulders, gave him two or
three hearty shakes, and endeavoured to lift him on his legs; but
this valiant champion, firmly persuaded that he was under the
clutches of some blood-thirsty caco-daemon, who, in all probability,
wanted to hurry him away, full drive, to the bottomless pit, began to
roar out so lustily, that we had presently the whole troop at their
prayers, each one imploring assistance from his favourite saint.
Sancta Mater and Kyrie Eleison, intermixed with groans unutterable,
resounded from every quarter. The scene was ludicrous beyond
description, and fully justified the assertion of the Roman poet—

"Primus in orbe Deos fecit timor."[Note 12]

After feasting our eyes and ears a full hour at least with the
cowardly devotion of these miserable wretches, we adjourned to the
inn, leaving our companions to celebrate high mass by themselves. Our
landlord was not a little surprised at seeing us return unattended,
and accosted us with at least a thousand questions; but as we stood
in need of rest, we deferred satisfying his inquisitive curiosity
till morning, and laid ourselves down upon the straw prepared for our
reception.

Our sleep, however, was not of long duration, for no sooner did it
begin to dawn, than the whole village was in an uproar, and young and
old assembled before the inn-door. Our gallant companions, it seems,
with the return of day, had gradually got the better of their fears,
and, venturing at last to look around them, discovered, to their no
small surprise, that we were missing. Whether their grief at our
supposed destruction proceeded from any real regard, or from the fear
of losing the promised gratuity for their faithful services, they
immediately hurried to the inn, and, with dreadful lamentations,
related the disaster that had happened. Laughable was it for us to
hear the various strange and contradictory accounts which they gave
of last night's adventure. Some would have it that we were torn in
pieces; others swore roundly, that they had seen us carried off by a
whole legion of devils: but all of them were unanimous in bearing
honourable testimony to their own prowess, and the signal feats of
heroism they had achieved. But what was their surprise at learning
from our landlord, who hitherto had purposely concealed this
intelligence from them, that we were not only still in the land of
the living, but had returned triumphant from the ghostly expedition!
At first they refused to give credit to his words, but, finding him
positive in his assertions, they insisted on being introduced to us
immediately. This accordingly took place; mutual congratulations
passed between us, the promised reward was faithfully distributed,
and, after satisfying our landlord for the loss of his tables,
benches, &c, we began to prepare for our departure. The Lieutenant,
indeed, wished still to try his luck once more, and, for that
purpose, proposed that we should secrete ourselves in the castle the
ensuing night; but to this neither the Count nor myself would in any
wise consent.

We set out, therefore, about seven in the morning, though the weather
was far from favourable, the wind getting exceedingly high, which,
added to the frequent flying showers that passed over us, rendered
the air extremely cold and damp. Already were we within less than a
mile of the Black Forest, when I perceived the Lieutenant, who rode
on horseback before us, accompanied by his groom, suddenly stop
short: after a short pause, he turned round his horse's head, and
took a cross direction, towards a small rivulet that flowed on the
left side of the road. Curiosity prompted me to look after him—I let
down the window of the carriage, and discovered an object that
demanded my whole attention.

Regardless of the raging storm and beating rain, that now began to
fall pretty rapidly, sat a hoary-headed hermit, venerable with age,
on the summit of a rock that projected nearly half-way over the
stream. He held in his hands a volume of considerable size, and
seemed entirely absorbed in contemplation. No friendly covering
defended his aged head from the rude inclemency of the storm; his
grey locks sported with the wind, and, dropping wet with the rain,
watered his back and shoulders: his dress was equally singular,
consisting of a loose robe, or gown, fastened about his loins with a
leathern girdle, after the manner of the Asiatics, and seemed to
proclaim him a native of the east; at his feet lay a long pilgrim's
staff, an hour-glass, and a knapsack made of tiger's skin.

Struck with surprise at the sight of this extraordinary character, I
instantly quitted the carriage, in order to converse with him; the
Count followed my example. We arrived at the spot just as the
Lieutenant began to interrogate him.

"And pray, Mr. Wiseacre, what book is that you are studying so
intensely?"

The sage seemed to take no notice of this question, but continued to
read, without answering a word.

"What book have you there? demanded the Lieutenant a second time,
alighting from his horse, placing himself behind the pilgrim, and
endeavouring to look over his shoulder.

Still the sage made no reply, but kept his eyes immovably fixed upon
the book he was reading.

My curiosity was, if possible, still greater than the Lieutenant's; I
accordingly stationed myself quite close to the wonderful stranger,
in order to take a nearer view, both of his person and the volume he
held in his hand. The leaves were of yellow parchment, and apparently
of great antiquity; the characters bore some resemblance to the
Arabic, and were, as I perceived, drawn with a pen in various
colours, but chiefly in red and gold.

Meanwhile, the Count and Lieutenant had insensibly engaged the
pilgrim in discourse. The latter giving Mr. Wiseacre, as he termed
him, a shake by the shoulders, and that none of the softest,
repeated, with authoritative voice, his former demand: —

"What is it you are studying, my friend?"

The sage seemed evidently disconcerted; knit his brows, and, slowly
raising his head, regarded us a long time with fixed and silent
indignation: then opening his lips, with a voice calculated to
inspire the utmost reverence and awe, replied —

"Wisdom!"

Count. "And pray what language is it, then, in which this book is
written?"

Pilgrim. "The language of wisdom.

Count. "And what is it you call wisdom?"

Pilgrim. "Everything of which thou hast no conception."

Lieutenant. "Well then, Mr. Wiseacre, that being the case, as you
possess such extraordinary knowledge of things which the rest of
mankind have no conception of, I shall be happy, methinks, to ask you
a question or two.

Pilgrim. (viewing him sternly). "Ask on."

Lieutenant. "Not far from this place stands a village, which is said
to be haunted by a whole troop of devils. The manor-house, it seems,
is their nocturnal place of rendezvous. These gentlemen, together
with myself, have kept watch in the castle these two nights past—"

Pilgrim (interrupting him). "And yet are not a whit the wiser than
before: for thou art not the man to whom wisdom deigns her hidden
lore; nor is the management of ghosts to thee intrusted."

Lieutenant. "That man, we suppose, can be no other than yourself."

Pilgrim. "I understand the language of wisdom."

The Lieutenant, naturally addicted to raillery, could no longer
refrain from bursting into a loud laugh. Of this the pilgrim took no
manner oi notice; but, returning to his former study, was soon
absorbed in meditation, from which, however, he was again roused by
the Count.

"Friend," began the latter, as such great wisdom appears to be
contained in the book you read, may we be allowed to ask who those
spirits are, and for what reason they thus infest the above-mentioned
castle?"

Pilgrim (after a long pause). "None but "the spirits themselves dare
resolve thee that question.

Count. "What, then, does your famous book of wisdom treat of?"

Pilgrim. "Of the manner in which spirits may be forcibly compelled to
appear, and a full confession extorted from them."

Count. "How happens it, then, that you have never essayed your art
upon those which disturb the peace of the neighbouring village?"

Pilgrim. "Because I have no wish, no interest in the case."

Lieutenant. "Well but, Mr. Wiseacre, suppose that we should make you
an offer of our purses; might not money, perhaps, have some weight in
persuading you to make a trial of your skill?"

Pilgrim (in a violent rage). "Mean sordid wretch! begone—can gold be
deemed equivalent to wisdom?"

Lieutenant. "What, then, can purchase it?"

Pilgrim. "Nothing! Will your courage stand the test?"

Lieutenant. "Were there any doubt of that, we should not have
ventured to keep watch in a place so formidable."

Pilgrim. "Well, then, watch one night more: precisely three quarters
past eleven you will see me, to a certainty. Meanwhile, leave me to
my meditations."

The peremptory tone and manner in which he pronounced these words put
it out of our power to disobey.—We retreated slowly to our carriage,
looking back, almost every minute, at the wonderful pilgrim, who
instantly relapsed into his former study. The Lieutenant, as he
remounted his horse, proposed that we should return to the inn, and,
putting off our departure till the morrow, give the stranger the
meeting at the time appointed.

Much as I disliked the project, it was in vain for me to raise
objections: the curiosity of the Count was wound up to its highest
pitch; my consent, therefore, was rather extorted than obtained from
me.

Our landlord, on learning the cause of our return, was little better
than distracted with joy; for, exclusive of the profits he hoped to
reap from another ghostly frolic, having been paid more than double
the value of his table, benches, &c. lost in our last expedition, his
brain was next kin to turned, with the marvellous relations which our
valiant companions gave of the adventure. Nothing was talked of, but
how frightfully the spectres had appeared; how furiously they broke
in upon us; how they breathed fire and smoke through their nostrils;
with eyes flaming-red, as big as any pint basins: notwithstanding all
which, they had, they said, laid so manfully about them, that the 
whole infernal troop was forced to take a precipitate flight, and
were, long before this, ten miles at least below the bottom of the
Red Sea! Hence, we saw ourselves regarded, by the whole village, as
beings of a superior order, and had enough to do to answer all the
questions put to us by our admirers. This was highly pleasing to the
Lieutenant, who diverted himself, the whole day, with practising upon
the simplicity of these rustics; and, I am firmly persuaded, told
more fortunes in the course of six hours than many astrologers have
an opportunity of doing in the course of as many years.

On the approach of night, we had a numerous army at command, without
being necessitated, as before, to beat up for volunteers; young and
old entreating us to permit them to bear us company: they neither
demanded pay nor provisions; the bare honour of serving under us was,
as they observed, more than sufficient recompense. Company, however,
was not what we at present wanted; not to mention that we had already
but too well experienced what sort of dependence we ought to place
upon their valour and assistance: we dissembled, therefore, our
intentions; but, finding even this ineffectual to answer our purpose,
we were fain, in order to get rid of our troublesome visitors, to
pretend ourselves sleepy, and to order the straw to be got ready for
our reception.

About ten we stole away as privately as possible to the castle. On
our arrival in the court, the Lieutenant's servant lighted up the
lamp we had brought with us; after which we repaired to the hall,
where, finding the benches we had formerly erected for our
accommodation still standing, we seated ourselves, and waited in
anxious expectation the time appointed for meeting our unknown
conductor.

The Lieutenant appeared doubtful whether the pilgrim might not fail
of his appointment, and discovered evident symptoms of mistrust, that
he had no other view in promising to meet us, than merely to sport
with our credulity. But the Count, who, from his youth, had always
manifested a strong hankering after the marvellous, was so entirely
prepossessed with the venerable appearance of the hoary-headed sage,
that he was ready to pledge his honour for his punctuality. This gave
birth to a curious controversy between the Lieutenant and the Count,
on the subject of supernatural agency; the former ridiculing the
whole system as visionary and preposterous, whilst the latter was
firmly of opinion that, however exaggerated and disguised such
accounts might be in the detail, the doctrine itself was founded in
truth and experience. For my part, I cursed and damned the pilgrim
most devoutly, and only wished that we had never seen nor given
ourselves the least trouble about him.

In this manner did we endeavour to beguile the tedious hour of
expectation. Before us lay our watches placed upon the table, to
which our eyes almost momentarily reverted. The minute-hand had
hardly pointed to three quarters past eleven, when we plainly
distinguished the tread of human footsteps across the passage.

"You are perfectly right, my lord," quoth the Lieutenant, addressing
himself to the Count, "our Pilgrim is a man of honour." With these
words he snatched up the lamp, and went to meet him.

Our conductor had now reached the hall. His dress was much the same
as when we first, beheld him, excepting that on his head he wore a
kind of turban, and carried his knapsack strapped about his
shoulders. With slow and solemn steps he approached the place where
we were seated; then, suddenly stopping short, beckoned with his hand
for us to follow him. We obeyed, and, leaving the Lieutenant's
servant fast asleep, behind us, followed him to the stone staircase
at the opposite end of the hall. This we descended, and next
traversed, in awful silence, the long winding passage to which it
led, till we came to the door of the vault, which the Lieutenant had
burst open on our first visit to the castle.

Here our conductor again stopped short; took the lamp out of the hand
of the Lieutenant, and, viewing us attentively all round, with a
stern forbidding look, that seemed to presage strange wonders,
addressed us in a trembling tone of voice:

Let awful silence seal your lips, nor dare
To tempt that fate which prudence bids beware;
For know one single word makes instant death your share."

The impression which his speech made upon our minds may be more
easily imagined than described. We entered the vault, not without
horror and reluctance; this time, however, we found the air of this
subterraneous dungeon less noxious and pestilential than before,
owing, probably, to the door having been left open by the Lieutenant,
at the time it was forced, as related above. Our conductor,
approaching the folding doors on the right-hand side, pushed back the
large enormous bolts which guarded them with a degree of ease that
well might create astonishment; then drawing forth from his bosom a
ponderous key of massy iron, fastened round his neck by a chain of
the same metal, he thrice pronounced a word of mystic, but to us
incomprehensible, meaning:

"—And in the keyhole turns
The intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Unfastens: on a sudden, open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
The infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder"

Horrible, beyond description, was the place into which we now
entered. The form was circular, arched over with brick, and totally
impervious to the smallest ray of light from without. Hollow sounded
the ground beneath our feet, and every step we took re-echoed back
distantly from the walls. Facing the entrance, appeared another pair
of folding doors, secured with locks and bolts, more formidable than
the former.

A blue inconstant flame, accompanied with a strong sulphurous smell
that rendered the faculty of breathing extremely difficult, whilst it
enhanced the gloomy horror of the scene, gradually discovered to our
view the mouldering monuments of ruin and decay. Rotten coffins,
human bones, ghostly skulls, shrouds, scutcheons, urns, and all the
various symptoms of mortality, were seen on every side. In the middle
of the vault arose a lofty bier, which supported a black leaden
coffin, of unusual magnitude. Over it hung a lamp, dependent from a
triple chain of iron.

Our conductor uncovered his head; we followed his example, and ranged
ourselves, in awful silence, round the coffin, but still at such a
distance, that we could barely touch it with outstretched arms. Then
placing the lamp held in his hands upon the floor, the necromantic
sage proceeded to untie his knapsack, from which, together with the
book he was studying when we first set eyes upon him, he took out a
magic wand, composed of three different pieces, which fastened
together in one, by means of joints, like a fishing-rod, and a tin
box filled with red sand.

With this he bestrewed the adjacent parts of the floor; and, having
fastened his rod together, described therewith three magic circles,
parallel at equal distances in the sand. The innermost was occupied
by the exorcist; in the second stood the Count, the Lieutenant, and
myself; the outermost being left empty, probably by way of defence,
or to serve as a rampart, in case the evil spirits should think
proper to meditate any sudden attack upon us. Thus duly armed,
entrenched, and fortified, according to the Demoniac system of
tactics—such of our readers as wish for a fuller account of this
science, are respectfully referred to the famous treatise, De
Daæmonologia, published by that learned and pious scribe, Joannes
Bodinus—we held ourselves in readiness against the ghostly invasion.

The sage, crossing his hands over his breast, stood for some minutes
motionless as a statue, with his eyes directed towards heaven, or at
least towards the ceiling of the vault. Suddenly, he appeared seized
with violent convulsions; the features of his countenance became
distorted to a ghastly degree, his eyes began to roll, his brows
knitted together, in a manner hideous to behold; his teeth chattered
in his head, his hair bristled up like quills upon the fretful
porcupine; in short, every part of his body bore witness to the big
feelings with which his heart seemed ready to burst. Words at length
found their way, but in a language to us quite unintelligible.—They
were pronounced in a hollow tone of voice, and with surprising
vehemence. He next opened the mystic book, and, with the same
continued agitation of face and body, began to read in a kind of half
whisper; the sweat all the time running down his face, as though the
iron hand of death had seized upon him.

The longer the sage continued to read, the more terrible became his
convulsions; till, at length, unable to contain himself, he flung the
book out of his hand with great violence against the ground.
Immediately the fury of his looks subsided, his eyes ceased to roll,
and his whole frame became more composed. With both his hands
outstretched, and pointing with his wand to the coffin that lay
before us, he again stood motionless as a statue.

The sound of horns and trumpets, with which the whole fabric now
began to shake, proclaimed the arrival of the midnight hunters. Still
the sage continued motionless. The noise drew nearer, and presently
the troop rushed thundering into the court. Still the sage continued
motionless. The next instant we heard them rapidly descending the
stone staircase. Inward horror seized upon us: but still the sage
continued motionless. And now the tread of their feet resounded along
the narrow winding passage that led to the vault next us. The sage,
with a sudden motion turning himself round in his circle, waved his
magic wand in the air, and all was silent in a moment.

Thrice, with tremendous voice, the sage pronounced a mystic word of
unknown import; striking each time violently with his wand against
the ground. Earth heard the summons, and obeyed. A sudden flash of
lightning shot trembling across the walls, whilst, thundering in our
ears, was heard the dreadful subterraneous peal. All nature seemed
convulsed; rocked, as with an earthquake; shook the hollow vault; our
lamps, though well supplied with oil, refused to burn, and, ere the
deep-mouthed thunder ceased to roll, we found ourselves surrounded
with midnight darkness.

Soon, however, a faint glimmering light began to diffuse itself from
the centre of the vault, increasing every moment, till the place was
sufficiently illuminated for us to distinguish the surrounding
object. We now perceived, with horror and astonishment, that this
light proceeded from the inside of the leaden coffin, the lid of
which, gradually lifting up, apparently from some internal force, at
length disclosed to view a human figure, pale and ghostly, clad in a
flowing white garment, stained with blood. With wild disorder in her
looks, she cast her hollow eyes around; pushed back the long black
tresses of her hair, which, matted with gore, descended below her
waist, and, baring her bosom, pointed to the gaping orifice of a
deadly wound, inflicted beneath her left breast. Drops of blood still
trickled from her pierced heart, and dreadfully resounded her groans
from the vault.


Illustration: Awful invocation of a spirit

Approaching the other circle with a furious threatening mien, she
seemed preparing to rush upon us. The sage stretched forth his hand,
struck thrice with his wand against the magic boundary, and instantly
the threatening form shrank back.

"Who art thou?" demanded the apparition; "and by what authority dare
thy unhallowed steps profane the place where spirits unembodied seek
repose?"

"And who art thou!" replied the sage sternly, and not the least
daunted, "that darest disturb the peace of this ill-fated mansion?"
"Not I!" howled she, in a lamentable piteous tone of voice; not I,
but the damned spirit of my husband! Bear witness, this accursed
steel—displaying a bloody dagger in her right hand—bear witness, this
deep wound, still reeking with my gore;" here she again pointed to
her breast—"'tis he, and he alone, disturbs the peace of this whole
village; 'tis he that violates even my repose!"

The Sage. "But wherefore?"

Spirit. "No time was given for repentance: no friendly warning bade
me in haste secure my peace with heaven. Fearless, I pressed the
downy couch; undreaded and unseen, the dark assassin dealt the
murderous blow. Thus sent with all my sins unpardoned on my head, I
suffer here, awhile, the torments of the purging flame. But double
wrath pursues my murderer, whom the righteous Judge above has doomed
to bear the punishment due to his sins and mine!"

The Sage. "Unhappy spirit! Betake thyself to rest. By the deep
secrets of yon mystic book! By that dread power which hell itself
controls! By all the terrors of the world unknown! I swear thy rest
shall never be disturbed!"

The spirit, making a low bow in token of gratitude, regained the
coffin, where it presently disappeared under the lid, which now
returned to its former place. The light that issued from the inside
gradually died away, as the coffin closed, leaving us once more
involved in thick impenetrable darkness.

Petrified with horror and amazement, having neither will to stay nor
power to move, we stood a long time senseless and immovable. At
length a dreadful flash of lightning, bursting full in our faces, ran
whizzing: along; the walls, and louder than before rattled the hoarse
rebellious thunder in our ears. Instantaneously our lamps, self-
lighted, began to burn again; whilst silence once more resumed its
wonted empire around us.

Our conductor hereupon, with great composure, gathered up the
scattered contents of his knapsack, replaced it upon his shoulders,
and beckoned, with his hand, for us to follow him. After carefully
relocking the door, and pushing home the bolts, he drew forth from
his pocket a piece of yellow parchment, about six inches square, and
inscribed with the same kind of characters as his book appeared to be
written in. This he laid upon the wings of the folding doors, in such
a manner that it covered both in equal proportions; then sealing it
at the four corners with red wax, and a large iron seal, he again
pronounced some short mystic sentences, and with his wand described
the emblem of a cross from one end of the door to the other.

We were now in the empty vault which we had before visited on our
first excursion to the castle. The sage, advancing to the opposite
door on the left hand, repeated his mystic ceremonies. The lock soon
yielded to his trusty key. We entered. Our way led through another
winding passage, arched over with brick like the former, but much
wider and longer; with this additional difference, that it had six or
seven doors, all strongly secured on each side, besides a larger one
of massy iron, in which it terminated.

This being likewise opened with great ease, we had next to ascend a
long flight of stone steps: at the top of which, another door,
studded with enormous iron nails, presented itself. Here our
conductor again stopped short, paused a while, and with great
solemnity repeated his former injunctions respecting silence,
although there seemed but little need for this precaution, not a
single word having been exchanged between us all the time.

The opening of this door was attended with much greater ceremony than
any other. We likewise took notice that our conductor, for this
purpose, made use of a different key than he had before employed: a
circumstance which seemed rather ominous to the Lieutenant, as I
could plainly perceive, by several significant looks which he cast
both at the Count and myself. We had, however, gone too far to
recede. A narrow passage, in which it was impossible to stand
upright, conducted us to an iron trap-door, opening upon a second
flight of steps. There we descended, and found ourselves in a gloomy
dungeon of a considerable size; dark as the shades of midnight, and
damp as the falling dews, when Sol withdraws his cheering rays.
Fronting the staircase, and on each side, appeared another formidable
door.

Advancing into the middle of this dismal place, the sage made a
signal for us to range ourselves round him. Hereupon, the ground was
bestrewed with red sand, in which he, as before, described three
magic circles with his wand, and, opening his books, began to read
softly, with great agitation of body. Then throwing his book upon the
ground, he waved his wand in air, turned himself round with
surprising velocity, and thrice pronounced, with a loud and dreadful
voice, the same mystic word which he had formerly made use of.

The whole dungeon instantly appeared on fire: the forked lightnings,
reverberating from the wall, flashed with dreadful impetuosity in our
faces, succeeded with peals of thunder, that seemed to forebode the
total dissolution of nature. Earth felt the potent shock, and
trembled to its centre: all the doors of our prison flew open with a
noise louder than the loudest thunder: above us and around us shook
the Gothic pile, threatening to overwhelm us beneath its ruins. At
the same time, our lamp went out, and in its stead was seen a blue
sulphurous flame hovering over the steps of the stone staircase, from
whence it now began to roll itself down. Hollow groans, and the
dismal clanking of chains, invaded our ears. Terror, beyond the power
of language to describe, laid hold of us.

As the noise drew nearer, the sage placed himself with his face
towards the stone staircase, and soon we saw, with horror
inexpressible, a grim and ghastly figure, of uncommon magnitude,
descending down the steps. A double row of chains were fastened to
his feet and hands, which, rattling at every step he took, grated
harsh infernal thunder in our ears. His garment appeared as if it had
been newly dipped in blood; his right eyeball was forced out of its 
socket, and the upper part of his skull was shattered to pieces.
Thus, horrible to behold, he approached, with furious mien, the outer
circles, foaming at the mouth, and grinding his teeth like the savage
fierce Hyrcanian tiger. The sage stretched forth his wand, and with
authoritative voice addressed the spectre: "Stay here, accursed
wretch I" he said, "and tell me who thou art?"

"A spirit of the damned!" replied the spectre, trembling.

Sage. "Hell, then, is fittest for thee! What business brings fcbee
hither?

Ghost. "To seek deliverance from its flames."

Sage. "On what conditions hopest thou to attain this?"

Spirit. "None, none, alas! except my wife's forgiveness."

Sage. "Is that thy only hope? Then back to hell—back to thy proper
punishment—Away! fly! fly with thy infernal troop; nor ever more
presume to violate the peace of this neighbourhood. Behold yon mystic
book, and tremble!"

At these words the sage pointed to the opposite door of the dungeon:
reluctantly the spectre bowed submission, and retreated. Instantly
the vault appeared the second time in flames. Louder and more awful
roared the thunder: all the doors fell to with horrible recoil:
dreadful groans resounded in our ears: frightful apparitions glided
along the walls, which, shaking with the deep-mouthed thunder,
threatened us with immediate destruction.

A scene like this might well strike terror into the stoutest heart.
We remained a long time in a state of stupefaction, from which we
however gradually recovered, as the lightnings ceased to flash, and
the hoarse rebellious thunder abated its fury. The blue sulphurous
flame no longer rolled itself down the stone staircase; darkness
worse than Egyptian enveloped us around, hideous groans and
lamentations rendering the gloomy silence of the place still more
awful and tremendous.

These likewise gradually dying away, we were, if possible, still more
terrified and alarmed by the hoarse music of the winding horn, and
the dashing of horses' hoofs, which now resounded dreadfully in the
echoing air. Roused by the well-known sound, from the state of
insensibility in which we lay, we discovered with horror our hopeless
situation. Bewildered in a gloomy subterraneous dungeon, surrounded
with impenetrable darkness, and nearly suffocated with a strong
sulphurous vapour that pervaded the place, it tended not a little to
aggravate the horrors of the scene, that each of us, ignorant of the
presence of the rest, supposed himself deserted and alone. Long time
was it before I could recover sufficient fortitude to grope about me;
nor was I less perplexed which way to steer my doubtful course, than
the mariner that tosses without compass on the boundless deep, whilst
night invests the pole, and not a star is seen in the spacious
firmament of heaven.

In this uncertainty I felt myself suddenly seized by the hand. Reason
had not yet resumed her empire over my mind; my imagination was still
too much heated with the strange scenes I had just witnessed, to form
any cool deliberation; and fancying myself actually under the
influence of enchantment, I started back with a fearful shriek, not
less appalled than if the grisly king of terrors himself had laid his
icy hand upon me!

"Don't be alarmed," exclaimed the well-known voice of the Lieutenant;
and instantly my fears fell, like a heavy stone, from my heart. At
the same time, I had the pleasure to hear the Count speak. We
presently joined him, and, holding fast by the skirts of our coats,
that we might not be separated again, endeavoured to grope our way to
the staircase.

In this design, after many fruitless attempts, we had at length the
good fortune to succeed. Never did panting lover mount the staircase
leading to the apartment of his mistress with greater alacrity than
we displayed in climbing up these steps. But how shall I express the
horror and disappointment we experienced on finding the trap-door
fastened against us? The Lieutenant, who on this as on all other
occasions acted as our leader, after communicating this unwelcome
intelligence, proposed that, instead of giving ourselves up for lost,
we should try our united strength in forcing it open. Every nerve,
accordingly, was strained to accomplish a purpose so devoutly to be
wished, but all in vain;—the door defied our utmost efforts.

Equally unsuccessful were we in our endeavours to make ourselves
heard by the Lieutenant's servant, whom we had left fast asleep in
the hall on the arrival of the pilgrim, as related before. In vain
did we exalt our voices, till our very throats were hoarse with
bawling: in vain did echo repeat his name, in long reiterated peals,
through the spacious untenanted apartments: in vain, with hands and
knees, did we strike against the iron door, till the blood began to
trickle down with the blows;—no pleasing sound of human footsteps
saluted our longing ears.

"Deuce take the lazy rascal!"—exclaimed the Lieutenant, tired with
the double fatigue of bawling and thumping against the door—"I
question whether the last trump itself would be powerful enough to
arouse him; and we may fairly roar our lungs out at this rate,
without doing any manner of good. Rather let us sit down upon these
steps, and listen till he begins to walk about in search of us, as no
doubt he will do when he awakes, and finds us missing."

This advice was immediately put in execution; though, for my own
part, I must acknowledge that I had little hope of ever seeing the
servant again. I judged it, however, prudent to conceal as much as
possible my suspicions, and the Lieutenant, likewise dissembling his
anxiety, began to discourse upon the strange scenes we had just
witnessed; but, in spite of his utmost efforts, was not able to
assume his wonted gaiety and unconcern. The Count and myself made
little or no reply, our thoughts being too much engrossed with the
probable danger of our present situation: the Lieutenant soon found
it impossible to disguise his apprehensions any longer; and in this
miserable state of horror and alarm we continued, as nearly as I can
guess, upwards of an hour, without exchanging a single word. Nothing
but the gentle breath of respiration disturbed the gloomy silence
that reigned around.

Thus things continued, till the natural impetuosity of the Lieutenant
could contain itself no longer; wherefore, making a fresh attempt to
engage us in conversation, he demanded, whether we were all in a
league with his servant, and were sleeping for a wager? But though
the agitation of our minds effectually repulsed the most distant
advances of sleep, we were equally incapable of joining in discourse,
and, urged by that strong propensity in human nature which renders
man a genuine Heautontimoroumenos,[Note 13]  and inclines the mind to take a
strange delight in tormenting itself, and brooding over its
misfortunes and calamities, we still remained silent for nearly two
hours longer, feasting our troubled thoughts with ideal and
anticipated sorrows.

"Damn me, if I hold it out any longer!" exclaimed the Lieutenant, in
a kind of frenzy, "that cursed rascal of mine can never sleep at such
a devil of a rate as this. But were he even as fast as our great-
grandfather Adam when his precious rib was taken from his side, I
think I'll manage to open his eyes for him."

With these words he began to stamp and roar, as though his design had
actually been nothing less than to anticipate the day of general
resurrection. The Count and myself, seconding him with might and main
in his pious intentions, joined lustily in the rough chorus—but all
to no purpose; no answer was returned—no tread of footsteps could be
heard. Exhausted with fatigue, we were fain to desist; and, once more
seating ourselves upon the stone steps, our patience was again put to
the test, in waiting till the servant should think proper to awake.

After two or three hours spent in fruitless expectation —

"I should be very sorry, gentlemen," began the Lieutenant, addressing
us in a firm indignant tone of voice, "to torture either you or
myself with groundless apprehensions. But, from the complexion of
circumstances, our destruction in this dismal dungeon appears
inevitable. As men, however, who have nothing worse than what already
awaits us to dread, let us borrow hope and courage from despair; and
rather let us perish in a bold attempt to regain our liberty, than
calmly submit to a lingering death, which resolution and perseverance
may still, perhaps, enable us to escape. Though this proud door
defies our utmost and united efforts, some other opening may,
perhaps, be found; at least, the chance, at any rate, is worth the
trial."

Without waiting for our reply, the Lieutenant began to descend the
steps. We followed his example, and returned to the dismal dungeon
from which we sought to escape. Each taking a different direction, we
groped about in quest of some friendly avenue that might afford us
egress.

In any other situation, the whimsical manner in which we frequently
met together might well have excited our risibility. Sometimes we
laid hold of each other by the feet and hands, or, running foul, came
tumbling to the ground together. At other times, our noses met in
rude contact with the opposing walls, or our shins were kicked bloody
against the loose bricks and rubbish that lay scattered up and down
the place. But all our efforts proved abortive. Faint and exhausted,
I at length stretched myself out upon the ground, and, more concerned
about the safety of the Count than my own, began to load myself with
bitter reproaches, for having, through my indiscreet compliance,
precipitated my pupil into inevitable ruin and destruction,—into the
necessity of dying a lingering death in a subterraneous dungeon.

Meanwhile that I was indulging these disagreeable reflections, the
Lieutenant and Count continued their researches, as I could easily
distinguish by the sound of their feet, which echoed dreadfully
through the dismal vault. Neither of them spoke a word, but groped
about, for some time, in gloomy and profound silence. At length, the
steps of one of my unhappy comrades ceased to be heard.

"Where are you both?" cried the Lieutenant, greatly agitated and
alarmed.

"For my part, I am here," was the reply;—"but where, pray, is the
Count?"

We both joined in calling after him, and roared out at least as loud
and lustily as we had done some hours before in search of the
Lieutenant's servant. The Count, however, returned no manner of
answer. My fears and apprehensions for his safety were now doubly
increased;—I was in a condition little short of positive distraction.
Suddenly a hollow rattling noise was heard at some distance, and
instantly a faint glimmering light began to diffuse itself in the
corner of our dungeon.

Transported with this discovery, the Lieutenant and myself directed
our steps towards the place from whence the light seemed to proceed.
We found, to our unspeakable joy, one of the iron doors of our prison
open, through which we entered into a long passage, arched over with
brick, at the extremity of which, at a considerable distance,
appeared the welcome light of day. This passage led us by a gradual
descent to a short flight of steps, opening into a spacious
apartment, the flooring of which was broken through near the
entrance; and through this aperture it was that the light issued.
Looking down in hopes of making fresh discoveries, we saw with horror
the Count stretched at full length upon a heap of mouldering straw,
to all appearance lifeless and insensible.

The height from which he had tumbled might be about fourteen feet,
but, had it been double that number, I should not have hesitated a
moment in jumping after him. The Lieutenant followed my example, and,
seizing the Count by the arms, we began to shake him lustily with
might and main, till he discovered symptoms of remaining life. Our
joint endeavours soon restored him to a perfect possession of his
faculties; when it appeared that, the fright excepted, he had
sustained no material injury. From his relation we learnt, that
having accidentally groped his way to the door on the left hand, and
finding it yield to his push (most probably the lock had failed to
fly back, at the time when the doors of the dungeon shut upon us, as
related before), he continued to descend the passage, till, falling
from the staircase upon the floor of the apartment to which it led,
the rotten boards, not able to sustain his weight, had broken under
him, and thereby precipitated him into the place where we now found
him.

This place, from its present appearance, had most probably been used
in former times for a stable. It had two round windows in the wall,
secured with iron gratings, through which the light could barely find
admission. We perceived a wooden door in one corner, against which we
pushed with our united efforts, and presently the rotten boards fell
tumbling in pieces at our feet.

A hollow subterraneous passage conducted us by a gradual ascent to a
trap-door, which opened into the garden at the back of the castle.
Our joy at once more beholding the welcome face of day is beyond the
power of language to describe; we embraced each other with the most
transporting ardour, and mutual congratulations on our narrow escape
from the jaws of death; and, being already sufficiently acquainted
with the walks of the garden, which we explored on our first visit to
the castle, we easily regained the hall, where we had left the
Lieutenant's servant fast asleep the preceding night. Table and
benches were still standing, but no signs of John could we possibly
discover.

"The fellow, no doubt, has made his escape to the inn!" was the
Lieutenant's opinion, after we had in vain made every apartment of
the castle echo with his name. We accordingly posted back to the inn,
thanking God that he had not punished our curiosity more severely, as
we took our leave of the haunted castle.

On our arrival at the inn, we found our landlord encompassed with a
whole troop of the inhabitants of the village, who, it seems, had
come to inquire after us; the ghosts having made such a horrible
uproar in the place the preceding night, that they all, with one
accord, gave us up for lost, and almost dreaded to inquire after our
fate. Great, therefore, was their astonishment at seeing us enter so
suddenly into their midst. Every one, as with common consent, put his
hand to his hat, and reverently bade us welcome, falling foul upon
us, at the same time, with an infinite multitude of questions
relative to last night's adventures. This time, however, the
Lieutenant had little inclination to divert himself with practising
upon their simplicity; his answers were short and unsatisfactory,
and, turning round to the landlord, he endeavoured to put an end to
their impertinence by inquiring after his servant.

"I have seen nothing of him since yesterday," was the reply.

"Are the horses safe?" demanded the Lieutenant.

"As safe and well as good stabling and the best of corn can make
them: it is hardly ten minutes since I fed them myself."

With a look that sufficiently indicated his surprise and
embarrassment, the Lieutenant regarded us steadfastly all round; then
addressing himself to the peasants, he offered them a handsome reward
to explore the neighbourhood in search of his servant. Every one
testified his readiness to serve him, and eagerly sat out in the
pursuit; but, after a long and fruitless search, they all returned
with the unwelcome intelligence, that no traces of him were to be
found.

As we had no hopes of seeing the lost fugitive any more, and were by
no means willing to repeat our visits to the haunted castle, we
resolved to pursue our journey immediately after dinner, and
accordingly gave the necessary orders for our departure. At parting,
our landlord and the peasants could not refrain from tears, so much
were they prepossessed in our favour; we made them a decent present
to drink our healths, and set off with the good wishes of the whole
neighbourhood.

The Lieutenant being better acquainted with the Black Forest than
ourselves, undertook to lead the way: we followed his guidance, and
soon cleared this terrible desert, without meeting with any fresh
adventures. The following evening he took his leave of us, being in
haste to rejoin the party to which he belonged. We parted with the
utmost reluctance, and with mutual assurances of friendship and
esteem. As he gave us his hand, "Accept, gentlemen (he began), my
sincerest thanks for your faithful assistance and co-operation in
encountering the most dreadful adventure I ever yet had occasion to
experience in the whole course of my life. Should I ever be so
fortunate as to obtain any further light respecting this intricate
affair (and you may rest assured that I will exert my utmost
endeavours to obtain satisfactory information, at some future
period), I shall consider it my duty to communicate the particulars
to you. On your side I request the same, in case you should be
beforehand with me in your discoveries: meanwhile, accept of my best
wishes, and whenever you call to mind the twenty-third of September,
1750, let the Danish Lieutenant have a place likewise in your
remembrance."

After a journey of five days, we arrived at the seat of the Count of
Einsiedel, the father of my pupil.

And here (continued Hermann, addressing himself to Cronheim) I cease
from being myself an actor in the eventful scene, The remainder of
this wonderful history, as I have already informed you, is contained
in a written account transmitted me many years ago by my former pupil
the Count of Einsiedel. You will find it replete with events far more
interesting and surprizing than any you have yet heard; and when you
come to the catastrophe, you will be forced to acknowledge, that
however extraordinary particular occurrences may seem ; however much
they may appear to favour of the marvellous, (and marvellous they
certainly are) they contain nothing but what may and will be
satisfactorily explained, without any recourse to supernatural
agency."

Founded on fact, and sanctioned by experience, it is to be hoped that
this history will meet with a more favourable reception than exploded
romances of giants and enchanters, than fairy tales of Persian
fables; which, by being destitute of probability as well as truth,
must prove insipid and disgusting to every reader of sentiment and
taste. For, if anything can render greater interest to a narrative,
it is the conviction that such things have actually occurred.

FINIS

NOTES 
1. It may, perhaps, not be amiss to inform the English reader, that
these fairs are far superior to anything of the kind in this country,
and generally last for several weeks.

2. About 25l. Sterling.

3. "Through many kingdoms, many towns he strayed,
And foreign customs, laws, and manners, weighed."

4. This immense forest is situated in Swabia, and is by far the largest
in all Germany; known to the ancients by the name of Sylva Hercynia.
Caesar gives a description of it in his Commentaries, where he
affirms it to be nine days' journey in breadth, and three score in
length.

5. "Thessalae mulieres vel lunam e coelo detrahere profitebantur.
Repente enim luna, cum plena esset et sublimis, facta est obscura,
lumineque deficiente multiplicibus mutatis coloribus evanuit"—Unde
Virgilius, Eclog. viii. ["The women of Thessaly can draw the moon
down from the sky. Suddenly the moon, which was full and beautiful,
is darkened, dim and changed in colour—whence Virgil, Eclogue 8" (l.
69: "Songs can even draw the moon down from heaven") Ed.]
"Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere Lunam.
Song, mystic song, attracts the labouring Moon.
Confer, et Horatium, Epod. v. et xvii.

6. As we, through the mercy of divine Providence, are placed in a
country where instances of cruel and haughty overbearance on the part
of lords of manors towards their tenants occur so very seldom, that
tyranny and oppression are hardly known among us but by name, it may
not be amiss to give the English reader a short ketch of the
miserable slavery in which the inhabitants of foreign countries are
still held; by perusing which he will at once be enabled to form an
idea how the case formerly was in this land of freedom, and at the
same time find abundant reason to thank Providence for the happy form
of government, the sacred, and unalienable liberty of the subject,
and the impartial administration of justice, which render the
constitution of this kingdom the envy and admiration of the whole
world. And this sketch we are the better qualified to give, having
resisted upwards of six years in different parts of Germany, during
which period we have had numberless opportunities of witnessing the
most atrocious instances of cruelty, tyranny, despotism, and
oppression
The feudal laws, which still in a great measure prevail in most parts
of Germany, render the generality of nobility, and lords of manors,
little better than so many petty tyrants. Proud of his descent, the
meanest country squire that can prefix the syllable von to his name,
considers himself as belonging to a superiors race of beings, and if
he possesses an estate, treats his tenants with less ceremony than
his cattle: for which reason the villagers, instead of being termed
tenants to the lord of the manor, are not unjustly denominated his
subjects; (untherthamen) and, in fact, their condition is but one
degree above chit of slaves, being compelled to do services for their
said lord; to cultivate his grounds; sow and reap his fields; fell
his timber; drain his fish-ponds, &c., whilst the women feed his
flocks; weed his garden; and do all manner of dairy and domestic
work; and these services are not only performed without any prospect
of hire, but the miserable peasants, if they are employed in
transporting timber, stones, sand, or building materials, are further
obliged to make use of their own oxen, which in this country
frequently supply the place of draught horses. Hence as the owners of
estates have the work and labour of their peasants in some places
four days in the week, in others five, according to the custom of the
manor, without pay or hire, it is their interest to follow husbandry
in all its different branches. They grow, and fell, timber, send to
market butter and cheese, rear cattle, and deal in fish, with twenty
other articles. Hence the German nobility, with all their haughtiness
and pride, might not improperly be denominated farmers and graziers.
Hence their houses, instead of exhibiting the elegance and superb
magnificence which are displayed in the country seats of our English
gentry, can hardly be compared with one half of the farm-yards in
this kingdom. The manor-house is generally a large, clumsy, shapeless
ill-contrived building, affording no other prospect than a stinking
yard, or court, where a dozen miserable women, with petticoats hardly
reaching to their knees, and neither shoes nor stockings to their
feet, stand sifting cinders, tossing dung about, whilst a whole herd
of swine run grunting up and down the place, driving cocks, hens, and
geese before them.
Many of these manor-houses, or, as they term them castles,
(schloesser) are monuments from the ancient times of chivalry, when
the knights and different orders of nobility formed a lawless body of
banditti, that living by plunder and rapine, infested the whole
country, and therefore erected these castles to serve them as places
of retreat and defence. In buildings originally constructed with this
design, elegance and propriety of style constituted, as we may
reasonably suppose, the last and least object of their views, and
therefore we cannot wonder if the gloomy appearance of these castles,
surrounded, as they frequently are, with high walls, a moat, or
ditch, and furnished with a drawbridge, still causes them to resemble
a den of thieves, or a county gaol, rather than the residence of his
noble, high-born, and illustrious excellency, my Lord Count von
Habenichts, or my Lord Baron von Sauerkraut.
So overstocked is Germany with nobility, that they are literally a
public nuisance, and difficult is it to determine whether they are
most notorious for their haughtiness, or for their poverty and
insignificance. The right of primogeniture, which renders our English
aristocracy so wealthy and respectable, is little known in a country
where titles and estate are inherited by every branch of the family,
however numerous. Hence we are bold to affirm, that many journeymen
mechanics in this metropolis are not only in better circumstances
than hundreds of the German counts and barons, but have moreover as
just a claim to rank and title.

7. Here again the translator cannot help commenting upon the happy
contrast which the laws of this country exhibit. Who ever read, or
heard of a single instance where the liberty of the subject was put
in competition with so paltry, and insignificant an object as the
preservation, or rather monopoly of hares and partridges?

8. Hanger: A short sword which hangs from a belt.

9. "Here lies Gottfried Haussinger, a sinner."

10. The Roman Catholics, as is well known, boast such an infinite host
of blessed saints and worthies, that, like the heathen of old, they
are never at a loss to whom to address themselves, whether for help,
comfort, or advice. Endless as is the dreadful list of human woes,
misfortunes, and calamities and all the various, complicated ills,
which flesh is heir to—it is impossible to state a single evil, that
is not graciously provided with its antidote, in the person of some
guardian angel, some tutelary saint! Thus women in labour address
themselves to the , Blessed Ever-Virgin Mary. Maids in love or dying
with the Green-Sickness, implore Saint Paul, who declares it to be
better to marry than to burn: Saint Agnes or St. Catherine afford
relief to patients of both sexes labouring under venereal complaints;
sufferers by fire call upon Saint Brandanus for deliverance: Saint
Sebaslian is invoked with equal success against the dreadful ravages
of the plague; whilst saint Romboldus defends his votaries from
ghosts, spectres, and hobgoblins. Happy religion, that, ever mindful
to the wants and necessities of its followers, holds out, like
Methodism,
"A sov’reign balm for ev’ry wound,
A Salve for ev’ry Sore!"

11. In Germany it is customary for the postilions to carry a small
French horn with them, which is certainly a more melodious instrument
than that made use of by the guards of the mail coach in this
country. The Germans having a natural genius for music, many of these
postilions are tolerable performers; and where the road, as is
frequently the case, leads through large and extensive woods, this
travelling concert has a wonderful effect.

12. "It was fear that first made gods in the world." Lucretius, Of the
Nature of Things, Bk. III l.661

13. Heautontimoroumenos: The name given to one of Terence's plays.
The word is originally Greek, and signifies a Self-tormentor.




