Foxe's Book Of Martyrs
Part III.

THE SEVENTH BOOK
OF
THE ACTS AND MONUMENTS,
BEGINNING WITH THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.

137. INTRODUCTION TO THE REIGN OF HENRY VIII.

Illustration:  Frontispiece - Portrait of Henry VIII. 
Illustration:  Title Page – The Execution of Dudley Earl of Leicester 
Illustration:  Henry VIII. Trampling the Pope Underfoot

  AS touching the civil state and administration of
the commonwealth, and likewise of the state of the church, under the
reign of King Henry the Seventh, how he entered first in possession
of the crown; how the two houses of York and Lancaster were in him
conjoined, through marriage with Elizabeth the eldest daughter to
King Edward the Fourth, by the prudent counsel of John Morton, then
bishop of Ely, after archbishop of Canterbury, and cardinal; how long
the said king reigned, and what persecution was in his time for lack
of search and knowledge of God's word, both in the diocese of Lincoln
under Bishop Smith, (who was erecter of the house of Brazen-nose in
Oxford,) as also in the diocese of Coventry, and other places more;
and further, what punishment and alteration God commonly sendeth upon
cities and realms public for neglecting the safety of his flock;
sufficiently in the former book hath been already specified; wherein
many things more amply might have been added, incident in the reign
of this prince, which we have for brevity pretermitted. For he that
studieth to comprehend in story all things, which the common course
and use of life may offer to the writer, may sooner find matter to
occupy himself, than to profit other. Otherwise I might have inferred
mention of the seditious tumult of Perkin Warbeck, with his retinue,
A.D. 1494. Also of Blackheath field by the blacksmith, A.D. 1496. I
might also have recited the glorious commendation of George Lily in
his Latin Chronicle, testifying of King Henry the Seventh, how he
sent three solemn orators to Pope Julius the Second to yield his
obedience to the see of Rome, A.D. 1506. And likewise how Pope
Alexander the Ninth, Pius the Third, and Julius the Second, sent to
the said King Henry the Seventh, three sundry famous ambassadors with
three swords, and three caps of maintenance, electing and admitting
him to be the chief defender of the faith. The commendation of which
fact, how glorious it is in the eyes of George Lily and Fabian, that
I leave to them. This I suppose, that when King Henry sent to Pope
Julius three orators with obedience, if he had sent him three
thousand arquebusiers to furnish his field against the French king
fighting at Ravenna, be had pleased Pope Julius much better. If
George Lily had been disposed to illustrate his story with notes,
this had been more worthy the noting, how Louis the Twelfth, French
king, calling his parliament, moved this question against Pope
Julius; Whether a pope might invade any prince by warlike force,
without cause; and whether the prince might withdraw his obedience
from that pope, or not? And it was concluded in the same parliament
with the king, against the pope. Also it was concluded the same time,
(which was in the reign of this King Henry the Seventh,) that the
Pragmatical Sanction should be received in full force and effect,
through all the realm of France.

     And forasmuch as we are fallen into the mention of George Lily,
this in him is to be found not unworthy noting, how, after the
burning of Thomas Norice, above mentioned, at the city of Norwich,
the same year followed such a fire in Norwich, that the whole city,
well near, was therewith consumed. Like as also after the burning of
the aforesaid good father in Smithfield, the same year (which was
1500) we read in the chronicle of Fabian, a great plague to fall upon
the city of London, to the great destruction of the inhabitants
thereof. Where again is to be noted, (as is aforesaid,) that
according to the state of the church, the disposition of the
commonwealth commonly is guided, either to be with adversity
afflicted, or else in prosperity to flourish. But after these notes
of King Henry the Seventh, now to the story of King Henry the Eighth.

     This King Henry the Seventh finishing his course in the year
abovesaid, which was 1509, had by Elizabeth his wife abovenamed, four
men children, and of women children as many. Of whom three only
survived; to wit, Prince Henry, Lady Margaret, and Lady Mary. Of whom
King Henry the Eighth after his father succeeded. Lady Margaret was
married to James the Fourth, king of Scots. Lady Mary was affianced
to Charles, king of Castile.

     Not long before the death of King Henry, Prince Arthur, his
eldest son, had espoused Lady Katharine, daughter to Ferdinand, being
of the age of fifteen years, and she about the age of seventeen; and
shortly after his marriage, within five months, departed at Ludlow,
and was buried at Worcester. After whose decease the succession of
the crown fell next to King Henry the Eighth, being of the age of
eighteen years, entered his reign the year of our Lord 1509, and
shortly after married with the aforesaid Katharine, his late brother
Prince Arthur's wife, to the end that her dowry, being great, should
not be transported out of the land. In the which his marriage, being
more politic than Scripture-like, he was dispensed with by Pope
Julius, at the request of Ferdinand her father. The reign of this
king continued with great nobleness and fame the space of thirty-
eight years. During whose time and reign, great alteration of things,
as well to the civil state of the realm, as especially to the state
ecclesiastical, and matters of the church appertaining. For by him
was exiled and abolished out of the realm, the usurped power of the
bishop of Rome, idolatry and superstition somewhat repressed, images
and pilgrimages defaced, abbeys and monasteries pulled down, sects of
religion rooted out, Scriptures reduced to the knowledge of the
vulgar tongue, and the state of the church and religion redressed.
Concerning all which things, in the process of these volumes here
following, we will endeavour (Christ willing) particularly and in
order to discourse; after that first we shall comprehend a few
matters, which within the beginning of his reign are to he noted and
collected. Where, leaving off to write of Empson and Dudley, who in
the time of King Henry the Seventh, being great doers in executing
the penal laws over the people at that time, and purchasing thereby
more malice than lands, with that which they had gotten, were shortly
after the entering of this king beheaded, the one a knight, the other
an esquire; leaving also to intermeddle with his wars, triumphs, and
other temporal affairs, we mean in these volumes principally to
bestow our travail in declaration of matters concerning most chiefly
the state of the church and of religion, as well in this Church of
England, as also of the whole Church of Rome.



138. DISPUTE ABOUT THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION

     Wherein first cometh to our hands a turbulent tragedy, and a
fierce contention, which long before had troubled the church, and now
this present year, 1509, was renewed afresh between two certain
orders of Begging Friars, to wit, the Dominic Friars and the
Franciscans, about the conception of the Virgin Mary, the mother of
Christ.

     The Franciscans were they which did hold of St. Francis, and
followed the rule of his testament, commonly called Grey Friars, or
Minorites. Their opinion was this; that the Virgin Mary, prevented by
the grace of the Holy Ghost, was so sanctified, that she was never
subject one moment in her conception to original sin. The Dominic
Friars were they which, holding of Dominic, were commonly called
Black Friars, or Preaching Friars. Their opinion was, that the Virgin
Mary was conceived as all other children of Adam be; so that this
privilege only belongeth to Christ, to be conceived without original
sin:  notwithstanding, the said blessed Virgin was sanctified in her
mother's womb, and purged from her original sin, so as was John
Baptist, Jeremiah, or any other privileged person. This frivolous
question kindling and gendering between these two sects of friars,
burst out in such a flame of parts and sides-taking, that it occupied
the heads and wits, schools and universities, almost through the
whole church, some holding one part with Scotus, some the other part
with Thomas Aquinas. The Minorites, holding with Scotus their master,
disputed and concluded, that she was conceived without all spot or
note of original sin, and thereupon caused the feast and service of
the Conception of St. Mary the Virgin to be celebrated and solemnized
in the church. Contrary, the Dominic Friars, taking side with
Aquinas, preached that it was heresy to affirm that the blessed
Virgin was conceived without the guilt of original sin; and that they
which did celebrate the feast of her Conception, or said any masses
thereof, did sin grievously and mortally.

     In the mean time, as this fantasy waxed hot in the church, the
one side preaching against the other, came Pope Sixtus the Fourth,
A.D. 1476, who, joining side with the Minorites, or Franciscans,
first sent forth his decree by authority apostolic, willing,
ordaining, and commanding all men to solemnize this new-found feast
of the Conception in holy church for evermore; offering to all men
and women, which, devoutly frequenting the church, would hear mass
and service from the first even-song of the said feast, to the
octaves of the same, as many days of pardon, as Pope Urban the
Fourth, and Pope Martin the Fifth, did grant for hearing the service
of Corpus Christi day, &c. And this decree was given and dated at
Rome, A.D. 1476.

     Moreover, the same pope, to the intent that the devotion of the
people might be the more encouraged to the celebration of this
conception, added a clause more to the Ave Maria, granting great
indulgence and release of sins to all such as would invocate the
blessed Virgin with the same addition, saying thus; "Hail Mary! full
of grace, the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus Christ; and blessed is Anna
thy mother, of whom thy virgin's flesh hath proceeded without blot of
original sin. Amen."

     Wherein thou mayest note, gentle reader, for thy learning three
things:  First, how the pope turneth that improperly into a prayer,
which properly was sent of God for a message or tidings. Secondly,
how the pope addeth to the words of the Scripture, contrary to the
express precept of the Lord. Thirdly, how the pope exempteth Mary,
the blessed Virgin, not only from the seed of Abraham and Adam, but
also from the condition of a mortal creature. For if there be in her
no original sin, then she beareth not the image of Adam, neither doth
she descend of that seed, of whose seed evil proceedeth upon all men
and women to condemnation, as St. Paul doth teach, Rom. v. Wherefore,
if she descend of that seed, then the infection of original evil must
necessarily proceed unto her. If she descend not thereof, then cometh
she not of the seed of Abraham, nor of the seed of David, &c. Again,
seeing that death is the effect and stipend of sin, by the doctrine
of St. Paul, Rom. vi., then had her flesh injury by the law (as
Christ himself had) to suffer the malediction and punishment of
death, and so should never have died, if original sin had no place in
her, &c. But to return unto our story:  This constitution of the pope
being set forth for the conception of the blessed Virgin, which was
A.D. 1476, it was not long after, but the said Pope Sixtus,
perceiving that the Dominic Friars with their accomplices would not
conform themselves hereunto, directed forth by the authority
apostolic a bull in effect as followeth: 

     "Whereas the holy Church of Rome hath ordained a special and
proper service for the public solemnizing of the feast of the
Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary; certain orders of the Black
Friars in their public sermons to the people in divers places, have
not ceased hitherto to preach, and yet daily do, that all they which
hold or affirm the said glorious Virgin to have been conceived
without original sin, be heretics; and they which celebrate the
service of the said her conception, or do hear the sermons of them
which do so affirm, do sin grievously; also not contented herewith,
do write and set forth books moreover, maintaining their assertions,
to the great offence and ruin of godly minds. We, therefore, to
prevent and withstand such presumptuous and perverse assertions,
which have risen, and more hereafter may arise, by such opinions and
preachings aforesaid, in the minds of the faithful; by the authority
apostolical, do condemn and reprove the same, and by the motion,
knowledge, and authority aforesaid, decree and ordain, that the
preachers of God's word, and all other persons, of what state,
degree, order, or condition soever they be, which shall presume to
dare affirm or preach to the people these aforesaid opinions and
assertions to be true, or shall read, hold, or maintain any such
books for true, having before intelligence hereof, shall incur
thereby the sentence of excommunication; from which they shall not be
absolved otherwise than by the bishop of Rome, except only in the
time of death."

     This bull, being dated A.D. 1483, gave no little heart and
encouragement to the Grey Friars Franciscans, which defended the pure
conception of the holy Virgin against the Black Dominic Friars, with
their confederates, holding the contrary side. By the vigour of which
bull, the Grey order had got such a conquest of the black guard of
the Dominics, that the said Dominics were compelled at length, for a
perpetual memorial of the triumph, both to give to the glorious
Virgin, every night, an anthem in praise of her conception, and also
to subscribe unto their doctrine; in which doctrine these, with
divers other points, be contained: 

     "1. That blessed Mary the Virgin suffered the griefs and
adversities in this life, not for any necessity inflicted for
punishment of original sin, but only because she would conform
herself to the imitation of Christ.

     "2. That the said Virgin, as she was not obliged to any
punishment due for sin, as neither was Christ her Son, so she had no
need of remission of sins; but instead thereof, had the Divine
preservation of God's help, keeping her from all sin; which grace
only she needed, and also had it.

     "3. Item, That where the body of the Virgin Mary was subject to
death, and died; this is to be understood to come, not for any
penalty due for sin, but either for imitation and conformity unto
Christ, or else for the natural constitution of her body being 
elemental, as were the bodies of our first parents; who, if they had
not tasted of the forbidden fruit, should have been preserved from
death, not by nature, but by grace and strength of other fruits and
meats in Paradise; which meats, because Mary had not, but did eat our
common meats, therefore she died, and not for any necessity of
original sin.

     "4. The universal proposition of St. Paul, which saith, that
the Scripture hath concluded all men under sin, is to be understood
thus, as speaking of all them which be not exempted by the special
privilege of God, as is the blessed Virgin Mary.

     "5. If justification be taken for reconciliation of him that
was unrighteous before, and now is made righteous; then the blessed
Virgin is to be taken, not for justified by Christ, but just from her
beginning, by preservation.

     "6. If a Saviour be taken for him which saveth men fallen into
perdition and condemnation, so is not Christ the Saviour of Mary, but
is her Saviour only in this respect, for sustaining her from not
falling into condemnation, &c.

     "7. Neither did the Virgin Mary give thanks to God, nor ought
so to do, for expiation of her sins, but for her conservation from
case of sinning.

     "8. Neither did she pray to God at any time for remission of
her sins, but only for remission of other men's sins she prayed many
times, and counted their sins for hers.

     "9. If the blessed Virgin had deceased before the passion of
her Son, God would have reposed her soul not in the place among the
patriarchs, or among the just, but in the same most pleasant place of
Paradise, where Adam and Eve were before they transgressed."

     These were the doting dreams and fantasies of the Franciscans,
and of other papists, commonly then holden in the schools, written in
their books, preached in their sermons, taught in churches, and set
forth in pictures. So that the people were taught nothing else almost
in the pulpits all this while, but how the Virgin Mary was conceived
immaculate and holy, without original sin, and how they ought to call
to her for help, whom they with special terms do call, "the way of
mercy, the mother of grace, the lover of piety, the comforter of
mankind, the continual intercessor for the salvation of the faithful,
and an advocate to the King, her Son, which never ceaseth," &c. And
although the greatest number of the school doctors were of the
contrary faction, as Peter Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, Bernard,
Bonaventure, and other, yet these new papists shifted off their
objections with frivolous distinctions and blind evasions, as thus: 
"Peter Lombard," they said, "is not received nor holden in the
schools, as touching this article, but is rejected."

     Bernard, although he seemeth to deny the conception of the
blessed Virgin to be void of original sin, saying that she could not
be holy when she was not, and lived not; to this they answer, "That
albeit she was not yet in essence, yet she was holy in her
conception, and before conception in the Divine prescience of God,
which had chosen and pre-elected her before the worlds, to be the
mother of the Lord."

     Again, where Bernard doth argue, that she was not without
original sin conceived, because she was not conceived by the Holy
Ghost, to this they answer, "That the Holy Ghost may work two ways in
conception; either without company of man, and so was Christ only
conceived; or else with company and help of man, and thus was the
blessed Virgin conceived."

     "Bonaventure," say they, "was a holy father, but he spake then
after the custom and manner of his time, when the solemnity and
purity of this conception was not yet decreed nor received by the
public consent and authority of the church; now seeing the authority
of the Church of Rome hath established the same, it ought not to be
contraried, nor can, without dangerous disobedience. In all men's
actions, diligent respect of time must be had. That which bindeth not
at one time, afterward the same by law being ratified, may bind at
another."

     Finally, for the number and multitude on the contrary side,
thus they answer for themselves, as we now in these our days likewise
in defence of the truth may well answer against the pope, and all his
popish friars, turning their own weapons against themselves: 
"Multitude," say they, "ought not to move us. Victory consisteth not
in number and heaps, but in fortitude and hearts of soldiers; yea,
rather fortitude and stomach cometh from heaven, and not of man.
Judas Maccabeus with a little handful overthrew the great army of
Antioch. Strong Samson with a poor ass's bone slew a thousand
Philistines. David had no more but a silly sling, and a few stones,
and with these struck down terrible Goliath the giant," &c.

     With these and such other like reasons the Grey Franciscans
avoided their adversaries, defending the conception of the Virgin
Mary to be unblemished, and pure from all contagion of original sin.
Contrariwise, the black guard of the Dominic Friars, for their parts
were not all mute, but laid lustily from them again, having great
authorities, and also the Scripture on their side. But yet the other
having the see apostolical with them, had the better hand, and in
fine, gat the victory triumphantly over the other, to the high
exaltation of their order. For Pope Sixtus, (as I said,) by the
authority apostolical, after he had decreed the conception day of the
Virgin perpetually to be sanctified, and also with his terrible bull
had condemned for heretics all them which withstood the same; the
Dominic Friars, with authority oppressed, were driven to two
inconveniences; the one was, to keep silence; the other was, to give
place to their adversaries the Franciscans. Albeit, where the mouth
durst not speak, yet the heart would work; and though the tongue were
tied, yet their good will was ready by all means possible to maintain
their quarrel and their estimation.

     Whereupon it happened the same year of our Lord, 1509, after
this dissension between the Dominic Friars and the Franciscans, that
certain of the Dominics thinking by subtle sleight to work in the
people's heads that which they durst not achieve with open preaching,
devised a certain image of the Virgin, so artificially wrought, that
the friars by privy gins made it to stir, and to make gestures, to
lament, to complain, to weep, to groan, and to give answers to them
that asked; insomuch that the people therewith were brought in a
marvellous persuasion, till at length the fraud being espied, the
friars were taken, condemned, and burned at Berne, the year above
mentioned.

     In the story of John Stumsius, this story aforesaid doth partly
appear; but in the registers and records of the city of Berne, the
order and circumstance thereof is more fully expressed and set forth
both in metre and prose, and is thus declared: 

     In the city of Berne there were certain Dominic Friars, to the
number chiefly of four principal doers and chieftains of that order,
who had inveigled a certain simple, poor friar, who had newly planted
himself in the cloister:  whom the aforesaid friars had so infatuated
with sundry superstitions, and feigned apparitions of St. Mary, St.
Barbara, and St. Katharine, and with their enchantments, and
imprinting moreover in him the wounds of St. Francis, that he
believed plainly, that the Virgin Mary had appeared to him, and had
offered to him a red host consecrated, with the blood also of Christ
miraculous; which blessed Virgin also had sent him to the senators of
Berne, with instructions, declaring unto them, from the mouth of the
Virgin, that she was conceived in sin, and that the Franciscan Friars
were not to be credited nor suffered in the city, which were not yet
reformed from that erroneous opinion of her conception. He added
moreover, that they should resort to a certain image there of the
Virgin Mary, (which image the friars by engines had made to sweat,)
and should do their worship, and make their oblations to the same,
&c.

     This feigned device was not so soon forged by the friars, but
it was as soon believed of the people; so that a great while the red-
coloured host was taken undoubtedly for the true body and blood of
Christ, and certain coloured drops thereof sent abroad to divers
noble personages and states for a great relic, and that not without
great recompence. Thus the deceived people in great number came
flocking to the image, and to the red host, and coloured blood, with
manifold gifts and oblations. In brief, the Dominic Friars so had
wrought the matter, and had so swept all the fat to their own beards,
from the order of the Franciscans, that all the alms came to their
box. The Franciscans seeing their estimation to decay, and their
kitchen to wax cold, and their paunches to be pinched, not able to
abide that contumely, and being not ignorant or unacquainted with
such counterfeited doings, for as the proverb saith, "It is ill
halting before a cripple," eftsoons espied their crafty juggling, and
detected their fraudulent miracles. Whereupon the four chief captains
abovenamed were apprehended, and put to the fire, of whom the
provincial of that order was one.

     And thus much touching the beginning and end of this tumultuous
and popish tragedy; wherein evidently it may appear to the reader,
how neither these turbulent friars could agree among themselves, and
yet in what frivolous trifles they wrangled together. But to let
these ridiculous friars pass, with their trifling fantasies, most
worthy to be derided of all wise men; in the mean time this is to be
lamented, to behold the miserable times of the church, in which the
devil kept the minds of Christ's people so attentive and occupied in
such friarly toys, that nothing else almost was taught or heard in
the church, but only the commendation and exaltation of the Virgin
Mary. But of our justification by faith, of grace and the promises of
God in Christ, of the strength of the law, of the horror of sin, of
difference between the law and the gospel, of the true liberty of
conscience, &c., no mention or very little was heard. Wherefore in
this so blind time of darkness, it was much needful and requisite,
that the Lord of his mercy should look upon his church, and send down
his gracious reformation; which also he did. For shortly upon the
same, through the gracious excitation of God, came Martin Luther; of
whom the order of story now requireth that we should and will treat,
(Christ willing,) after the story of Richard Hunne, and a few other
things premised, for the better opening of the story to follow.



139. LONDONERS FORCED TO RECANT, 1510-1527

     Mention was made sufficiently before of the doings of Pope
Julius, and of his warlike affairs, for the which he was condemned,
and not unjustly, in the council of Tours in France, A.D. 1510, and
yet all this could not assuage the furious affection of this pope,
but the same year he invaded the city of Modena and Mirandola in
Italy, and took them by force of war. Which Pope Julius not long
after, in the year of our Lord 1512, refusing peace offered by
Maximilian the emperor, was encountered by Louis the French king,
about Ravenna, upon Easter day; where he was vanquished, and had of
his army slain to the number of sixteen thousand. And the year next
following, A.D. 1513, this apostolical warrior, which had resigned
his keys unto the river of Tiber before, made an end together both of
his fighting and living, after he had reigned and fought ten years.
After whom succeeded next in the see of Rome Pope Leo the Tenth,
about the compass of which time great mutations and stirs began to
work, as well in states temporal, as especially in the state of the
church.

     Pope Leo the Tenth, in Rome, A.D. 1513, reigned nine years.

     Charles the Fifth, emperor in Germany, A.D. 1519, reigned
thirty-nine years.

     Francis, king of France, A.D. 1515, reigned thirty-two years.

     Henry the Eighth, king of England, A.D. 1509, reigned thirty-
eight years.

     James the Fifth, king of Scotland, A.D. 1514, reigned twenty-
nine years.

     In the time of which pope, emperor, and kings of England and of
France, great alterations, troubles, and turns of religion were
wrought in the church, by the mighty operation of God's hand, in
Italy, France, Germany, England, and all Europe, such as have not
been seen, although much groaned for, many hundred years before; as
in further discourse of this history (Christ willing) shall more
manifestly appear.

     But before we come to these alterations, taking the time as it
lieth before us, we will first speak of Richard Hun, and certain
other godly-minded persons here in England, afflicted for the word of
Christ's gospel in great multitude, as they be found and taken out of
the registers of Fitzjames, bishop of London, by the faithful help
and industry of R. Carket, citizen of London.

The history of divers good men and women, persecuted for religion in
the city and diocese of the bishop of London, briefly extracted out
of the registers of Richard Fitzjames.

     Amongst and beside the great number of the faithful martyrs and
professors of Christ, that constantly in the strength of the Holy
Ghost gave their lives for the testimony of his truth, I find
recorded in the register of London, between the years of our Lord
1509 and 1527, the names of divers other persons both men and women;
who, in the fulness of that dark and misty time of ignorance, had
also some portion of God's good Spirit, which induced them to the
knowledge of his truth and gospel, and were diversly troubled,
persecuted, and imprisoned for the same; notwithstanding, by the
proud, cruel, and bloody rage of the catholic seat, and through the
weakness and frailty of their own nature, (not then fully
strengthened in God,) it was again in them, for the time, suppressed
and kept under, as appeareth by their several abjurations made before
Richard Fitzjames, then bishop of London, (in his time a most cruel
persecutor of Christ's church,) or else before his vicar-general
deputed for the same. And forasmuch as many of the adversaries of
God's truth have of late days disdainfully and braggingly cried out,
and made demands in their public assemblies, and yet do, asking where
this our church and religion was within these fifty or sixty years, I
have thought it not altogether vain, somewhat to stop such lying
crakers, both by mentioning their names, and likewise opening some of
the chief and principal matters, for which they were so unmercifully
afflicted and molested, thereby to give to understand, as well the
continuance and consent of the true church of Christ in that age,
touching the chief points of our faith, though not in like perfection
of knowledge and constancy in all; as also by the way, something to
touch what fond and frivolous matters the ignorant prelates shamed
not in that time of blindness to object against the poor and simple
people, accounting them as heinous andgreat offences, yea, such as
deserved death of both body and soul. But lest I should seem too
prolix and tedious herein, I will now briefly proceed with the story,
and first begin with their names, which are these: 

A.D. 1510.
Joan Baker.
William Pottier.
John Forge.
Thomas Goodred
Thomas Walker, alias Talbot
Thomas Forge.
Alice Forge.
John Forge, their son.
William Couper.
John Calverton.
John Woodrofe.

A.D. 1511.
Richard Woolman.
Roger Hilliar.
Alice Couper.
Thomas Austy.
Joan Austy.
Thomas Graunt.
John Garter.
Christopher Ravins.
Dionyse Ravins
Thomas Vincent
Lewis John.
Joan John.

A.D. 1512.
John Webb, alias Baker.

A.D. 1517.
John Houshold.
Robert Rascal.

A.D. 1518.
Elizabeth Stanford.
George Browne.
John Wikes.
John Southake.
Richard Butler.
John Samme.

A.D. 1521.
William King.
Robert Durdant.
Henry Woolman.
Edmund Spilman.

A.D. 1523.
John Higges, alias Noke, alias Johnson.

A.D. 1526.
Henry Chambers.
John Higgins.
A.D. 1527.
Thomas Egleston..

     The particular examination of all these here abovenamed, here
followeth.

     To these were divers and sundry particular articles, (besides
the common and general sort accustomably used in such cases,)
privately objected, even such as they were then accused of, either by
their curate, or other their neighbours. And because I think it
somewhat superfluous to make any large recital of all and every part
of their several process, I mind, therefore, briefly only to touch so
many of their articles as may be sufficient to induce the Christian
reader to judge the sooner of the rest, being (I assure you) of no
greater importance than these that follow:  except that sometime they
were charged most slanderously with horrible and blasphemous lies
against the majesty and truth of God, which, as they utterly denied,
so do I now for this present keep secret in silence, as well for
brevity's sake, as also somewhat to colour and hide the shameless
practices of that lying generation. But to our purpose.

     The chiefest objection against Joan Baker was, that she would
not only herself not reverence the crucifix, but had also persuaded a
friend of hers lying at the point of death, not to put any trust or
confidence in the crucifix, but in God which is in heaven, who only
worketh all the miracles that be done, and not the dead images, that
be but stocks and stones:  and therefore she was sorry that ever she
had gone so often on pilgrimage to St. Saviour and other idols. Also,
that she did hold opinion, that the pope had no power to give
pardons, and that the Lady Young (who was not long before that time
burned) died a true martyr of God; and therefore she wished of God,
that she herself might do no worse than the said Lady Young had done.

     Unto William Pottier, besides divers other false and slanderous
articles, (as that he should deny the benefit and effect of Christ's
passion,) it was also alleged that he should affirm, that there were
six Gods. The first three was the holy Trinity, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. The fourth was a priest's concubine being kept in
his chamber. The fifth was the devil. And the sixth, that thing that
a man setteth his mind most upon.

     "The first part of this article he utterly denied, confessing
most firmly and truly the blessed Trinity to be only one God in one
unity of Deity:  as to the other three be answered, that a priest
delighting in his concubine, made her as his god. Likewise a wicked
person persisting in his sin without repentance, made the devil his
god. And lastly he granted, that he once hearing of certain men,
which by the singing and chattering of birds would seek to know what
things were to come, either to themselves or others, said that those
men esteemed their birds as gods:  and otherwise he spake not."

     Amongst the manifold and several articles objected against
Thomas Goodred, Thomas Walker, Thomas Forge, Alice Forge his wife,
John Forge their son, John Calverton, John Woodrofe, Richard Woolman,
and Roger Hilliar, (as that they should speak against pilgrimages,
praying unto saints, and such like,) this principally was propounded,
that they all denied the carnal and corporal presence of Christ's
body and blood in the sacrament of the altar; and further, had
concealed and consented unto their teachers and instructors of that
doctrine, and had not, according unto the laws of the church, accused
and presented them unto the bishop or his ordinary. Also great and
heinous displeasure was conceived against Richard Woolman, for that
he termed the church of Paul's, a house of thieves; affirming that
the priests and other ecclesiastical persons there, were not liberal
givers unto the poor, (as they ought,) but rather takers away from
them, what they could get.

     Likewise as Thomas Austy, Joan Austy his wife, Thomas Graunt,
John Garters, Christopher Ravins, Dionyse Ravins his sister, Thomas
Vincent, Lewis John, Joan John his wife, and John Webb, were of one
fellowship and profession of faith with divers of the last before
recited; so were they also almost apprehended about one time, and
chiefly burdened with one opinion of the sacrament. Which declareth
evidently, that notwithstanding the dark ignorance of those corrupted
times, yet God did ever in mercy open the eyes of some, to behold the
manifest truth, even in those things whereof the papists make now
greatest vaunt and brag of longest continuance. Furthermore, many of
them were charged to have spoken against pilgrimages, and to have
read and used certain English books, impugning the faith of the
Romish Church; as the Four Evangelists, Wickliff's Wicket, a book of
the Ten Commandments of Almighty God, the Revelation of St. John, the
Epistles of Paul and James, with other like, which those holy ones
could never abide; and good cause why:  for as darkness could never
agree with light, no more can ignorance, the maintainer of that
kingdom, with the true knowledge of Christ and his gospel.

     It was further particularly objected against Joan John, the
wife of Lewis John, that (besides the premises) she learned and
maintained that God commanded no holy-days to be kept, but only the
sabbath day; and therefore she would keep none but it, nor no fasting
days; affirming, that to fast from sin was the true fast. Moreover,
that she had despised the pope, his pardons, and pilgrimages;
insomuch that when any poor body asked his alms of her in the worship
of the Lady of Walsingham, she would straight answer in contempt of
the pilgrimage, The Lady of Walsingham help thee. And if she gave any
thing unto him, she would then say, Take this in the worship of our
Lady in heaven, and let the other go. Which declareth for lack of
better instruction and knowledge, she yet ignorantly attributed too
much honour to the true saints of God departed; though otherwise she
did abhor the idolatrous worshipping of the dead images. By which
example, as also by many others, (for shortness sake, at this present
omitted,) I have just occasion to condemn the wilful subtlety of
those, that in this bright shining light of God's truth would yet,
under colour of godly remembrance, still maintain the having of
images in the church, craftily excusing their idolatrous kneeling and
praying unto them, by affirming, that they never worshipped the dead
images, but the things that the images did represent. But if that
were their only doctrine and cause of having of them, why then would
their predecessors so cruelly compel these poor simple people, thus
openly in their recantations, to abjure and revoke their speaking
against the gross adoration of the outward images only, and not
against the thing represented? Which many of them, (as appeareth
partly by this example,) in their ignorant simplicity, confessed
might be worshipped. Howbeit, God be thanked, (who ever in his mercy
continue it,) their colourable and hypocritical excuses cannot now
take such place in the hearts of the elect of God, as they have done
heretofore, especially seeing the word of God doth so manifestly
forbid as well the worshipping of them, as also the making or having
of them, for order of religion.

     It was alleged against William Cowper and Alice Cowper his
wife, that they had spoken against pilgrimages, and worshipping of
images; but chiefly the woman, who having her child on a time hurt by
falling into a pit or ditch, and earnestly persuaded by some of her
ignorant neighbours, to go on pilgrimage to St. Laurence for help for
her child, said, that neither St. Laurence nor any other saint could
help her child, and therefore none ought to go on pilgrimage to any
image made with man's hand, but only unto Almighty God; for
pilgrimages were nothing worth, saving to make the priests rich.

     Unto John Houshold, Robert Rascal, and Elizabeth Stamford, as
well the article against the sacrament of the altar was objected, as
also that they had spoken against praying to saints, and had despised
the authority of the bishop of Rome, and others of his clergy. But
especially John Houshold was charged to have called them antichrists
and fornicators, and the pope himself a strong strumpet, and a common
scandal unto the world, who with his pardons had drowned in blindness
all Christian realms, and that for money.

     Also among divers other ordinary articles propounded against
George Brown, these were counted very heinous and heretical:  First,
that he had said, that he knew no cause why the cross should be
worshipped, seeing that the same was a hurt and pain unto our Saviour
Christ in the time of his passion, and not any ease or pleasure;
alleging for example, that if he had had a friend hanged or drowned,
he would ever after have loved that gallows, or water, by the which
his friend died, rather worse for that than better. Another objection
was, that he had erroneously, obstinately, and maliciously said, for
so are their words, that the church was too rich. This matter, I may
tell you, touched somewhat the quick, and therefore no marvel though
they counted it erroneous and malicious; for take away their gain,
and farewell their religion. They also charged him to have refused
holy water to be cast about his chamber, and likewise to have spoken
against priests, with other vain matters.

     The greatest matter wherewith they burdened John Wikes, was,
that he had often and of long time kept company with divers persons
suspected of heresies, as they termed them, and had received them
into his house, and there did suffer and hear them, sundry times,
read erroneous and heretical books, contrary to the faith of the
Romish Church, and did also himself consent unto their doctrine; and
had many times secretly conveyed them from the taking of such as were
appointed to apprehend them.

     Like as the greatest number of those before mentioned, so were
also John Southake, Richard Butler, John Sam, William King; Robert
Durdant, and Henry Woolman, especially charged with speaking words
against the real presence of Christ's body in the sacrament of the
altar, and also against images, and the rest of the seven sacraments.
Howbeit, they burdened the last five persons with the reading of
certain English heretical books, accounting most blasphemously the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, written by the four evangelists, to be of
that number, as appeareth evidently by the eighth article objected by
Thomas Bennet, doctor of law, chancellor and vicar general, unto
Richard Fitzjames, then bishop of London, against the said Richard
Butler. The very words of which article, for a more declaration of
truth, I have thought good here to insert; which are these:  "Also we
object to you, that divers times, and especially upon a certain 
night, about the space of three years last past, in Robert Durdant's
house of Iver Court near unto Stanes, you erroneously and damnably
read in a great book of heresy of the said Robert Durdant's, all that
same night, certain chapters of the evangelists in English,
containing in them divers erroneous and damnable opinions and
conclusions of heresy, in the presence of the said Robert Durdant,
John Butler, Robert Carder, Jenkin Butler, William King, and divers
other suspect persons of heresy then being present, and hearing your
said erroneous lectures and opinions." To the same effect and purpose
tended the tenor of some of the articles propounded against the other
four. Whereby, as also by others like before specified, we may easily
judge what reverence they, which yet will be counted the true and
only church of Christ, did bear to the word and Gospel of Christ, who
shamed not to blaspheme the same with most horrible titles of
erroneous and damnable opinions, and conclusions of heresy. But why
should we marvel thereat, seeing the Holy Ghost in sundry places of
the Scripture doth declare, that in the latter days there should come
such proud and cursed speakers, which shall speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have their consciences marked with a hot iron? Let us
therefore now thank our heavenly Father for revealing them unto us;
and let us also pray him, that of his free mercies in his Son Christ
Jesus, he would, if it be to his glory, either turn and mollify all
such hearts, or else, for the peace and quietness of his church, he
would in his righteous judgment take them from us.

     About this time Richard Fitzjames ended his life. After whose
death, Cutbert Tunstall (afterwards bishop of Durham) succeeded in
the see and bishopric of London; who soon upon his first entry into
the room, minding to follow rightly the footsteps of his predecessor,
caused Edmund Spilman, priest, Henry Chambers, John Higgins, and
Thomas Eglestone, to be apprehended, and so to be examined upon
sundry like articles, as before are expressed; and in the end, either
for fear of his cruelty, and his rigour of death, or else through
hope of his flattering promises, (such was their weakness,) he
compelled them to abjure and renounce their true professed faith
touching the holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which was,
that Christ's corporal body was not in the sacrament, but in heaven,
and that the sacrament was a figure of his body, and not the body
itself.

     Moreover, about the same time there were certain articles
objected against John Higges, alias Noke, alias Johnson, by the said
bishop's vicar-general. Amongst which were these:  First, that he had
affirmed, that it was as lawful for a temporal man to have two wives
at once, as for a priest to have two benefices. Also, that he had in
his custody a book of the Four Evangelists in English, and did often
read therein; and that he favoured the doctrines and opinions of
Martin Luther, openly pronouncing that Luther had more learning in
his little finger than all the doctors in England in their whole
bodies; and that all the priests in the church were blind, and had
led the people the wrong way. Likewise it was alleged against him,
that he had denied purgatory, and had said, that while he were alive
he would do as much for himself as he could, for after his death he
thought that prayer and alms-deeds could little help him.

     These and such-like matters were they, wherewith these poor and
simple men and women were chiefly charged, and as heinous heretics
excommunicated, imprisoned, and at last compelled to recant; and some
of them, in utter shame and reproach, (besides the ordinary bearing
of faggots before the cross in procession, or else at a sermon,) were
enjoined for penance, (as they termed it,) as well to appear once
every year before their ordinary, as also to wear the sign of a
faggot painted upon their sleeves, or other part of their outward
garment, and that during all their lives, or so often and long as it
pleased their ordinary to appoint. By which long, rigorous, and open
punishing of them, they meant (as it should seem) utterly to terrify
and keep back all others from the true knowledge of Jesus Christ and
his gospel. But the Lord be evermore praised, what effect their
wicked purposes therein have taken, these our most lightsome days of
God's glorious gospel do most joyfully declare.

     There were also troubled besides these, certain others more
simple and ignorant; who having but a very small smack or taste of
the truth, did yet at the first (as it may seem) gladly consent unto
the same; but being apprehended, they quickly again yielded, and
therefore had only assigned them for their penance, the bearing of a
little candle before the cross, without any further open abjuring or
recanting. Amongst which I find two especially; the one a woman,
called Ellen Heyer, to whom it was objected, that she had neither
confessed herself unto the priest, nor yet received the sacrament of
the altar, by the space of four years, and notwithstanding had yearly
eaten flesh at Easter, and after, as well as others that had received
the same, contrary to the usual manner and conversation of all other
Christian people.

     The other was a man, named Robert Berkeway, who (besides most
wicked blasphemies against God, which he utterly denied) was charged
to have spoken heinous words against the pope's holy and blessed
martyr Thomas Becket, calling him covetous and a thief, for that he
wrought by crafts and imaginations.

     Thus have I (as briefly as I could) summarily collected the
principal articles objected against these weak, infirm, and earthy
vessels. Not minding hereby to excuse or condemn them, in these their
fearful falls and dangerous defections; but leaving them unto the
unmeasurable rich mercies of the Lord; I thought only to make
manifest the insatiable bloody cruelty of the pope's kingdom, against
the gospel and true church of Christ; nothing mitigating their
envious rage, no not against the very simple idiots, and that
sometimes in most frivolous and irreligious cases. But now leaving to
say any further herein, I will (by God's grace) go forward with other
somewhat more serious matters.



140. WILLIAM SMEETING AND JOHN BREWSTER.

     In searching and perusing of the Register, for the collection
of the names and articles before recited, I find that within the
compass of the same years there were also some others, who after they
had once showed themselves as frail and inconstant as the rest,
(being either therewith pricked in conscience, or otherwise zealously
overcome with the manifest truth of God's most sacred word,) became
yet again as earnest professors of Christ as ever they were before,
and for the same profession were the second time apprehended,
examined, condemned, and in the end were most cruelly burned. Of the
which number were William Sweeting and John Brewster, who were both
burned together in Smithfield, the eighteenth day of October, A.D.
1511. The chiefest case of religion alleged against them in their
articles, was their faith concerning the sacrament of Christ's body
and blood. Which, because it differed from the absurd, gross, and
Capernaitical opinion of the new schoolmen, was counted as most
heinous heresy. There were other things besides objected against
them; as the reading of certain forbidden books, and accompanying
with such persons as were suspected of heresy. But one great and
heinous offence counted amongst the rest, was their putting and
leaving off the painted faggots, which they were at the first
abjuring enjoined to wear as badges during their lives, or so long as
it should please their ordinary to appoint, and not to leave them
off, upon pain of relapse, until they were dispensed withal for the
same. The breach of this injunction was esteemed to be of no small
weight, and yet, the matter well and thoroughly considered, it
seemeth by their confessions, they were both thereunto by necessity
enforced. For the one, named Sweeting, being for fear of the bishop's
cruelty constrained to wander the countries to get his poor living,
came at length unto Colchester, where by the parson of the parish of
Mary Magdalene, he was provoked to be the holy-water clerk, and in
that consideration had that infamous badge first taken away from him.
The other (which was Brewster) left off his at the commandment of the
comptroller of the earl of Oxford's house; who hiring the poor man to
labour in the earl's household business, would not suffer him,
working there, to wear that counterfeit cognizance any longer:  so
that (as I said) necessity of living seemeth to compel both of them
at the first to break that injunction; and therefore, if charity had
borne as great sway in the hearts of the pope's clergy as did
cruelty, this trifle would not have been so heinously taken, as to be
brought against them for an article and cause of condemnation to
death. But where tyranny once taketh place, as well all godly love,
as also all human reason and duties, are quite forgotten. Well, to be
short, what for the causes before recited, as also for that they had
once already abjured, and yet (as they term it) fell again into
relapse, they were both (as you have heard) in the end burned
together in Smithfield; although the same parties (as the Register
recordeth) did again before their death fearfully forsake their
former revived constancy, and submitting themselves unto the
discipline of the Romish Church, craved absolution from their
excommunication. Howbeit, because many of the Register's notes and
records in such cases may rightly be doubted of, and so called into
question, I refer the certain knowledge hereof unto the Lord, (who is
the trier of all truths,) and the external judgment unto the godly
and discreet reader; not forgetting yet by the way, (if that the
report should be true,) upon so just an occasion, to charge that
catholic clergy and their wicked laws, with a more shameless tyranny
and uncharitable cruelty than before. For if they nothing stay their
bloody malice towards such as so willingly submit themselves unto
their mercies, what favour may the faithful and constant professors
of Christ look for at their hands? I might here also ask of them, how
they follow the pitiful and loving admonition (or rather precept) of
our Saviour Christ, (whose true and only church they so stoutly brag
to be,) who in the 17th chapter of St. Luke saith, Though thy brother
sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn
to thee, saying, It repenteth me, thou shalt forgive him. But what go
I about to allure them unto the following of the rule and counsel of
him, unto whose word and gospel they seem most open and utter
enemies? Wherefore, not purposing to stay any longer thereupon, but
leaving them unto the righteous revengement of the Lord; let us now
hereunto adjoin the story of one John Browne, a good martyr of the
Lord, burnt at Ashford, about this fourth year of King Henry the
Eighth, whose story hereunder followeth.

     The occasion of the first trouble of this John Browne was by a
priest, sitting in a Gravesend barge. John Browne being the same time
in the barge, came and sat hard by him; whereupon after certain
communication, the priest asked him, "Dost thou know," said he, "who
I am; thou sittest too near me, thou sittest on my clothes?" "No,
sir," said he, "I know not what you are." "I tell thee I am a
priest." "What, sir, are ye a parson, or vicar, or a lady's
chaplain?" "No," quoth he again, "I am a soul priest, I sing for a
soul," saith he. "Do you so, sir," quoth the other, "that is well
done. I pray you, sir," quoth he, "where find you the soul when you
go to mass?" "I cannot tell thee," said the priest. "I pray you where
do you leave it, sir, when the mass is done?" " I cannot tell thee,"
said the priest. "Neither can you tell where you find it when you go
to mass, nor where you leave it when the mass is done, how can you
then have the soul," said he. "Go thy ways," said the priest, "thou
art a heretic, and I will be even with thee." So at the landing, the
priest taking with him Walter More and William More, two gentlemen,
brethren, rode straightways to the Archbishop Warham, whereupon the
said John Browne within three days after, his wife being churched the
same day, and he bringing in a mess of pottage to the board to his
guests, was sent for, and his feet bound under his own horse, and so
brought up to Canterbury, neither his wife nor he, nor any of his,
knowing whither he went, nor whither he should. And there continuing
from Low-Sunday till the Friday before Whitsunday, his wife not,
knowing all this while where he was; he was set in the stocks over
night, and on the morrow went to death, and was burned at Ashford,
A.D. 1517. The same night as he was in the stocks at Ashford, where
he and his wife dwelt, his wife then hearing of him, came and sat by
him all the night before he should be burned; to whom he declaring
the whole story how he was handled, showed and told, how that he
could not set his feet to the ground, for they were burned to the
bones, and told her how by the two bishops, Warham;and Fisher, his
feet were heated upon the hot coals, and burnt to the bones, "to make
me," said he, "to deny my Lord, which I will never do; for if I
should deny my Lord in this world, he would hereafter deny me. I pray
thee," said he, "therefore, good Elizabeth, continue as thou hast
begun, and bring up thy children virtuously and in the fear of God: "
and so the next day, on Whitsunday even, this godly martyr was
burned. Standing at the stake, this prayer he made, holding up his
hands,

"O Lord, I yield me to thy grace,
Grant me mercy for my trespass,
Let never the fiend my soul chase.
Lord, I will bow, and thou shalt beat,
Let never my soul come in hell heat.
Into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou hast redeemed
me, O Lord of truth." And so he ended.

     At the fire, one Chilton, the baily arrant, bade cast in
Browne's children also; for they would spring, said he, of his ashes.

     This blessed martyr John Browne had borne a faggot seven years
before in the days of King Henry the Seventh.



141. RICHARD HUN

     As it is the property of Satan ever to malice the prosperous
estate of the saints of God, and true professors of Christ; so
ceaseth he not continually to stir up his wicked members to the
effectual accomplishing of that which his envious nature so greedily
desireth; if not always openly by colour of tyrannical laws, yet, at
the leastwise, by some subtle practice of secret murder; which thing
doth most plainly appear not only in a great number of the blessed
martyrs of Christ's church, mentioned in this book, but also, and
especially, in the discourse of this lamentable history that now I
have in hand, concerning the secret and cruel murdering of Richard
Hun, whose story here consequently ensueth, excerped and collected
partly out of the registers of London, partly out of a bill exhibited
and denounced in the parliament house.

     There was in the year of our Lord 1514, one Richard Hun,
merchant tailor, dwelling within the city of London, and freeman of
the same, who was esteemed during his life, and worthily reputed and
taken, not only for a man of true dealing and good substance, but
also for a good catholic man. This Richard Hun had a child at nurse
in Middlesex in the parish of St. Mary Matsilon, which died; by the
occasion whereof, one Thomas Drifield, clerk, being parson of the
said parish, sued the said Richard Hun in the spiritual court for a
bearing sheet, which the said Thomas Drifield claimed, unjustly, to
have of the said Hun, for a mortuary for Stephen Hun, son of the said
Richard Hun; which Stephen, being at nurse in the said parish, died
being of the age of five weeks, and not above. Hun answered him
again, that forasmuch as the child had no property in the sheet, he
therefore neither would pay it, nor the other ought to have it.
Whereupon the priest, moved with a covetous desire, and loth to lose
his pretended right, cited him to appear in the spiritual court,
there to answer the matter. Whereupon the said Richard Hunne, being
troubled in the spiritual court, was forced to seek counsel of the
learned in the law of this land, and pursued a writ of præmunire
against the said Thomas Drifield, and other, his aiders, counsellors,
proctors,and adherents, as by the process thereof is yet to be seen;
which when the rest of the priestly order heard of, greatly
disdaining that any layman should so boldly enterprise such a matter
against any of them; and fearing also that if they should now suffer
this priest to be condemned at the suit of Hun, there would be
thereby ever after a liberty opened unto all others of the laity to
do the like with the rest of the clergy in such-like cases; they
straightways, both to stop this matter, and also to be revenged of
him, for that he had already done, sought all means they possibly
could how to entrap and bring him within the danger of their own
cruel laws; and thereupon making secret and diligent inquisition, and
seeking all corners they could against him, at length they found a
means how to accuse him of heresy, unto Richard Fitzjames, then
bishop of London, and so did; who (desirous to satisfy the revenging
and bloody affection of his chaplains) caused him thereupon to be
apprehended and committed unto prison within the Lollard's Tower at
Paul's, so that none of his friends might be suffered to come to him.
This Richard Hun being clapped in the Lollard's Tower, shortly after,
at the earnest instigation of one Doctor Horsey the bishop's
chancellor, (a man more ready to prefer the clergy's cruel tyranny
than the truth of Christ's gospel,) was brought before the bishop at
his manor of Fulham, the second day of December, in the year before-
mentioned; where within his chapel he examined him upon these
articles following, collected against him by the said Horsey and his
accomplices.

     "First, That he had read, taught, preached, published, and
obstinately defended, against the laws of Almighty God; that tithes,
or paying of tithes, was never ordained to he due, saving only by the
covetousness of priests.

     "2. Item, That he had read, taught, preached, published, and
obstinately defended; that bishops and priests be the scribes and
Pharisees that did crucify Christ, and damned him to death.

     "3. Item, That he had read, taught, preached, &c., that bishops
and priests be teachers and preachers, but no doers, neither
fulfillers of the law of God; but catching, ravening, and all things
taking, and nothing ministering, neither giving.

     "4. Item, Where and when one Joan Baker was detected and
abjured of many great heresies, (as it appeareth by her abjuration,)
the said Richard Hun, said, published, taught, preached, and
obstinately took upon him, saying, that he would defend her and her
opinions, if it cost him five hundred marks.

     "5. Item, Afterwards (where and when the said Joan taker, after
her abjuration, was enjoined open penance according to her demerits)
the said Richard Hun said, published, taught, and obstinately did
defend her, saying, The bishop of London and his officers have done
open wrong to the said Joan Baker, in punishing her for heresy; for
her sayings and opinions be according to the laws of God; wherefore
the bishop and his officers are more worthy to be punished for heresy
than she is.

     "6. Item, That the said Richard Him hath in his keeping divers
English books, prohibited and damned by the law; as the Apocalypse in
English, Epistles and Gospels in English, Wickliff's damnable works,
and other books, containing infinite errors, in the which he hath
been long time accustomed to read, teach, and study daily."

     Particular answer unto these several objections, in the
Register, I find none, saving that next under them, there is written
in his name with a contrary hand these words following:  "As touching
these articles, I have not spoken them as they be here laid:  howbeit,
unadvisedly I have spoken words somewhat sounding to the same; for
the which I am sorry, and ask God mercy, and submit me unto my lord's
charitable and favourable correction." Which they affirm to be
written with Hun's own hand:  but how likely to truth that is, let the
discreet wisdom of the reader indifferently judge by the whole sequel
of this process. And further, if it were his own act, what occasion
then had they so cruelly to murder him as they did? seeing he had
already so willingly confessed his fault, and submitted himself unto
the charitable and favourable correction of the bishop, (for the
which even by their own law, in cases of most heinous heresy, he
ought to be again received and pardoned,) except perhaps they will
account horrible murder to be but the bishop's favourable correction.
Again, it seemeth they had very few credible witnesses to prove
certainly that this was his answer and hand-writing; for the
Register, or some other for him (appointed to record the same) hath
certified it, as of hearsay from others, and not of his own proper
sight and knowledge, as the words noted in the margin of the book,
adjoining to the aforesaid answer, plainly do declare, which are
these, Hoc fuit scriptum manu propria Richardi Hunne, ut dicitur. Now
if he had had any sure ground to stablish this certificate, I doubt
not but he would (instead of ut dicitur) have registered the names of
the assistants at the time of his examination, (which he confesseth
to be many,) as generally they do in all their acts, especially in
cases of heresy, as they term it. But how scrupulous those good
fellows that spared not so shamelessly to murder him, would be to
make a lie of him that was already dead, let (as I said) the
indifferent judgment of the godly wise discern.

     This examination ended, the bishop sent him back again the same
day,unto the Lollard's Tower; and then by the appointment of Doctor
Horsey, his chancellor, he was colourably committed from the custody
of Charles Joseph, the sumner, unto John Spalding, the bell-ringer, a
man by whose simpleness in wit (though otherwise wicked) the subtle
chancellor thought to bring his devilish pretended homicide the
easier to pass; which most cruelly he did by his ministers suborned,
within two nights then next following accomplish; as is plainly
proved hereafter by the diligent inquiry and final verdict of the
coroner of London, and his inquest, made by order of the laws in that
behalf limited. But when this usual practice of the papists was once
accomplished, there wanted then no secret shifts nor worldly wiles
for the crafty colouring of this mischief; and therefore, the next
morning after they had in the night committed this murder, John
Spalding (I doubt not but by the counsel of his master chancellor)
got himself out of the way, into the city, and leaving the keys of
the prison with one of his fellows, willed him to deliver them unto
the sumner's boy, which accustomably did use to carry Hun his meat,
and other necessaries that he needed; thinking that the boy, first
finding the prisoner dead, and hanged in such sort as they left him,
they might (by his relation) be thought free from any suspicion of
this matter. Which thing happened in the beginning almost as they
wished. For the boy, the same morning (being the fourth day of
December) having the keys delivered him, accompanied with two other
of the bishop's sumners, went about ten of the clock into the prison,
to serve the prisoner, as he was wont to do; and when they came up,
they found him hanged with his face towards the wall. Whereupon they
(astonished at this sight) gave knowledge thereof immediately unto
the chancellor, being then in the church, and watching, I suppose, of
purpose, for such news; who forthwith got unto him certain of his
colleagues, and went with them into the prison, to see that which his
own wicked conscience knew full well before, as was afterwards
plainly proved, although then he made a fair face to the contrary,
blazing abroad among the people, by their officers and servants, that 
Hun had desperately hanged himself. Howbeit, the people having good
experience as well of the honest life and godly conversation of the
man, as also of the devilish malice of his adversaries the priests,
judged rather that by their procurement he was secretly murdered.
Whereof arose great contention; for the bishop of London on the 'one
side, taking his clergy's part, affirmed stoutly that Hun had hanged
himself. The citizens again on the other side, vehemently suspecting
some secret murder, caused the coroner of London (according to law)
to choose an inquest, and to take good view of the dead body, and so
to try out the truth of the matter. Whereby the bishop and his
chaplains were then driven to the extremity of shifts; and therefore 
minding by some subtle show of justice, to stop the mouths of the
people, they determined that in the mean while, as the inquest was
occupied about their charge, the bishop should, for his part, proceed
ex officio, in case of heresy, against the dead person; supposing
(most like) that if the party were once condemned of heresy, the
inquest durst not then but find him guilty of his own death, and so
clearly acquit them from all the former suspicion of privy murder.
This determination of theirs they did immediately put in practice, in
order as followeth.
Illustration:  Richard Hun Found Hanged in the Lollard's Tower

     First, besides the articles before mentioned, (which they
affirm were objected against him in his lifetime,) Doctor Hed did now
also after his death, collect certain others out of the prologue of
his English Bible, remaining then in the bishop's hands; which he
diligently perused, not to learn any good thing therein, but to get
thereout such matter, as he thought might best serve their cursed
purpose, as appeareth by the tenor of the articles, which are these: 

     "1. First, The said book damneth all holy canons, calling them
ceremonies and statutes of sinful men and uncunning; and calleth the
pope Sathanas and antichrist.

     "2. Item, It damneth the pope's pardons, saying, they be but
leasings.

     "3. Item, The said book of Hun saith, that kings and lords,
called Christian in name, and heathen in conditions, defile the
sanctuary of God, bringing clerks full of covetousness, heresy, and
malice, to stop God's law that it cannot be known, kept, and freely
preached.

     "4. Item, The said book saith, that lords and prelates pursue
full cruelly them that would teach truly and freely the law of God;
and cherish them that preach sinful men's traditions and statutes, by
the which he meaneth the holy canons of Christ's church.

     "5. Item, That poor men and idiots have the truth of the Holy
Scriptures, more than a thousand prelates and religious men, and
clerks of the school.

     "6. Item, That Christian kings and lords set idols in God's
house, and excite the people to idolatry.

     "7. Item, That princes, lords, and prelates, so doing, be worse
than Herod that pursued Christ, and worse than Jews and heathen men
that crucified Christ.

     "8. Item, That every man swearing by our Lady, or any other
saint or creature, giveth more honour to the saints, than to the holy
Trinity; and so he saith they be idolaters.

     "9. Item, He saith, that saints ought not to be honoured.

     "10. Item, He damneth adoration, prayer, kneeling, and offering
to images, which he calleth stocks and stones.

     "11. Item, He saith, that the very body of the Lord is not
contained in the sacrament of the altar, but that men, receiving it,
shall thereby keep in mind, that Christ's flesh was wounded and
crucified for us.

     "12. Item, He damneth the university of Oxford, with all
degrees and faculties in it, as art civil, canon, and divinity,
saying, that they let the true way to come to the knowledge of the
laws of God and Holy Scripture.

     "13. Item, He defendeth the translation of the Bible and Holy
Scripture into the English tongue, which is prohibited by the laws of
our mother holy church."

     These articles thus collected, as also the others before
specified, they caused for a more show of their pretended justice and
innocence, to be openly read the next Sunday following by the
preacher at Paul's Cross, with this protestation made before.

     "Masters and friends, for certain causes and considerations, I
have in commandment to rehearse, show, and publish here unto you, the
articles of heresy, upon which Richard Hun was detected and examined;
and also other great articles and damnable points and opinions of
heresy contained in some of his books, be come to light and
knowledge, here ready to be showed."

     And therewith he read the articles openly unto the people,
concluding with these words: 

     "And, masters, if there be any man desirous to see the
specialty of these articles, or doubt whether they be contained in
this book or not, for satisfying of his mind, let him come to my lord
of London, and he shall see it with good will. Moreover, here I
counsel and admonish, that if there be any persons, that of their
simpleness have been familiar and acquainted with the said Richard
Hun in these articles, or have heard him read upon this book, or any
other sounding to heresy, or have any like books themselves, let them
come unto my lord of London betwixt this and Candlemas next, and
acknowledge their fault, and they shall be charitably treated and
dealt withal, so that both their goods and honesty shall be saved;
and if they will not come of their own offer, but abide the process
of the law, then at their own peril be it, if the rigour of the law
be executed against them."

     After which open publication and admonition, the bishop at
sundry times examined divers of his priests, and other lay persons,
upon the contents of both these articles. Among which examinates,
there was a man servant and a maid of the said Hun's, who, although
they had of long time dwelt with him, were not able to charge him
with any great thing worthy reprehension; no, not in such points as
the bishop chiefly objected against him. But yet the priests (through
whose procurement this mischief was first begun) spared no whit
stoutly and maliciously to accuse him, some in the contents of the
first articles, and some in the second. Wherefore, having now (as
they thought) sufficient matter against him, they purposed speedily
to proceed to his condemnation. And because they would seem to do all
things formally, and by prescript order, they first drew out certain
short and summary rules, by the which the bishop should be directed
in this solemn session; which are these: 

     "First, Let the bishop sit in his tribunal seat, in our Lady's
chapel.

     "Secondly, Let him recite the cause of his coming, and take
notaries to him, to enact that shall be there done.

     "Thirdly, Let him declare, how, upon Sunday last, at Paul's
Cross, he caused to be published a general monition, or denunciation,
that all abettors and maintainers of Richard Hun, should come in, as
by this day, and submit themselves; and let him signify withal, how
certain have come in, and have appeared already.

     "Fourthly, Let him protest and say, that if there remain any
yet behind which have not appeared according to the former monition
and denunciation; yet if they will come, and appear, and submit
themselves, they shall be heard and received with grace and favour.

     "Fifthly, Let the bishop, or some other at his appointment,
recite the articles objected against Richard Hun; in the time of his
life; and then the other articles likewise, which were out of his
great book of the Bible extracted.

     "Sixthly, Let the answers and confessions of the said Richard
Hun summarily be recited, with the attestations made to the same
articles. Also let his books be exhibited, and then Thomas Brook his
servant be called for.

     "Seventhly, Let it be openly cried at the choir door, that if
there be any which will defend the articles, opinions, books, or the
memory of the said Richard Hun, let them come and appear, and they
shall be heard, as the law in that behalf shall require.

     "Eighthly, Let it be openly cried, as in manner before, for
such as be receivers, favourers, defenders, or believers of the said
Richard Hun, that all such do appear and submit themselves to the
bishop, or else he intendeth to proceed to the excommunication of
them in general, according to the exigence of the law in that behalf.

     "Ninthly, Then the bishop speaking to the standers by, and to
them which sat with him upon the bench, of the clergy, demanding of
them, what their judgment and opinion is touching the premises, and
whether they think it convenient and agreeable for him to proceed to
the sentence against the said Richard Hun, in this part to be
awarded.

     "Tenthly, After their consent and counsel given, let the bishop
read out the sentence.

     "Finally, After the sentence read, let the bishop appoint the
publication and denunciation of the aforesaid sentence to be read at
Paul's Cross or elsewhere, as to him shall seem expedient, with a
citation likewise generally against all them that be receivers,
favourers, and believers of the said Hun, to give to understand why
he ought not further to proceed against them," &c.

     Now according to the tenor of these prescripts and rules, the
bishop of London, accompanied with the bishops of Durham and Lincoln,
sat in judgment the 16th day of December, then next following, within
the place by the same appointed; adjoining also unto them as
witnesses of their proceedings, six public notaries, his own
register, and about twenty-five doctors, abbots, priors, and priests
of name, with a great rabble of their common anointed catholics.
Where, after a solemn proclamation made, that if there were any that
would defend the opinions and books of Richard Hun, they should
presently appear and be heard according to law, he commanded all the
articles and objections against Hun openly to be read before the
assembly; and then, perceiving that none durst appear in his defence,
by the advice of his assistants, he pronounced the sentence
definitive against the dead carcass, condemning it of heresy, and
therewith committed the same unto the secular power, to be by them
burned accordingly. Which ridiculous decree was as fondly
accomplished in Smithfield the 20th day of the same month of
December, (being full sixteen days after they had thus horribly
murdered him,) to the great grief and disdain of all the people.

     Notwithstanding, after all this tragical and cruel handling of
the dead body, with their fair and colourable show of justice, yet
the inquest no whit stayed their diligent searching out of the true
cause and means of his death. Insomuch that when they had been divers
times called both before the king's privy council, (his Majesty
himself being sometime present,) and also before the chief judges and
justices of this realm, and that the matter being by them thoroughly
examined, and perceived to be much bolstered and borne withal by the
clergy, was again wholly remitted unto their determination and
ending; they found by good proof and sufficient evidence, that Doctor
Horsey, the chancellor, Charles Joseph, the sumner, and John
Spalding, the bell-ringer, had privily and maliciously committed this
murder, and therefore indicted them all three as wilful murderers.
Howbeit, through the earnest suit of the bishop of London unto
Cardinal Wolsey, (as appeareth by his letters hereafter mentioned,)
means was found, that at the next sessions of gaol delivery, the
king's attorney pronounced the indictment against Doctor Horsey to be
false and untrue; and him not to be guilty of the murder. Who being
then thereby delivered in body, having yet in himself a guilty
conscience, gat him unto Exeter, and durst never after for shame come
again unto London. But now, that the truth of all this matter may
seem more manifest and plain unto all men's eyes, here shall follow
word by word the whole inquiry and verdict of the inquest, exhibited
by them unto the coroner of London, so given up and signed with his
own hand.

The verdict of the inquest.

     "The fifth and the sixth day of December, in the sixth yeere of
the reigne of our soueraigne lord King Henry the Eighth, William
Barnewell crowner of London, the day and yeere abouesaid, within the
ward of Castelbainard of London assembled a quest, whose names
afterward doe appeare, and hath sworne them truely to enquire of the
death of one Richard Hun, which lately was found dead in the Lollards
Tower within Pauls church of London:  whereupon all we of the inquest
together went vp into the said Tower, where we found the body of the
said Hun hanging vpon a staple of iron in a girdle of silke, with
faire countenance, his head faire kemmed, and his bonet right sitting
vpon his head, with his eyne and mouth faire closed, without any
staring, gaping, or frowning, also without any driueling or spurging
in any place of his body:  whereupon by one assent all we agreed to
take downe the dead body of the said Hun, and as soon as we began to
heaue the body, it was loose; whereby, by good aduisement we
perceiued that the girdle had no knot about the staple, but it was
double cast, and the linkes of an iron chaine which did hang on the
same staple, were laid vpon the same girdle whereby hee did hang: 
also the knot of the girdle that went about his necke, stood vnder
his left eare, which caused his head to leane towards his right
shoulder. Notwithstanding there came out of his nostrels two small 
streames of blood, to the quantity of foure drops. Saue onely these
foure drops of blood, the face, lips, chinne, doublet, coller, and
shirt of the said Hun, was cleane from any blood. Also we find that
the skinne both of his necke and throte beneath the girdle of silke,
was fret and faled away, with that thing which the murtherers had
broken his necke withall. Also the hands of the said Hun were wrung
in the wrists; whereby we perceiued that his hands had bin bound.

     Moreouer, we find that within the said prison was no meane
whereby a man might hang himselfe, but onely a stoole, which stoole
stood vpon a bolster of a bed, so tickle, that any man or beast might
not touch it so little, but it was ready to fall. Wherby we perceiued
that it was not possible that Hun might hang himselfe, the stoole so
standing. Also all the girdle from the staple to his necke, as well
as the part which went about his neck, was too little for his head to
come out thereat. Also it was not possible that the soft silken
girdle should breake his necke or skin beneath the girdle. Also we
find in a corner somewhat beyond the place where he did hang, a great
parcell of blood. Also we find vpon the left side of Hunnes iacket
from the brest downeward, two great streames of blood. Also within
the flap of the left side of his iacket, we find a great cluster of
blood, and the iacket folden downe thereupon; which thing the said
Hun could neuer fold nor doe after he was hanged. Whereby it
appeareth plainely to vs all, that the necke of Hun was broken, and
the great plenty of blood was shed before he was hanged. Wherefore
all we find by God and all our consciences; that Richard Hunne was
murthered. Also we acquit the said Richard Hun of his own death.

     "Also there was an end of a wax candle, which as Iohn Belringer
saith, hee left in the prison burning with Hunne that same Sunday at
night that Hun was murthered; which waxe candle we found sticking
vpon the stockes faire put out, about seuen or eight foote from the
place where Hunne was hanged; which candle after our opinion was
neuer put out by him, for many likelihoods which we haue perceiued.
Also at the going vp of master chancellor into the Lollard's Tower,
we haue good proofe that there lay on the stockes a gowne either of
murrey or crimosin in graine furred with shankes; whose gowne it was
wee could neuer proue, neither who bare it away. All we find, that
Master William Horsey, chancellour to my lord of London, hath had at
his commandement both the rule and guiding of the said prisoner.
Moreouer, all wee find that the said Master Horsey, chancellor, hath
put Charles Ioseph out of his office, as the said Charles hath
confessed, because he would not deale and vse the said prisoner so
cruelly, and do to him as the chancellor would haue had him to doe.
Notwithstanding, the deliuerance of the keyes to the chancellour by
Charles on the Saturday at night before Hunnes death, and Charles
riding out of the towne on that Sunday in the morning ensuing, was
but a conuention made betwixt Charles and the chancellour for to
colour the murther. For the same Sunday that Charles rode forth, he
came againe to the towne at night, and killed Richard Hunne, as in
the depositions of Iulian Littell, Thomas Chicheley, Thomas Simonds,
and Peter Turner doth appeare.

     "After colouring of the murther betwixt Charles and the
chancellour conspired, the chancellour called to him one Iohn
Spalding, belringer of Pauls, and deliuered to the same belringer the
keyes of the Lollards Tower, giving to the said belringer a great
charge, saying:  I charge thee to keepe Hun more straitely then hee
hath beene kept, and let him have but one meale a day. Moreouer I
charge thee, let no body come to him without any licence, neither to
bring him shirt, cappe, kirchiefe, or any other thing, but that I see
it before it come to him. Also before Hunne was carried to Fulham,
the chancellor commanded to bee put vpon Huns necke a great coller of
iron with a great chaine, which is too heauie for any man or beast to
weare, and long to endure.

     "Moreouer, it is wel proued, that before Huns death, the said
chancellor came vp into the said Lollard's Tower, and kneeled downe
before Hun, holding vp his hands to him, praying him of forgiuenes of
all that he had done to him, and must doe to him. And on Sunday
following the chancellor commanded the penitensarie of Pauls to goe
vp to him and say a gospel, and make for him holy water and holy
bread, and giue it to him; which so did; and also the chancellor
commanded that Hunne should haue his dinner. And the same dinner time
Charles boy was shut in prison with Hun, which was neuer so before: 
and after dinner when the belringer let out the boy, the belringer
said to the same boy; Come no more hither with meat for him, vntill
to morrow at noone; for my master chancellor hath commanded that he
should haue but one meale a day:  and the same night following Richard
Hun was murthered:  which murther could not haue beene done without
consent and licence of the chancellor, and also by the witting and
knowledge of Iohn Spalding belringer:  for there could no man come
into the prison, but by the keies being in Iohn belringers keeping.
Also as by my lord of Londons booke doth appeare, Iohn belringer is a
poore innocent man. Wherefore all wee doe perceiue that this murther
could not bee done, but by the commandement of the chancellor, and by
the witting and knowing of John belringer.

     "Charles Ioseph within the Tower of London of his own free will
and vnconstrained said, that master chancellor deuised and wrote with
his own hand, all such heresies as were laid to Huns charge, record
Iohn God, Iohn True, Iohn Pasmere, Richard Gibson, with many other.
Also Charles Ioseph saith, that when Richard Hun was slaine, Iohn
belringer bare vp the staire into Lollards Tower a waxe candle,
hauing the keies of the dores hanging on his arme, and I Charles went
next to him, and master chancellor came vp last:  and when all we came
vp, wee found Hun lying on his bed, and then master chancellor said;
Lay hands on the theefe, and so all wee murthered him:  and then I
Charles put the girdle about Huns necke, and then Iohn belringer and
I Charles did heaue vp Hun, and master chancellor pulled the girdle
ouer the staple, and so Hunne was hanged."

The copy of Richard Fitzjames's letter, then bishop of London, sent
to Cardinal Wolsey.

     "I beseech your good lordship to stand so good lord vnto my
poor chancellor now in warde, and indighted by an vntrue quest, for
the death of Richard Hun, vpon the onely accusation of Charles
Ioseph, made by paine and durance; that by your intercession, it may
please the kings grace to haue the matter duely and sufficiently
examined by indifferent persons of his discreet councell, in the
presence of the parties, ere there be any more done in the cause, and
that vpon the innocencie of my said chancellor declared, it may
further please the kings grace to award a plackard vnto his atturney
to confesse the said enditement to be vntrue, when the time shall
require it:  for assured am I, if my chancellor be tried by any twelue
men in London, they be so malitiouslie set In fauorem hereticæ
prauitatis, that they will cast and condemne any clerke, though he
were as innocent as Abel. Quare si potes beate pater adjuva
infirmitates nostras, tibi in perpetuum deuincti erimus. Ouer this in
most humble wise I beseech you, that I may have the kings gracious
fauour, whom I neuer offended willingly, and that by your good meanes
I might speake with his grace and you, and I with all mine, shall
pray for your prosperous estate long to continue.

     Your most humble Oratour R. L."

     Lastly, now remaineth to infer the sentence of the questmen,
which followeth in like sort to be seen and expended, after I have
first declared the words of the bishop spoken in the parliament
house.

The words that the bishop of London spake before the lords in the
parliament house.

     "Memorandum, That the bishop of London said in the parliament
house, that there was a bill brought to the parliament, to make the
jury that was charged upon the death of Hun, true men; and said, and
took upon his conscience, that they were false, perjured caitiffs;
and said furthermore to all the lords, there then being; For the love
of God look upon this matter; for if you do not, I dare not keep mine
house for heretics:  and said, that the said Richard Hun hanged 
himself, and that it was his own deed, and no man's else. And
furthermore said, that there came a man to his house, whose wife was
appeached of heresy, to speak with him, and he said that he had no
mind to speak with the same man; which man spake and reported to the
servants of the same bishop, that if his wife would not hold still
her opinions, he would cut her throat with his own hands, with other
words."

The sentence of the inquest, subscribed by the coroner.

     The inquisition intended and taken at the city of London in the
parish of St. Gregory, in the ward of Bainard Castle, in London, the
sixth day of December, in the sixth year of the reign of King Henry
the Eighth, before Thomas Barnewell, coroner of our sovereign lord
the king, within the city of London, aforesaid, also before James
Yarford and John Mundey, sheriffs of the said city, upon the sight of
the body of Richard Hun, late of London, tailor, which was found
hanged in the Lollard's Tower; and by the oath and proof of lawful
men of the same ward, and of other three wards next adjoining, as it
ought to be, after the custom of the city aforesaid, to inquire how,
and in what manner wise, the said Richard Hun came unto his death;
and upon the oath of John Bernard, Thomas Stert, William Warren,
Henry Abraham, John Aborow, John Turner, Robert Allen, William
Marler, John Burton, James Page, Thomas Pickhill, William Burton,
Robert Bridgewater, Thomas Busted, Gilbert Howell, Richard Gibson,
Christopher Crafton, John God, Richard Holt, John Palmere, Edmund
Hudson, John Arunsell, Richard Cooper, John Tim:  the which said upon
their oaths, that where the said Richard Hun, by the commandment of
Richard, bishop of London, was imprisoned and brought to hold in a
prison of the said bishop's, called Lollard's Tower, lying in the
cathedral church of St. Paul, in London, in the parish of St.
Gregory, in the ward of Bainard Castle aforesaid, William Horsey of
London, clerk, otherwise called William Heresy, chancellor to
Richard, bishop of London, and one Charles Joseph, late of London,
sumner, and John Spalding of London, otherwise called John
Bellringer, feloniously, as felons to our lord the king, with force
and arms, against the peace of our sovereign lord the king, and
dignity of his crown, the fourth day of December, the sixth year of
the reign of our sovereign lord aforesaid, of their great malice, at
the parish of St. Gregory aforesaid, upon the said Richard Hun made a
fray, and the same Richard Hun feloniously strangled and smothered,
and also the neck they did break of the said Richard Hun, and there
feloniously slew him, and murdered him.

     After that the twenty-four had given up their verdict sealed
and signed with the coroner's seal, the cause was then brought into
the parliament house, where the truth was laid so plain before all
men's faces, and the fact so notorious, that immediately certain of
the bloody murderers were committed to prison, and should, no doubt,
have suffered that they deserved, had not the cardinal, by his
authority, practised for his catholic children, at the suit of the
bishop of London. Whereupon the chancellor, by the king's pardon and
secret shifting, rather than by God's pardon and his deserving,
escaped, and went, as is said, to Exeter, &c. Nevertheless, though
justice took no place, where favour did save, yet, because the
innocent cause of Hun should take no wrong, the parliament became
suitors unto the king's Majesty, that whereas the goods of the said
Hun were confiscated into the king's hands, that it would please his
Grace to make restitution of all the said goods unto the children of
the said Hun; upon which motion, the king, of his gracious
disposition, did not only give all the aforesaid goods unto the
aforesaid children, under his broad seal, yet to be seen, but also
did send out his warrants to those that were the cruel murderers,
commanding them, upon his high displeasure, to redeliver all the said
goods, and make restitution for the death of the said Richard Hun;
all which goods came to the sum of 1500 pounds sterling, besides his
plate and other jewels.

The tenor of the king's letter in the behalf of Richard Hun.

     "Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well:  Whereas by the
complaint to us made, as well as also in our high court of
parliament, on the behalf and part of Roger Whapplot of our city of
London, draper, and Margaret his wife, late the daughter of Richard
Hun:  And whereas you were indicted by our laws, of and for the death
of the said Richard Hun, the said murder cruelly committed by you,
like as by our records more at large plainly it doth appear, about
the fifth day of December, in the sixth year of our reign; the same
we abhor; nevertheless, we, of our especial grace, certain science,
and mere motion, pardoned you upon certain considerations us moving: 
for the intent that the goods of the said Richard Hun, the
administration of them were committed to the said Roger Whapplot, we
then supposed and intended your amendment, and restitution to be made
by you to the infants the children of the said Richard Hun, as well
foi his death, as for his goods, embezzled, wasted, and consumed by
your tyranny, and cruel act so committed, the same being of no little
value; and as hitherto ye have made no recompence, according to our
laws, as might stand with equity, justice, right, and good
conscience, and for this cause due satisfaction ought to be made by
our laws. Wherefore, we will and exhort, and otherwise charge and
command you, by the tenor of this our especial letters, that ye
satisfy and recompense the said Roger Whapplot, and the said Margaret
his wife, according to our laws in this cause, as it may stand with
right and good conscience, else otherwise at your further peril, so
that they shall have no cause to return unto us, for their further
remedy eftsoons in this behalf, as ye, in the same, tender to avoid
our high displeasure; otherwise, that ye, upon the sight hereof, to
set all excuses apart, and to repair unto our presence, at which your
hither coming you shall be further advertised of our mind.

     From our manor," &c.

Defence of Richard Hun against Sir Thomas More and Alen Cope.

     I doubt not but by these premises thou hast (Christian reader)
sufficiently to understand the whole discourse and story of Richard
Hun from top to toe. First, how he came in trouble for denying the
bearing sheet of this young infant departed; then how he was forced,
for succour of himself, to sue a præmunire; and thereupon what
conspiracy of the clergy was wrought against him, what snares were
laid, what fetches were practised, and articles devised, to snarl him
in the trap of heresy, and so to imprison him. Furthermore, being in
prison, how he was secretly murdered; after his murder, hanged; after
his hanging, condemned; after his condemnation, burned; and after his
burning, lastly, how his death was inquired by the coroner, and
cleared by acquittal of the inquest. Moreover, how the cause was
brought into the parliament, and by the parliament the king's precept
obtained for restitution of his goods. The debating of which tragical
and tumultuous story, with all the branches and particular evidences
of the same, taken out as well of the public acts, as of the bishop's
registers, and special records, remaining in the custody of Dunstan
Whapplot, the son of the daughter of the said Richard Hun, there to
be seen, I thought here to unwrap and discover, so much the more, for
three special purposes.

     First, as is requisite, for testimony and witness of the truth
falsely slandered, of innocence wrongfully condemned, and of the
party cruelly oppressed.

     The second cause moveth me, for Sir Thomas More's Dialogues,
wherein he dallieth out the matter, thinking to jest poor simple
truth out of countenance.

     The third cause which constraineth me, be the Dialogues of Alen
Cope; which two, the one in English, the other in Latin, railing and
barking against Richard Hun, do doublewise charge him, both to be a
heretic, and also a desperate homicide of himself. Which, as it is
false in the one, so it is to be found as untrue in the other, if
simple truth, which hath few friends, and many times cometh in crafty
handling, might freely come in indifferent hearing. Wherefore, as I
have hitherto described the order and manner of his handling, with
the circumstances thereof, in plain and naked narration of story,
simply laid out before all men's faces; so something here to intermit
in the defence, as well of his oppressed cause as also in discharge
of myself, I will now compendiously answer to both these aforesaid
adversaries, stopping, as it were, with one bush two gaps, and the
mouths also, if I can, of them both together. And first, against Sir
Thomas More, albeit in degree worshipful, in place superior, in wit
and learning singular, (if his judgment in Christ's matters had been
correspondent to the same,) otherwise being a man with many worthy
ornaments beautified, yet, being but a man, and one man, I lay and
object against the person of him, the persons and censures of twenty-
four questmen, the deposition of so many jurors, the judgment of the
coroner, the approbation of the parliament, and lastly, the king's
bill assigned for restitution of his goods, with his own broad seal
confirmed, &c. And thus much to the person and credit of Sir Thomas
More.

     Now as touching his reasons:  whereas he coming in with a flim-
flam of a horse-mill, or a mill-horse, (in his own terms I speak,)
thinketh it probation good enough, because he could not see him taken
by the sleeve which murdered Hun:  against these reasons unreasonable
of his, I allege all the evidences and demonstrations of the history
above prefixed to be considered, and of all indifferent men to he
poised.

     First, how he was found hanging, with his countenance fair,
with his beard and head fair combed, his bonnet set right upon his
head, with his eyes and his mouth fair closed, without any drivelling
or spurging. His body being taken down, was found loose, (which by
hanging could not be,) his neck broken, and the skin thereof, beneath
the throat where the girdle went, fret and faled away; his girdle
notwithstanding being of silk, and so double cast about the staple,
that the space of the girdle between the staple and his neck, with
the residue also which went about his neck, was not sufficient for
his head to come out at. His hands moreover wrung in his wrists, his
face, lips, chin, doublet, and shirt collar unstained with any blood: 
when notwithstanding, in a manner somewhat beyond the place where he
did hang, a great quantity of blood was found. Also, whereas the
staple whereon he hanged was so that he could not climb thereto
without some mean, there was a stool set up upon the bolster of a
bed, so tickle, that with the first touch in the world it was ready
to fall. And how was it possible that Hun might hang himself upon
that staple, the stool so standing? Besides the confession moreover
of Charles Joseph's own mouth to Julian Litten, of Robert Johnson,
John Spalding the bell-ringer, Peter Turner, and others. All which
testimonies and declarations being so clear and undeniable, may
suffice (I trust) any indifferent man to see where the truth of this
case doth stand:  unless Master More, being a gentleman of Utopia,
peradventure, after some strange guise of that country, useth to
carry his eyes not in his head but in his affection, not seeing but
where he liketh, nor believing but what he listeth.

     Finally, where Sir Thomas More, speaking of himself, so
concludeth, that he hearing in the matter, what well might be said,
yet could not find contrary, but Hun to be guilty of his own death;
so, in as many words to answer him again, I perusing and searching in
the story of Richard Hun, what may well be searched, cannot but
marvel with myself, either with what darkness the eyes of Master More
be closed, not to see what is so plain; or else with what conscience
he would dissemble, that which shame cannot deny. And thus by the way
to the Dialogues of Sir Thomas More.

     Thirdly, touching the Dialogues of Alen Cope, which had rather
the bishop's chancellor and officers to be accounted among thieves
and murderers, than Hun to be numbered among the martyrs; I have
herein not much to say, because himself saith but little; and if he
had said less, unless his ground were better, it had made as little
matter. But forasmuch as he saying not much, sendeth us to seek more
in More; so with like brevity again I may send him to William
Tindall, to shape him an answer. Yet, notwithstanding, lest Cope, in
saying something, should think Hun's innocent cause to lack some
friends, which will not or dare not adventure in defence of truth,
somewhat I will answer in this behalf.

     And first, touching this murder of Hun, not to be his own
wilful act, but the deed of others; besides the demonstrations above
premised to Sir Thomas More, now to Master Cope, if I had no other
evidences but only these two, I would require no more; that is, his
cap found so straight standing upon his head, and the stool so
tottering under his feet. For how is it, I will not say, like, but
how is it possible for a man to hang himself in a silken girdle
double cast about a staple, in such shortness, that neither the space
of the knot could well compass his head about, and yet having his cap
so straight set upon his head, as his was?

     Again, how is it possible, or can it be imagined, for him to
hang himself, climbing up by a stool which had no stay for him to
stand upon, but stood so tickle, that if he had touched the same
never so little, it must needs have fallen?

     But Cope, being something more provident in this matter,
seemeth to exceed not altogether so far as doth Master More. For he
understanding the case to be ambiguous and doubtful, so leave it in
suspense, neither determining that Hun did hang himself, and yet not
admitting that he died a martyr, no more than they which are quelled
by thieves and murderers in highway-sides. Well, be it so as Cope
doth argue, that they which die by the hands of felons and murderers
in thievish ways, be no martyrs; yet, notwithstanding, this his own
similitude, comparing the bishop's chancellor and officers to thieves
and murderers, doth grant at least that Hun died a true man, although
no martyr. Now if the cause be it, and not the pain, that maketh a
martyr, in pondering the cause why Hun was slain, we shall find it
not altogether like to the cause of them which perish by thieves and
robbers. For such commonly because of their goods, and for some
worldly gain to be sought by their death, are made away, and being
true men, may peradventure have the reward, although not the name, of
martyrs:  whereas this man's death, being wrought neither for money,
nor any such temporal lucre to redound to his oppressors, as it hath
another cause, so may it have another name, and deserve to be called
by the name of martyrdom. Like as Abel being slain by wicked Cain,
albeit he had no opinion of religion articulate against him, but of
spite only and of malice was made away, yet, notwithstanding, is
justly numbered among the martyrs; so what let to the contrary, but
that Hun also with him may be reckoned in the same society, seeing
the cause wherefore they both did suffer proceedeth together out of
one fountain? And what, moreover, if a man should call Naboth (who
for holding his right inheritance was slain) a martyr, what great
injury should he do either to the name or cause of the person, worthy
to be carped at? Against Thomas Becket, ye know, Master Cope, no
special article of faith was laid, wherefore he died. And why then do
you bestow upon him so devoutly the title of a martyr, for
withholding that from the king which by the law of God and of the
realm did belong unto him; and cannot suffer Hun to be titled for a
martyr, dying in his own right by the hands of spiritual thieves and
homicides, as you yourself do term them? But what do I strain my
travail any further, to prove Hun a martyr, when Cope's own
confession doth import no less, though I said nothing? For what if I
should take no more but his own very words, and say that he was known
to be a heretic, as Cope doth affirm; what could I say more, seeing
he died for their heresy, to prove him to die a martyr? For to die a
heretic with the papists, what is it else (to say truth) but to die
with God a martyr?
       But howsoever it pleaseth either Sir Thomas More to jest, or
Alen Cope to scold out the matter, and to style Richard Hun for a
known and desperate heretic; yet to all true, godly disposed men, Hun
may well be known to be a godly and virtuous person; no heretic, but
faithful and sound; save that only he seemed rather half a papist; at
least no full protestant, for that he resorted daily to mass, and
also had his beads in prison with him, after the catholic manner;
albeit he was somewhat inclined (as may appear) toward the gospel.
And if the name of a martyr be thought too good for him, yet I trust
Master Cope will stand so good master to him, to let him at least to
be a martyr's fellow. But what now if I go further with Master Cope,
and name Richard Hun not only for a martyr, but also commend him for
a double martyr? Certes, as I suppose, in so saying I should affirm
nothing less than truth, nor any thing more than truly may be said,
and justly proved. But to give and grant this contention unto the
adversary, which notwithstanding might be easily proved; let us see
now the proofs of Master Cope, how he argueth that Richard Hun is no
martyr; "because," saith he, "true men being killed in highways by
thieves and murderers, are not therefore to be counted martyrs," &c.
And was there nothing else in the cause of Hun, but as in true men
killed by thieves and murderers? They that are killed by thieves and
murderers, are killed for some prey, or money about them. And what
prey or profit was in the death of Hun, let us see, to redound to
them which oppressed him? If it were the mortuary or the bearing
cloth, that was a small thing, and not worthy his death. If it were
the præmunire, the danger thereof pertained to the priest, and not to
them. If they feared lest the example thereof once begun, should
afterward redound to the prejudice of the whole church, then was the
cause of his death not private, but public, tending to the whole
Church and clergy of Rome; and so is his death not altogether like to
the death of them, which for private respects are killed of thieves
and murderers.

     But he was a heretic, saith Cope. By the same reason that Cope
taketh him for a heretic, I take him the more to be accepted for a
martyr. For by that way which they call heresy, the living God is
served by no way better. And if he were a heretic, why then did they
not proceed against him as a heretic while he was alive? When they
had him at Fulham before them, if they had been sure to entrap him in
that snare, why did they not take their advantage, when they might
with least jeopardy? why did they not proceed and condemn him for a
heretic? why made they such haste to prevent his death before? why
did they not tarry the sentence of the law, having the law in their
own hands? But belike they perceived that he could not be proved a
heretic while he lived; and therefore thought it best to make him
away privily, and to stop the præmunire, and afterward to stop the
pursuit of his death, by making him a heretic; and therefore were
articles devised by the chancellor (as is proved by witness of
Charles Joseph and another, above) against him, and he condemned for
a heretic, and his favourers also, whosoever durst stir to take his
part, and so thereupon was committed to the secular power, and
burned. Wherein they did him double wrong; first, in that they burned
him for a heretic, having before submitted himself to their
favourable correction, as it appeareth yet in the bishop's registers
by his own hand, as it is there pretended; which was against their
own laws. Again, if he had not submitted himself at that time, yet
did they him wrong to burn him, before they knew and heard him speak
(as Tindall saith) whether he would recant or no. And yet admit that
he was condemned and burned for a heretic, yet to be killed and
burned of them for a heretic, that taketh not from him the name of a
martyr, but rather giveth him to be a double martyr. But Cope yet
proceeding in his hot choler against Richard Hun, after he hath made
him first no martyr, and then a heretic, thirdly, he now maketh him
also a murderer of himself, and saith, that no other man was any part
of his death, but only his own hands, and that either for indignation
and anger, or for desperation, or for some cause, he knoweth not
what. And in his Epilogue, to make it probable, he allegeth the
example of one, but nameless, who in Queen Mary's time in like sort
went about to hang himself, had he not been taken in the manner, and
rescued.

     Furthermore, as touching the chancellor, he argueth that there
was no cause why he should attempt any such violence against him,
both for his age, for his dignity, for his learning, and for the
greatness of his own peril, which might ensue thereof. Who if he had
maligned the man, and had been so disposed to work his destruction,
had means otherwise without danger to bring that about, having him
within his danger convict and fast tied for heresy. Whereunto I
answer, that to all this matter sufficient hath been answered by the
story itself of his death, above specified. Whereby the manner of his
death, by circumstances of his handling, and hanging, by his neck
broke, by his body loose, by his skin fretted, by his wrists wrung,
by his girdle in such shortness double cast about the staple, by his
cap right upon his head, by his hair combed, by his eyes closed, by
the cake of blood found in the floor, by his shirt collar, doublet,
jacket, and other outward parts of his garments without drop of blood
unspotted, by the stool so standing upon the bolster, by the
chancellor's murrey gown found the day after upon the stocks, the wax
candle fair put out; furthermore, by the verdict of the inquest, by
the attestation of the witnesses sworn, by the coroner's judgment, by
the assent of the parliament, by the king's letters assigned, and
broad seal for restitution of his goods; and finally, by the
confession of the parties themselves which murdered him, &c.:  and yet
thinketh Cope to make men such fools, having their five wits, to ween
yet that Hun did hang himself, after so many demonstrations and
evidences to the contrary, as in every part of this story may appear.
And though it were, as it was unlike, and hard for a man to believe,
that Doctor Horsey, a man of such age, dignity, and learning, would
so much forget himself, to attempt such a villany, yet so great is
the devil sometimes with man (where God permitteth) that he worketh
greater things than this, and more incredible. For who would have
thought it like that Cain would ever have killed Abel his own natural
brother? which was more than a bishop's chancellor to kill a citizen: 
yet so he did. And where Cope pretendeth the causes of anger and
desperation whereby Hun did hang himself; how is it like, or who did
ever hear, a man being in such extremity of desperation, to stand
first trimming himself, and combing his head, before he go to hang
himself? No less credit is also to be given to that which followeth
in the same Cope, where he saith, that Richard Hun being in prison,
was convicted of heresy. By the which word, convicted, if he mean
that Hun was proved a heretic, that is false; for that he, being at
Fulham, examined upon certain articles, both denied the articles to
be true, as they were objected; and also if they were true, yet he
submitted himself to their favourable correction, and therefore, not
standing obstinately in the same, could not be proved a heretic. And
if by this term, convicted, he mean that he was by sentence cast; so
was Hun never cast by any sentence for a heretic, so long as he
lived, but after his death, when be could nothing answer for himself.
And because this untruth should not go without his fellow, see how he
huddleth up one false narration in the neck of another; affirming,
moreover, that Hun was cast into prison before he entered his suit of
præmunire against the priest. Which is utterly false and untrue, both
disagreeing to other stories, and also refuted by the words of Sir
Thomas More, his own author, who reporteth that Hun, (in suing his
præmunire against the priest,) being set upon a glory of victory,
made his boast among his friends, that he trusted to have the matter
long spoken of, and to be called Hun's case. Whereby it appeareth,
that Hun was not then in prison, clapped up for heresy, but was
abroad seeking counsel among the lawyers, and boasting among his
friends, as writeth More, lib. iii. Dial.

     After this heap of untruths above passed, add yet further
another copy of Cope's false dealing; who, seeking all corners, and
every where, how to pick matter against my former history, chargeth
me with arrogancy, as though I took so highly upon me to undo and
derogate the king's acts and judgments in the acquittal of Doctor
Horsey. If it so pleased the king to acquit Doctor Horsey, by his
gracious pardon, I am not against it, neither do I deny but the king
so did; neither do I say, nor ever did, but the king of his
supereminent prerogative may so do:  and wherein then do I unrip or
loose the king's acts here done and concluded? But if the question be
this, whether Doctor Horsey, with his colleagues, did kill Richard
Hun or no, then do I say, that the pardon of the king doth not take
away the verity of the crime committed, but removeth away the penalty
of the law deserved; and so if the life of them was saved by way of
pardon, (as Master More himself seemeth not to deny,) then was it not
through their innocency claiming justice that they escaped, but
through petition standing in need of mercy. For what needeth pardon,
where justice absolveth? yea, who sueth pardon, but in so doing must
yield himself guilty? for pardon never cometh lightly either with God
or man, except the crime be first confessed. Wherefore, if they
escaped by justice, as Cope pretendeth, how then doth Master More
say, they were saved by pardon? and if they escaped by pardon, how
then doth Cope say, they were not guilty? And be it admitted, that
the sentence of the king's attorney in the king's name did absolve
them as unguilty, according as the king was then informed by the
cardinal and suit of friends; yet, afterward the king, being better
informed by the parliament, and the truth better known, detested and
abhorred their fact, and yet continued his pardon unto them, as by
the king's own acts and his broad seal appeareth, yet remaining in
records to be seen.

     And as touching my former histories set forth in Latin and in
English, which spake first of the foreman of the inquest, then of the
king's attorney, to be laboured with some gifts or money; as Cope
hath yet proved no untruth in my saying, so less can he find any
repugnance or disagreeing in the same. For he that speaketh of
bribing, first of one person, and then afterward of another, where
both might be bribed together, is not contrary (I think) to himself,
but rather doth comprehend that in the one book, which he before
leaveth out in the other, and yet no great repugnance either in the
one or in the other, seeing that which is said may be verified in
both, as it is no other like but in this matter it was. For, how is
it otherwise like or possible, but that there must needs be found
some privy packing in this matter, seeing after such evidence found
and brought in by the coroner's inquest and jury of twenty-four
chosen persons, after so many marks and tokens of the murder so clear
and demonstrable, and laid forth so plain to the eyes of all the
world, that no man could deny, or not see the same; yet, through the
handling of the aforesaid attorney, and of the foreman of the
inquest, the murderers were borne out, and confessed to be no
murderers? If such bolstering out of matters and partiality were then
such a rare case in the realm of England in the time of Cardinal
Wolsey, who then under the king and in the king's name did what he
list, then let it seem untrue in my former stories, that I have
written. And yet the words of my story which Cope carpeth at so much,
be not mine, but the words of Edward Hall, his own author. Wherefore,
if his disposition be so set, that he must needs be a censurer of
other men's writings, let him expostulate with Hall, and not with me.



142. LONDON MARTYRS, 1509-1518

     But I trouble the reader too much in this matter of Richard
Hun, being of itself so clear, that no indifferent judge can doubt
thereof. As for wranglers and quarrellers, they will never be
satisfied. Wherefore, to return again to the purpose of our story
intermitted; in the table above, containing the names of them which
about this time of Richard Hun were forced to deny and abjure their
professed opinions, mention was made of Elizabeth Stamford, John
Houshold, and other more, abjuring about the year of our Lord, 1517.
Whose vexation and weakness, although it be pitiful to behold, yet to
consider the confession of their doctrine in those ancient days, it
is not unprofitable. Wherein we have to see the same form of
knowledge and doctrine then taught and planted in the hearts of our
fore-elders, which is now publicly received, as well touching the
Lord's sacrament of his body, as also other specialties of sincerity.
And although they lacked then public authority to maintain the open
preaching and teaching of the gospel, which the Lord's merciful grace
hath given us now, yet in secret knowledge and understanding they
seemed then little or nothing inferior to these our times of public
reformation; as may appear by this confession of Elizabeth Stamford
hereunder written; which only may suffice for example to understand
what ripe knowledge of God's word was then abroad, although not in
churches publicly preached, for danger of the bishops, yet in secret
wise taught and received of divers.

     In number of whom was this Elizabeth Stamford, who being
brought and examined before Fitzjames, bishop of London, A.D. 1517,
confessed that she was taught by one Thomas Beele, sometime dwelling
at Henley, these words, eleven years before:  "That Christ feedeth and
fast nourisheth his church with his own precious body, that is, the
bread of life coming down from heaven; this is the worthy word that
is worthily received, and joined unto man for to be in one body with
him. Sooth it is that they be both one, they may not be parted:  this
is the wisely deeming of the holy sacrament Christ's own body:  this
is not received by chewing of teeth, but by bearing of ears, and
understanding with your soul, and wisely working thereafter.
Therefore saith St. Paul, I fear me amongst us, brethren, that many
of us be feeble and sick; therefore I counsel us brethren to rise and
watch, that the great day of doom come not suddenly upon us, as the
thief doth upon the merchant." Also the said Thomas taught and showed
her, that the sacrament of the altar was not the very body of Christ,
but very bread; and that the sacrament was the very body of Christ,
put upon the cross, after a divine or mystical manner. And moreover,
that the said Thomas Beele did many times and oft teach her this
aforesaid lesson, that she should confess her sins to God, and that
the pope's pardons and indulgences were nought worth, and profited
not; and that worshipping of images and pilgrimages are not to be
done.

John Stilman, martyr.

     It would ask a long tractation and tedious, to recite in order
the great multitude and number of good men and women, besides these
above rehearsed, which in those days recanted and abjured about the
beginning of King Henry's reign and before:  among whom yet,
notwithstanding, some there were whom the Lord reduced again, and
made strong in the profession of his truth, and constant unto death;
of which number one was John Stilman by name, who about the twenty-
fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord, 1518, was
apprehended and brought before Richard Fitzjames, then bishop of
London, at his manor of Fulham, and by him was there examined and
charged, that notwithstanding his former recantation, oath, and
abjuration made about eleven years then past, before Edmund, then
bishop of Salisbury, as well for speaking against the worshipping,
praying, and offering unto images, as also for denying the carnal and
corporal presence in the sacrament of Christ's memorial; yet, since
that time he had fallen into the same opinions again, and so into the
danger of relapse; and further, had highly commended and praised John
Wickliff, affirming that he was a saint in heaven, and that his book
called The Wicket was good and holy. Soon after his examination he
was sent from thence unto the Lollard's Tower at London, and the
twenty-second day of October then next ensuing, was brought openly
into the consistory at Paul's, and was there judicially examined by
Thomas Hed, the bishop's vicar-general, upon the contents of these
articles following: 

     "1. First I object unto you, that you have confessed before my
lord of London, and me, Doctor Hed his vicar-general, that about
twenty years past, one Stephen Moone, of the diocese of Winchester,
with whom you abode six or seven years after, did teach you to
believe that the going on pilgrimage and worshipping of images, as
the Lady of Walsingham and others, were not to be used. And also that
afterwards one Richard Smart, who was burned at Salisbury about
fourteen or fifteen years past, did read unto you Wickliff's Wicket,
and likewise instructed you to believe that the sacrament of the
altar was not the body of Christ:  all which things you have
erroneously believed.

     "2. Item, You have divers times read the said book called
Wickliffe's Wicket, and one other book of the ten commandments, which
the said Richard Smart did give you, and at the time of your first
apprehension, you did hide them in an old oak, and did not reveal
them unto the bishop of Salisbury, before whom you were abjured of
heresy about eleven years since; where you promised by oath upon the
evangelists, ever after to believe and hold as the Christian faith
taught and preached, and never to offend again in the said heresies,
or any other, upon pain of relapse. And further, you there promised
to perform all such penance as the said bishop of Salisbury did
enjoin you; who then enjoined you, upon the like pain, not to depart
his diocese, without his special licence.

     "3. Item, It is evident that you be relapsed, as well by your
own confession, as also by your deeds, in that about two years after
your abjuration you went into the said place where you had hidden
your books; and then taking them away with you, you departed the
aforesaid diocese, without the licence of the bishop, and brought
them with you to London, where now being attached and taken with them
upon great suspicion of heresy, you are brought unto the bishop of
London. By reason of which your demeanour, you have showed both your
impenitent and dissembled conversation both your errors, and also
your unfaithful abjuration, and disobedience unto the authority of
our mother holy church, in that you performed not the penance, in
which behalf you be voluntarily perjured and also relapsed, in that
you departed the same diocese without licence.

     "4. Item, You be not only (as before is said) impenitent,
disobedient, voluntarily perjured, and relapsed, by this your
aforesaid heretical demeanour, but also, since your last attachment
upon suspicion of heresy, you have maliciously spoken erroneous and
damnable words, affirming before my lord of London, your ordinary,
and me, judicially sitting at Fulham, that you were sorry that ever
you did abjure your said opinions, and had not suffered then manfully
for them:  for they were, and be, good and true; and therefore you
will now abide by them, to die for it. And furthermore, you have
spoken against our holy father the pope and his authority, damnably
saying, that he is antichrist, and not the true successor of Peter,
or Christ's vicar on earth:  and that his pardons and indulgences
which he granteth in the sacrament of penance, are naught, and that
you will none of them:  and likewise that the college of cardinals be
limbs of the said antichrist, and that all other inferior prelates
and priests are the synagogue of Satan. And moreover you said, that
the doctors of the church have subverted the truth of Holy Scripture,
expounding it after their own minds; and therefore their works be
naught, and they in hell; but that Wickliff is a saint in heaven, and
the book called his Wicket is good, for therein he showeth the truth.
Also you did wish that there were twenty thousand of your opinion
against us Scribes and Pharisees, to see what you would do for the
defence of your faith. All which heresies you did afterwards
erroneously affirm before the archbishop of Canterbury, and then
said, that you would abide by them to die for it, notwithstanding his
earnest persuasions to the contrary; and therefore for these premises
you be evidently relapsed, and ought to be committed unto the secular
power."

     After these articles thus propounded, and his constant
persevering in the truth perceived, Doctor Hed, vicar-general, the
twenty-fifth day of October, by his sentence definitive, did condemn
him a relapsed heretic, and so delivered him the same present day
unto the sheriffs of London, to be openly burned in Smithfield.

Thomas Man, martyr.

     Next to John Stilman above mentioned, followeth in this order
of blessed martyrs, the persecution and condemnation of Thomas Man;
who, the twenty-ninth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1518, was
burned in Smithfield. This Thomas Man had likewise been apprehended
for the profession of Christ's gospel about six years before, the
fourteenth day of August, A.D. 1511, and being at that time brought
before Doctor Smith, bishop of Lincoln, was by him examined upon
divers and sundry articles.

     The fifteenth day of February, Doctor Hed, the chancellor,
again judicially sitting in the consistory at Paul's, commanded
Thomas Man to be brought before him, and there causing the articles
objected against him by the bishop of Lincoln, with his order of
abjuration and penance, and also his own articles last propounded, to
be first read, he called forth a third witness to be sworn and
examined upon the same. But because he would seem to do all things by
order of justice, and nothing against law, he therefore appointed
unto the said Thomas Man certain doctors and advocates of the Arches,
as his counsellors to plead in his behalf. Which was even like as if
the lamb should be committed to the defence and protection of the
wolf, or the hare to the hound. For what good help could he look for
at their hands, which were both most wicked haters and abhorrers of
his Christian profession, and also stout upholders and maintainers of
that antichristian law, by the which he was for the same condemned?
And that full well appeared by the good advice and profitable counsel
which they gave him against his next examinations. For as well upon
the twentieth and also the twenty-third days of the same month of
February, in their several sessions, he, seeing his own negations to
their objections to take no place against their sworn witnesses, had
no other thing to allege for himself, but that through his twenty
weeks of hard imprisonment under the bishop of Lincoln, he was forced
to recant and abjure; which was a poor shift of counsel, God knoweth;
and yet Dr. Raynes, being one of his chief assigned advocates,
instead of advice, could by his subtle questioning then make him to
confess, that certain talk, whereof one of the witnesses had accused
him, was spoken about five years before past; which because it was
since his recantation, was rather an accusation of himself, than an
excusing; and therefore it is easy to judge with how favourable and
uprightful hearts they took upon them to be his advocates and
defenders. The chancellor likewise charged him upon the same twenty-
third day, that since his last imprisonment he had said unto Robert
Clunie the bishop's sumner, and his keeper, that as far forth as he
could see or perceive for his part in this his matter, the laws of
the church were grounded upon Pilate and Caiaphas. Which objection he
granting to be true, the chancellor did for that time dismiss the
court, until the first day of March next following. Upon which day,
minding to make quick despatch, he in few words asked Man, what
matter he had to allege for himself, why he should not then,
considering the premises, be pronounced a relapsed heretic, and
receive such punishment by the secular power, as to such was due by
order of law? But he having no other allegations than before which
might take place with them, was finally condemned as a heretic. And
notwithstanding that, as the register noteth, but how truly God only
knoweth, he did again forsake his former renewed profession of
Christ's gospel, and yielded himself unto the bishop of Rome,
requiring to be absolved from his curse of excommunication, and
contented to do such penance as they should enjoin him; he was yet,
the twenty-ninth day of March, delivered by Doctor Hed unto the
sheriff of London, to be then presently burned, with this
protestation made before, that he might not consent to the death of
any, and therefore he desired the sheriff that he would receive this
person as relapsed and condemned, and yet to punish him otherwise
than by rigorous rigor. The words to be marked in their sentence be
these:  We desire in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the
punishment and execution of due severity of thee, and against thee in
this part, may so be moderate, that there be no rigorous rigor, nor
yet no dissolute mansuetude, but to the health and wealth of thy
soul, &c. Wherein these catholic churchmen do well declare, according
to the words of Thomas Man before expressed, that the laws of their
church be grounded upon Pilate and Caiaphas; for like as Caiaphas
with his court of Pharisees cried against Christ unto Pilate, It is
not lawful for us to put any man to death; but if thou let him go,
thou art not Cæsar's friend:  even so they, first condemning the
saints of God to death, and then delivering them unto the secular
magistrate, to be thereupon executed, would yet cover their malignant
hearts with the cloak of hypocritical holiness and unwillingness to
shed blood. But God be thanked, which bringeth all things to light in
his due time, and uncovereth hypocrisy at last, that she may be seen
and known in her right colours.
Illustration:  Thomas Man Brought to Execution

     Thus Thomas Man, the manly martyr of Jesus Christ,being
condemned by the unjust sentence of Hed the chancellor, was delivered
to the sheriff of London, sitting on horseback, in Paternoster Row,
before the bishop's door, A.D. 1518, protesting to the said sheriff
that he had no power to put him to death; and therefore desired the
sheriff to take him as a relapse and condemned, to see him punished,
et tamen citra mortem, that is, without death, as the words stand in
the register. The sheriff, receiving neither articles to be read at
his burning, nor any indentures of that his delivery, immediately
carried him to Smithfield, and there the same day in the forenoon
caused him to be put into God's angel, according to the words of the
said Thomas Man before, saying, that if he were taken again of the
pilled knave priests, as he called them, he wist well he should go to
the holy angel, and then be an angel in heaven.

     In the deposition of one Thomas Risby, weaver, of Stratford
Langthorn, against the forenamed martyr, Thomas Man, it appeareth by
the registers, that he had been in divers places and countries in
England, and had instructed very many, as at Amersham, at London, at
Billericay, at Chelmsford, at Stratford Langthorn, at Uxbridge, at
Burnham, at Henley upon Thames, in Suffolk and Norfolk, at Newbury,
and divers places more; where he himself testifieth, that as he went
westward, he found a great company of well-disposed persons, being of
the same judgment, touching the sacrament of the Lord's supper, that
he was of, and especially at Newbury, where was, as he confessed, a
glorious and sweet society of faithful favourers, who had continued
the space of fifteen years together, till at last by a certain lewd
person, whom they trusted and made of their counsel, they were
betrayed, and then many of them, to the number of six or seven score,
were abjured, and three or four of them burnt. From thence he came
then, as he confessed, to the forest of Windsor, where he, hearing of
the brethren which were at Amersham, removed thither, where he found
a godly and a great company, which had continued in that doctrine and
teaching twenty-three years, which was from this present time seventy
years agone. And this congregation of Buckinghamshire men remained
till the time of John Longham, bishop of Lincoln, whereof we shall,
Christ willing, hear more anon. Against these faithful Christians of
Amersham, was great trouble and persecution in the time of William
Smith, bishop of Lincoln, about the year of our Lord 1507, at which
time divers and many were abjured, and it was called abjuratio magna,
the great abjuration, and they which were noted of that doctrine and
profession, were called by the name of "known men," or "just-fast
men," &c. In this congregation of the faithful brethren, were four
principal readers or instructers. Whereof one was Tilsworth, called
then Doctor Tilsworth, who was burnt at Amersham, mentioned in our
history before, by the name of William Tilseley, whom I suppose
rather to be called Tilseworth. Another was Thomas Chase, called
amongst them Doctor Chase, whom we declared before to be murdered and
hanged in the bishop of Lincoln's prison at Wooburn, called Little
Ease. The third was this Thomas Man, called also Doctor Man, burned,
as is here mentioned, in Smithfield, A.D. 1518, who, as by his own
confession, and no less also by his travail, appeareth, was God's
champion, and suffered much trouble by the priests for the cause and
law of God. He confesseth himself in the same register, that he had
turned seven hundred people to his religion and doctrine, for the
which he thanked God. He conveyed also five couples of men and women
from Amersham, Uxbridge, Burnham, and Henley upon Thames, where they
dwelt, unto Suffolk and Norfolk, that they might be brought, as he
then termed it, out of the devil's mouth. The fourth was Robert
Cosin, named likewise among them, Doctor Cosin.

Robert Cosin, martyr.
This Robert Cosin seemeth to be the same, which in the former part of
our history is before mentioned, being called by the name of Father
Robert, and was burnt in Buckingham. Of this Robert Cosin I find in
the registers of Lincoln, that he, with Thomas Man, had instructed 
and persuaded one Joan Norman, about Amersham, not to go on
pilgrimage, nor to worship any images of saints. Also when she had
vowed a piece of silver to a saint for the health of her child, they
dissuaded her from the same, and that she needed not to confess her
unto a priest, but to be sufficient to lift up her hands to heaven.
Moreover, they were charged by the bishop, for teaching the said
Joan, that she might as well drink upon the Sunday before mass, as
any other day, &c. And thus you see the doctrine of these good men,
for the which they were in those days abjured and condemned to death.

William Sweeting, alias Clerke, martyr.

     William Sweeting, otherwise named Clerke, first dwelt with the
Lady Percy at Darlington in the county of Northampton for a certain
space, and from thence went to Boxted in the county of Essex, where
he was the holy-water clerk the space of seven years; after that, he
was bailiff and farmer to Mistress Margery Wood the term of thirteen
years. From Boxsted he departed and came to the town of St. Osithe,
where he served the prior of St. Osithe's, named George Laund, the
space of sixteen years and more; where he had so turned the prior by
his persuasions, that the said prior of St. Osithe was afterward
compelled to abjure. This William Sweeting coming up to London with
the aforesaid prior, for suspicion of heresy was committed to the
Lollard's Tower, under the custody of Charles Joseph, and there,
being abjured in the church of St. Paul, was constrained to bear a
faggot at Paul's Cross, and at Colchester; and afterward, to wear a
faggot upon his coat all his life. Which he did two years together
upon his left sleeve, till at length the parson of Colchester
required him to help him in the service of the church, and so plucked
the badge from his sleeve, and there he remained two years, being the
holy-water clerk. From thence afterward he departed, and travelling
abroad, came to Rederiffe in the diocese of Winchester, where he was
holy-water clerk the space of a year; then went to Chelsith, where he
was their neatherd, and kept the town beasts. In the which town, upon
St. Ann's day in the morning, as he went forth with his beasts to the
field, the good man was apprehended and brought before the bishop,
and his chamber searched for books. This was A.D. 1511.

     The crimes whereupon he was examined were these: 

     "First, For having much conference with one William Man of
Boxsted, in a book which was called Matthew.

     "Item, That he had familiarity, and frequented much the company
of James Brewster, who had been before abjured.

     "Item, That when his wife would go on pilgrimage, he asked of
her, what good she should receive by her going on pilgrimage:  adding
moreover, that, as he supposed, it was to no purpose nor profit, but
rather it were better for her to keep at home, and to attend to her
business.

     "Item, That he had learned and received of William Man, that
the sacrament of the priests' altar was not the present very body,
but bread in substance, received in memorial of Christ.

     "Item, That he had propounded and affirmed the same doctrine to
James Brewster.

     "Item, Because he had reprehended his wife for worshipping the
images in the church, and for setting up candles before them."

     And thus have you all the causes and crimes laid against this
William Sweeting, wherefore he was condemned. Who then being asked
what cause he had, why he should not be judged for relapse, said, he
had nothing else, but only that he committed himself to the mercy of
Almighty God.

James Brewster, martyr.

     With William Sweeting also the same time was examined and
condemned James Brewster, of the parish of St. Nicholas in
Colchester. This James Brewster was a carpenter, dwelling ten years
in the town of Colchester, who being unlettered, could neither read
nor write, and was apprehended upon the day of St. James, in one
Walker's house in St. Clement's parish.

     About six years before, which was A.D. 1505, he had been
abjured by William Warham, archbishop of Canterbury, the see of
London being then vacant; and after other penance done at Colchester,
was enjoined to wear a faggot upon his upper garment during his life.
Which badge he did bear upon his left shoulder near the space of two
years, till the comptroller of the earl of Oxford plucked it away,
because he was labouring in the works of the earl.

     The crimes whereupon he was examined, and which he confessed,
were these:  "First, that he had been five times with William Sweeting
in the fields keeping beasts, hearing him read many good things out
of a certain book. At which reading also were present at one time,
Woodroffe or Woodbinde, a net-maker, with his wife; also a brother-
in-law of William Sweeting; and another time Thomas Good-red, who
heard likewise the said William Sweeting read.

     "Item, Because he used the company and conference of Henry
Hert, carpenter, of Westminster, and wrought with him in his science
at Westminster.

     "Item, For having a certain Iittle book of Scripture in
English, of an old writing almost worn for age, whose name is not
there expressed.

     "Item, Because he hearing upon a time one Master Bardfield of
Colchester thus say, that he that will not worship the Maozim in
heart and thought shall die in fight; he asked afterward of William
Man, what that word Maozim should mean; who told him that it
signified as much as the mass god, to wit, the sacrament of the
altar.

     "Item, That he had much conference with Henry Hert against
oblations and images, and that it was better bestowed money which was
given to the poor, than that that was offered in pilgrimage.

     "Item, For that he had communication and conference with Roger
Heliar, and one Walker, a thicker of St. Clement's, concerning divers
such matters of pilgrimage, offering to images, worshipping of
saints, and the sacrament of the altar.

     "Item, When Thomas Goodred, William Sweeting, and he, in the
fields keeping beasts, were talking together of the sacrament of the
Lord's body and like matters, this James Brewster should thus say: 
Now the Son of the living God help us. Unto whom William Sweeting
again should answer, Now Almighty God so do."

     And thus have you the causes likewise and crimes laid against
James Brewster, upon which he with William Sweeting was together
examined and condemned. Then being asked, as the Romish manner is,
whether he had any cause why he should not be adjudged for relapse,
he, trusting to find favour and grace in submitting himself, said,
that he submitted him to the mercy of Almighty God, and to the
favourable goodness of him his judge. And likewise did William
Sweeting submit himself; trusting belike that they should find some
favour and relief in this humble subjecting themselves unto their
goodness.

     But note here the unmerciful and unchristian dealing of these
catholic fathers, who upon their submission were contented to give
out a solemn commission, the tenor whereof was to release and pardon
them from the sentence of the excommunication, whereunto they had
incurred:  but immediately after upon the same, the bishop, all this
notwithstanding, pronounced upon them the sentence of death and
condemnation. Whereupon they were both delivered to the secular
power, and both together burnt in Smithfield at one fire, the 18th
day of October, A.D. 1511.

Christopher Shoomaker, martyr.

     To these blessed saints before past, we will also adjoin
Christopher Shoomaker; of whom this I find briefly in the register of
Sir John Longland; that the said Christopher Shoomaker, a parishioner
of Great Missenden, came to the house of John Stay, and after other
matters of talk, read to him out of a little book, the words which
Christ spake to his disciples. And thus coming to his house about
four times, at every time he read something out of the same book unto
him; teaching him not to be deceived in the priest's celebration at
mass, and declaring that it was not the same very present body of
Christ, as the priests did fantasy; but in substance bread, bearing
the remembrance of Christ.

     And taught him moreover, that pilgrimage, worshipping and
setting up candles to saints, were all unprofitable. And thus the
said John Say being taught by this Christopher, and also confirmed by
John Okenden and Robert Pope, was brought to the knowledge of the
same doctrine. Thus much briefly I find in that register concerning
Christopher Shoomaker, declaring further that he was burned at
Newbury about this time, which was A.D. 1518. And thus much out of
the registers of London.
Illustration:  The execution of Christopher Schoomaker



143. PERSECUTION IN LINCOLN

     In turning over the registers and records of Lincoln likewise,
and coming to the year of our Lord 1520, and 1521, I find, that as
the light of the gospel began more to appear, and the number of the
professors to grow, so the vehemency of persecution and stir of the
bishops began also to increase. Whereupon ensued great perturbation
and grievous affliction in divers and sundry quarters of this realm,
especially about Buckinghamshire, and Amersham, Uxbridge, Henley,
Newbury, in the diocese of London, in Essex, Colchester, Suffolk and
Norfolk, and other parts more. And this was before the name of Luther
was heard of in these countries among the people. Wherefore they are
much beguiled and misinformed, which condemn this kind of doctrine
now received of novelty, asking where was this church and religion
forty years ago, before Luther's time? To whom it may be answered,
that this religion and form of doctrine was planted by the apostles,
and taught by true bishops, afterward decayed, and now reformed
again; although it was not received nor admitted of the pope's clergy
before Luther's time, neither yet is, yet it was received of other,
in whose hearts it pleased the Lord secretly to work, and that of a
great number, which both professed and suffered for the same, as in
the former times of this history may appear. And if they think this
doctrine be so new, that it was not heard of before Luther's time,
how then came such great persecution before Luther's time here in
England? If these were of the same profession which they were of,
then was their cruelty unreasonable, so to persecute their own
catholic fraternity. And if they were otherwise, how then is this
doctrine of the gospel so new, or the professors thereof so late
start up, as they pretend them to be? But this cometh only of
ignorance, and for not knowing or considering well the times and
antiquities of the church which have been before us; which if they
did, they should see and say, that the Church of England hath not
lacked great multitudes, which tasted and followed the sweetness of
God's holy word almost in as ample manner, for the number of well-
disposed hearts, as now. Although public authority then lacked to
maintain the open preaching of the gospel, yet the secret multitude
of true professors was not much unequal; certes, the fervent zeal of
those Christian days seemed much superior to these our days and
times; as manifestly may appear by their sitting up all night in
reading and hearing, also by their expenses and charges in buying of
books in English; of whom some gave five marks, some more, some less,
for a book. Some gave a load of hay for a few chapters of St. James,
or of St. Paul, in English. In which rarity of books, and want of
teachers, this one thing I greatly marvel and muse at, to note in the
registers and to consider how the word of truth, notwithstanding, did
multiply so exceedingly, as it did amongst them. Wherein is to be
seen, no doubt, the marvellous working of God's mighty power. For so
I find and observe in considering the registers, how one neighbour
resorting and conferring with another, eftsoons, with a few words of
their first or second talk, did win and turn their minds to that
wherein they desired to persuade them, touching the truth of God's
word and his sacraments. To see their travails, their earnest
seeking, their burning zeal, their readings, their watchings, their
sweet assemblies, their love and concord, their godly living, their
faithful marrying with the faithful, may make us now in these our
days of free profession to blush for shame.

     Four principal points they stood in against the Church of Rome,
in pilgrimage, adoration of saints, in reading Scripture books in
English, and in the carnal presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament.

     After the great abjuration aforesaid, which was under William
Smith, bishop of Lincoln, they were noted and termed among themselves
by the name of "known men," or "just-fast men," as now they are
called by the name of Protestants.

     As they were simple, and yet not uncircumspect in their doings,
so the crafty serpent, being more wily than they, by fraudulent
subtlety did so circumvent them, that they caused the wife to detect
the husband, the husband the wife; the father the daughter, the
daughter the father; the brother to disclose the brother, and
neighbour the neighbour. Neither were there any assemblies nor
readings kept, but both the persons and also the books were known;
neither was any word so closely spoken, nor article mentioned, but it
was discovered. So subtlely and sleightly these catholic prelates did
use their inquisitions and examinations, that nothing was done or
said among these "known men," fifteen or twenty years before, so
covertly, but it was brought at length to their intelligence. Such
captious interrogatories, so many articles and suspicions they had,
such espials and privy scouts they sent abroad, such authority and
credit they had with the king, and in the king's name; such diligence
they showed in that behalf, so violently and impudently they abused
the book of the peaceable evangelists, wresting men's consciences
upon their oath, swearing them upon the same to detect themselves,
their fathers and mothers, and other of their kindred, with their
friends and neighbours, and that to death. All which things in the
further process of the table ensuing, (Christ willing,) which we have
collected out of some part of the registers of Lincoln, shall appear.

     For the better declaration whereof, first here is to be
premonished by the way, touching the see of Lincoln, that after
William Smith, succeeded John Longland. This William Smith, although
he was somewhat eager and sharp against the poor simple flock of
Christ's servants, under whom some were burned, many abjured, a great
number molested, as partly hath been before declared; yet was he
nothing so bloody and cruel as was the said Longland, who afterward
succeeded in that diocese. For so I find of him, that in the time of
the great abjuration and troublesome affliction of Buckinghamshire
men, wherein many were abjured, and certain burned; yet divers he
sent quietly home without punishment and penance, bidding them go
home, and live as good Christian men should do. And many who were
enjoined penance before, he did release. This Smith died about the
year of our Lord 1515, by whom was builded, as is aforesaid, the
college of Brazen-nose in Oxford.

     Not long after him followed John Longland, a fierce and cruel
vexes of the faithful poor servants of Christ; who, to renew again
the old sparkles of persecution, which were not yet utterly quenched,
first began with one or two of those which had been abjured, whom he
thought to be most notorious, causing them by force of their oath, to
detect and bewray, not only their own opinions touching points of
religion, but also to discover all others of their affinity, which
were either suspected or abjured before. And them likewise he put to
their oath, most violently constraining them to utter and confess
both themselves, and whom else soever they knew:  by reason whereof,
an incredible multitude of men, women, and maidens, were brought
forth to examination, and straitly handled. And such as were found in 
relapse, were burned.

     The rest were so burdened with superstitious and idolatrous
penance and injunctions, that either through grief of conscience they
shortly died, or else with shame they lived.

     Captious interrogatories ministered commonly by the bishop of
Lincoln, against these examinates here following.

     The interrogatories or articles which Longland, bishop of
Lincoln, used most commonly to minister to these examinates or "known
men," in number were nine, and are these as followeth: 

     "1. First, Whether they or any of them did know, that certain
of the parish of Amersham had been convented before William Smith,
late bishop of Lincoln, for heresy?

     "2. Item, Whether they knew that they, so convented before the
said bishop, did err in the sacrament of the altar, or in any other
sacrament of the church:  and if they did, in what sacraments, and in
which of them? Also whether they knew that the said parties so
convented did confess their errors, and receive penance for the same?

     "3. Item, Whether they, or any of them, were of the society of
those so convented for heresy:  and if they were, what fellowship they
had with them, and with whom?

     "4. Item, Whether they, or any of them, were ever conversant
with such a one (naming the person whom they knew suspected, as with
Thurstan Littlepage)? And if they were, what conversation they had
with him, how long, and when:  and whether they knew the said person
to have been suspected of heresy?

     "5. Item, Whether they, or any of them, were ever conversant
with him; or with him (naming some other person whom they suspected,
as Alexander Mastall)? and if they were, how, and how long? and
whether they knew the said person to be suspected of heresy?

     "6. Item, Whether they, or any of them, had been beforetime
detected of heresy, to the office of the aforesaid William, bishop of
Lincoln:  and if they were, by what person or persons they were
detected? or else, whether they only were called by the aforesaid
William, bishop, for heresy?

     "7. Item, Whether he or they be noted and holden for heretics;
or be reputed and defamed to be of the sect of those who were
convented for heresy? and whether he or they be named for a 'known
man' amongst them?

     "8. Item, Whether he or they have been ever at any readings of
such as have been so convented for heresy?

     "9. Item, Whether he or they were ever in any secret
communication or conventicle with them? whom or which of them he knew
to be named and reputed for a 'known man,' or holding against the
sacrament of the altar, or other sacraments and articles of faith?
and if they knew any such, to declare where and when, and what they
were, and who were present the same time."

     These articles and interrogatories thus declared, now followeth
to be shown a certain brief sum compendiously collected out of the
registers of John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, of the names first of
those who by oath were constrained against their wills to detect and
accuse others. Secondly, The persons that were accused. Thirdly, The
crimes to them objected.

     And first; forasmuch as the bishop perceived that Roger Bennet,
William Chedwell, Edmund Dormer, Thomas Harding, Robert Andrew, with
such others, were men especially noted to be of that side, therefore,
to work his purpose the better, he began with them; producing the
same as witnesses, to detect first Robert Bartlet of Amersham, and
Richard his brother; understanding that these aforenamed witnesses,
because they had been abjured before, durst now do no other, upon
pain of relapse, but needs confess whatsoever was put unto them. And
therefore, because Robert Bartlet and Richard his brother, being
called before the bishop, and sworn upon their oath, would confess
nothing against themselves; the bishop, to convict them by witnesses,
went first to William Chedwell, lying sore sick in his bed, causing
him upon the evangelists to swear, whether he knew the aforesaid
Robert and Richard Bartlet to be "known men." Which being done, the
bishop then called before him Robert Andrew, Roger Bennet, John Hill,
Edmund Dormer, John Milsent, Thomas Bernard, Thomas Littlepage, John
Dosset, (all Amersham men,) who, being abjured before, as is said,
durst no otherwise do but confess upon their oath that Robert and
Richard Bartlet were "known men." And yet the bishop, not contented
with this, caused also their two wives, to wit, Margaret the wife of
Robert Bartlet, and Isabel the wife of Richard Bartlet, to depose and
give witness against their own natural husbands. Albeit Isabel
Bartlet, being somewhat more temperate of her tongue, refused utterly
to confess any thing of her husband, and denied her husband's words
to be true; till at last, she, being convicted of perjury, was
constrained to utter the truth. And first, as touching those who,
being brought to abjuration, were put to their penance; long it were
to recite the names of all. Certain I thought to recite here in a
catalogue:  first reciting the persons; afterwards the rigorous
penance to them enjoined.

The names of those who were abjured in the diocese of Lincoln, A.D.
1521.
William Colins.
John Colins.
Joan Colins.
Robert Colins.
John Hacker.
John Brabant the father.
John Brabant his son.
John Brabant the younger son.
John Edmonds.
Edward Pope.
Henry Phip.
John Steventon.
Joan Steventon.
Robert Bartlet.
Thomas Clerke.
John Clerke.
Richard Bartlet.
William Phip.
John Phip.
Thomas Couper.
William Littlepage.
John Littlepage.
Joan Littlepage.
John Say.
John Frier.
Richard Vulford.
Thomas Tredway
William Gudgame.
Roger Heron.
Francis Funge.
Robert Pope.
Roger Dods.
John Harris.
Robert Bruges.
John Stampe.
Joan Stampe.
Richard White.
Benet Ward.
John Baker.
Agnes Wellis.
Marian Morden.
Isabel Morwin.
John Butler.
John Butler the younger.
Richard Carder.
Richard Bernard.
Joan Bernard.
John Grace.
John French.
John Edings.

The towns, villages, and countries where these aforesaid persons did
inhabit, are named chiefly to be these.

Amersham.
Chesham.
Hichenden.
Missenden the Great.
Missenden the Less.
East-hundred.
West-hundred.
Asthall.
Beaconsfield.
Denham.
Ginge.
Betterton.
Charney.
Stanlake.
Claufield.
Walton.
Marlow.
Dorney.
Iver.
Burton.
Uxbridge.
Woburn.
Henley.
Wycombe.
West-Wycombe.
Newbury.
Burford.
Witney.
Hungerford.
Upton.
Windsor.
London.
Coleman-street in London.
Cheapside in London.
Shoreditch by London.
St. Giles in London.
Essex.
Suffolk.
Norfolk.
Norwich.

     The books and opinions which these were charged withal, and for
which they were abjured, partly are before expressed, partly here
follow, in a brief summary to be seen.

A brief summary of their opinions

     The opinions of many of these persons were, That he or she
never believed in the sacrament of the altar, nor ever would; and
that it was not as men did take it.

     For that he was known of his neighbours to be a good fellow,
meaning, that he was a "known man."

     For saying, that he would give forty pence on condition that
such a one knew as much as he did know.

     Some, for saying that they of Amersham, who had been abjured
before by Bishop Smith, were good men, and perfect Christians, and
simple folk who could not answer for themselves, and therefore were
oppressed by power of the bishop.

     Some, for hiding others in their barns.

     Some, for reading the Scriptures, or treatises of Scripture, in
English:  some, for hearing the same read.

     Some, for defending, some for marrying with, them that had been
abjured.

     Some, for saying that matrimony was not a sacrament.

     Some, for saying that worshipping of images was mawmetry; some,
for calling images carpenters' chips; some, for calling them stocks
and stones; some, for calling them dead things.

     Some, for saying that money spent upon pilgrimage, served but
to maintain thieves and harlots. Some, for calling the image in the
rood-loft, "Block-almighty."

     Others, for saying that nothing graven with man's hand was to
be worshipped.

     Some, for calling them fools who came from Master John Shorne
in pilgrimage.

     Another, for calling his vicar a poll-shorn priest. Another,
for calling a certain blind chapel, being in ruin, an old fair milk-
house.

     Another, for saying that he threshed God Almighty out of the
straw.

     Another, for saying that alms should not be given before they
did sweat in a man's hand.

     Some, for saying that those who die, pass straight either to
heaven or hell.

     Isabel Bartlet was brought before the bishop and abjured, for
lamenting her husband, when the bishop's man came for him; and
saying, that he was an undone man, and she a dead woman.

     For saying, that Christ, departing from his disciples into
heaven, said that once he was in sinners' hands, and would come there
no more.

     Robert Rave, hearing a certain bell in an uplandish steeple,
said, "Lo, yonder is a fair bell, an it were to hang about any cow's
neck in this town;" and therefore, as for other such-like matters
more, he was brought coram nobis!

     Item, For receiving the sacrament at Easter, and doubting
whether it was the very body of Christ, and not confessing their
doubt to their ghostly father.

     Some, for saying that the pope had no authority to give pardon,
or to release man's soul from sin, and so from pain; and that it was
nothing but blinding of the people, and to get their money.

     The penance to these parties enjoined by this John Longland,
bishop of Lincoln, was almost uniform, and all after one condition;
save only that they were severally committed and divided into several
and divers monasteries, there to be kept and found of alms all their
life, except they were otherwise dispensed with by the bishop. As for
example, I have here adjoined the bishop's letter for one of the said
number, sent to the abbey of Ensham, there to be kept in perpetual
penance; by which one, an estimation may be taken of the rest, who
were bestowed likewise sundrily into sundry abbeys, as to Osney, to
Frideswide, to Abingdon, to Thame, to Bicester, to Dorchester, to
Netley, to Ashridge, and divers more. The copy of the bishop's
letter, sent to the abbot of Ensham, here followeth underwritten.

Copy of the bishop's letter to the abbot of Ensham.

     "My loving brother, I recommend me heartily unto you:  And
whereas I have, according to the law, put this bearer R. T. to
perpetual penance within your monastery of Ensham, there to live as a
penitent, and not otherwise; I pray you, and nevertheless according
unto the law command you, to receive him, and see ye order him there
according to his injunctions, which he will show you, if ye require
the same. As for his lodging, he will bring it with him; and for his
meat and drink, he may have such as you give of your alms. And if he
can so order himself by his labour within your house in your
business, whereby he may deserve his meat and drink; so may you order
him as ye see convenient to his deserts, so that he pass not the
precinct of your monastery. And thus fare you heartily well:  From my
place," &c.

     As touching the residue of the penance and punishment inflicted
on these men, they do little or nothing disagree, but had one order
in them all; the manner and form whereof in the said bishop's
register do proceed in condition as followeth: 

Penance enjoined under pain of relapse, by John Longland, bishop of
Lincoln, the 19th day of December, A.D. 1521.

     "In primis, That every one of them shall, upon a market-day,
such as shall be limited unto them, in the market-time, go thrice
about the market at Burford, and then to stand up upon the highest
greece of the cross there, a quarter of an hour, with a faggot of
wood every one of them upon his shoulder, and every one of them once
to bear a faggot of wood upon their shoulders, before their
procession upon a Sunday, which shall be limited unto them at
Burford, from the choir-door going out, to the choir-door going in;
and all the high mass time, to hold the same faggot upon their
shoulders, kneeling upon the greece before the high altar there; and
every of them to do likewise in their own parish church, upon such a
Sunday as shall be limited unto them:  and once to bear a faggot at a
general procession at Uxbridge, when they shall be assigned thereto;
and once to bear a faggot at the burning of a heretic, when they
shall be admonished thereto.

     "Also every one Of them to fast, bread and ale only, every
Friday during their life; and every even of Corpus Christi, every one
of them to fast bread and water during their life, unless sickness
unfeigned let the same.

     "Also, to be said by them every Sunday, and every Friday,
during their life, once our Ladypsalter; and if they forget it one
day, to say as much another day for the same.

     "Also neither they, nor any of them, shall hide their mark upon
their cheek, neither with hat, cap, hood, kerchief, napkin, or none
otherwise; nor shall suffer their beards to grow past fourteen days;
nor ever haunt again together with any suspected person or persons,
unless it be in the open market, fair, church, or common inn or
alehouse, where other people may see their conversation.

     "And all these injunctions they and every of them to fulfil
with their penance, and every part of the same, under pain of
relapse."

     And thus have you the names, with the causes and the penance,
of those who were at this present time abjured. By this word
"abjured" is meant, that they were constrained by their oath,
swearing upon the evangelists, and subscribing with their hand, and a
cross to the same, that they did utterly and voluntarily renounce,
detest, and forsake, and never should hold hereafter these or any
other like opinions, contrary to the determination of the holy mother
Church of Rome:  And further, that they should detect unto their
ordinary, whomsoever they should see or suspect hereafter to teach,
hold, or maintain the same.

The names of them that were condemned for relapse, and committed unto
the secular power.

     Among these aforenamed persons who thus submitted themselves,
and were put to penance, certain there were, who, because they had
been abjured before, as is above-mentioned, under Bishop Smith, were
now condemned for relapse, and had sentence read aginst them, and so
were committed to the secular arm to be burned:  whose names here
follow:  Thomas Bernard, James Morden, Robert Rave, and John
Scrivener, martyrs.

     Of these mention is made before, both touching their
abjuration, and also their martyrdom; unto whom we may adjoin, Joan
Norman, and Thomas Holmes.

     This Thomas Holmes, albeit he had disclosed and detected many
of his brethren, as in the table above is expressed; thinking thereby
to please the bishop, and to save himself, and was thought to be a
feed man of the bishop for the same:  yet, notwithstanding, in the
said bishop's register appeareth the sentence of relapse and
condemnation, written and drawn out against him; and most likely he
was also adjudged and executed with the others.

     As touching the burning of John Scrivener, here is to be noted,
that his children were compelled to set fire unto their father; in
like manner as Joan Clerke also, daughter of William Tylsworth, was
constrained to give fire to the burning of her own natural father, as
is above specified.

     The example of which cruelty, as it is contrary both to God and
nature, so it hath not been seen or heard of in the memory of the
heathen.

     Where moreover is to be noted, that at the burning of this John
Scrivener, one Thomas Dorman, mentioned before, was present, and bare
a faggot, at Amersham; whose abjuration was afterwards laid against
him, at what time he should depose for recovery of certain lands from
the school of Berkhamstead. This Thomas Dorman (as I am credibly
informed of certain about Amersham) was then uncle to this our
Dorman, and found him to school at Berkhamstead, under Master Reeve;
who now so uncharitably abuseth his pen in writing against the
contrary doctrine, and raileth so fiercely against the blood of
Christ's slain servants, miscalling them to be a dunghill of stinking
martyrs.

     Well, howsoever the savour of these good martyrs do scent in
the nose of Master Dorman, I doubt not but they give a better odour
and sweeter smell in the presence of the Lord:  Pretiosa enim in
conspectu Domini mars sanctorum ejus; Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his saints. And therefore, howsoever it shall
please Master Dorman with reproachful language to misterm the good
martyrs of Christ, or rather Christ in his martyrs; his unseemly
usage (more cart-like than clerk-like) is not greatly to be weighed.
For, as the danger of his blasphemy hurteth not them that are gone,
so the contumely and reproach thereof as well comprehendeth his own
kindred, friends, and country, as any others else; and especially
redoundeth to himself, and woundeth his own soul, and none else, unto
the great provoking of God's wrath against him, unless he be blessed
with better grace, by time to repent.



144. SCHOLARS AND POETS
Doctor John Colet, dean of St. Paul's.

     Much about this time, or not past two years before, died Dr.
John Colet, to whose sermons these "known men," about
Buckinghamshire, had a great mind to resort. After he came from Italy
and Paris, he first began to read the Epistles of St. Paul openly in
Oxford, instead of Scotus and Thomas. From thence he was called by
the king, and made dean of Paul's; where he accustomed much to
preach, not without a great auditory, as well of the king's court, as
of the citizens and others. His diet was frugal, his life upright; in
discipline he was severe, insomuch that his canons, because of their
straiter rule, complained that they were made like monks. The honest
and honourable state of matrimony he ever preferred before the
unchaste singleness of priests. At his dinner commonly was read
either some chapter of St. Paul, or of Solomon's Proverbs. He never
used to sup. And although the blindness of that time carried him away
after the common error of popery, yet in ripeness of judgment he
seemed something to incline from the vulgar trade of that age. The
religious order of monks and friars he fantasied not; as neither he
could greatly favour the barbarous divinity of the school-doctors, as
of Scotus, but least of all of Thomas Aquinas:  insomuch that when
Erasmus, speaking in the praise of Thomas Aquinas, did commend him,
that he had read many old authors, and had written many new works, as
Catena Aurea, and such like, to prove and to know his judgment: 
Colet, first supposing that Erasmus had spoken in jest, but after
supposing that he meant good faith, bursteth out in great vehemency,
saying, "What tell you me," quoth he, "of the commendation of that
man, who, except he had been of an arrogant and presumptuous spirit,
would not define and discuss all things so boldly and rashly; and
also, except he had been rather worldly-minded than heavenly, would
never have so polluted Christ's whole doctrine with man's profane
doctrine, in such sort as he hath done?"

     The bishop of London at that time was Fitzjames, of age no less
than eighty; who, (bearing long grudge and displeasure against
Colet,) with other two bishops taking his part, like to himself,
entered action of complaint against Colet to the archbishop of
Canterbury, being then William Warham. The matter of his complaint
was divided into three articles:  the first was for speaking against
worshipping of images. The second was about hospitality, for that he,
treating upon the place of the gospel, "Feed, feed, feed;" when he
had expounded the two first, for feeding with example of life, and
with doctrine; in the third, which the schoolmen do expound for
feeding with hospitality, he left out the outward feeding of the
belly, and applied it another way. The third crime wherewith they 
charged him, was for speaking against such as used to preach only by
bosom sermons, declaring nothing else to the people, but as they
bring in their prayers with them; which, because the bishop of London
used then much to do for his age, he took it as spoken against him,
and therefore bare him this displeasure. The archbishop, more wisely
weighing the matter, and being well acquainted with Colet, so took
his part against his accusers, that he at that time was rid out of
trouble.

     William Tyndall, in his book answering Master More, addeth
moreover, and testifieth, that the bishop of London would have made
the said Colet, dean of Paul's, a heretic, for translating the
Paternoster into English, had not the bishop of Canterbury holpen the 
dean.

     But yet the malice of Fitzjames the bishop so ceased not; who,
being thus repulsed by the archbishop, practised by another train how
to accuse him unto the king. The occasion thus fell. It happened the
same time, that the king was in preparation of war against France;
whereupon the bishop with his coadjutors, taking occasion upon
certain words of Colet, wherein he seemed to prefer peace before any
kind of war, were it never so just; accused him therefore in their
sermons, and also before the king.

     Furthermore it so befell at the same time, that upon Good
Friday Dr. Colet, preaching before the king, entreated of the victory
of Christ, exhorting all Christians to fight under the standard of
Christ, against the devil; adding, moreover, what a hard thing it was
to fight under Christ's banner, and that all they which upon private
hatred or ambition took weapon against their enemy, (one Christian to
slay another,) such did not fight under the banner of Christ, but
rather of Satan:  and therefore concluding his matter, he exhorted
that Christian men, in their wars, would follow Christ their prince
and captain, in fighting against their enemies, rather than the
examples of Julius or Alexander, &c. The king, hearing Colet thus
speak, and fearing lest by his words the hearts of his soldiers might
be withdrawn from his wars which he had then in hand, took him aside
and talked with him in secret conference, in his garden walking.
Bishop Fitzjames, Bricot, and Standish, who were his enemies, thought
now none other, but that Colet must needs be committed to the Tower;
and waited for his coming out. But the king, with great gentleness
entertaining Dr. Colet, and bidding him familiarly to put on his cap,
in long courteous talk had with him in the garden, much commended him
for his learning and integrity of life; agreeing with him in all
points, but that only he required him (for that the rude soldiers
should not rashly mistake that which he had said) more plainly to
explain his words and mind in that behalf; which after he did. And
so, after long communication and great promises, the king dismissed
Colet with these words, saying:  "Let every man have his doctor as him
liketh, this shall be my doctor;" and so departed. Whereby none of
his adversaries durst ever trouble him after that time.

     Among many other memorable acts left behind him, he erected the
worthy foundation of the school of Paul's, (I pray God the fruits of
the school may answer the foundation,) for the cherishing up of youth
in good letters, providing a sufficient stipend as well for the
master, as for the usher; whom he willed rather to be appointed out
of the number of married men, than of single priests with their
suspected chastity. The first moderator of this school was William
Lily, a man no less notable for his learning, than was Colet for his
foundation. This Colet died the year of our Lord 1519.

     Not long before the death of this Colet and Lily, lived William
Grocine and William Latimer, both Englishmen also, and famously
learned. This Grocine, as he began to read in his open lecture, in
the church of St. Paul, the book of Dionysius Areopagita, commonly
called Hierarchia Ecclesiastica, (for the reading of the Holy
Scriptures in Paul's was not in use,) in the first entry of his
preface cried out with great vehemency against them, whosoever they
were, who either denied or stood in doubt of the authority of that
book:  in the number of whom he noted Laurence Valla, and divers
others of the like approved judgment and learning. But afterwards the
same Grocine, when he had continued a few weeks in his reading
thereof, and did consider further in him, he utterly altered and
recanted his former sentence, protesting openly, that the afore-named
book, to his judgment, was never written by that author whom we read
in the Acts of the Apostles to be called Dionysius Areopagita.

     The tractation of these two couples above rehearsed, do
occasion me to adjoin also the remembrance of another couple of like
learned men:  the names of whom, not unworthy to be remembered, were
Thomas Linacre, and Richard Pace; which two followed much upon the
time of Colet and William Lily. But of Richard Pace, who was dean
next after the aforesaid John Colet, more convenient place shall
serve us hereafter to speak, coming to the story of Cardinal Wolsey.

Geoffrey Chaucer and John Gower

     Moreover, to these two I thought it not out of season, to
couple also some mention of Geoffrey Chaucer and John Gower; which,
although being much discrepant from these in course of years, yet may
seem not unworthy to be matched with these forenamed persons, in
commendation of their study and learning. Albeit concerning the full 
certainty of the time and death of these two, we cannot find; yet it
appeareth in the prologue of Gower's work, entitled Confessio
Amantis, that he finished it in the sixteenth year of King Richard
the Second. And in the end of the eighth book of his said treatise,
he declareth that he was both sick and old when he wrote it; whereby
it may appear that he lived not long after. Notwithstanding, by
certain verses of the said Master Gower, placed in the latter end of
Chaucer's works both in Latin and English, it may seem that he was
alive at the beginning of the reign of King Henry the Fourth, and
also by a book which he wrote to the same King Henry. By his
sepulture within the chapel of the church of St. Mary Overy's, which
was then a monastery, where he and his wife lie buried, it appeareth
by his chain and his garland of laurel, that he was both a knight,
and flourishing then in poetry; in the which place of his sepulture
were made in his grave-stone three books:  the first bearing the
title, Speculum Meditantis; the second, Vox Clamantis; the third,
Confessio Amantis. Besides these, divers chronicles and other works
more he compiled.

     Likewise, as touching the time of Chaucer, by his own words in
the end of his first book of Troilus and Cressida, it is manifest
that he and Gower were both of one time, although it seemeth that
Gower was a great deal his ancient; both notably learned, as the
barbarous rudeness of that time did give; both great friends
together, and both in like kind of study together occupied; so
endeavouring themselves, and employing their time, that they,
excelling many others in study and exercise of good letters, did pass
forth their lives here right worshipfully and godly, to the worthy
fame and commendation of their name. Chaucer's works be all printed
in one volume, and therefore known to all men.

     This I marvel, to see the idle life of the priests and
clergymen of that time, seeing these lay-persons showed themselves in
these kinds of liberal studies so industrious and fruitfully
occupied. But much more I marvel to consider this, how that the
bishops, condemning and abolishing all manner of English books and
treatises which might bring the people to any light of knowledge, did
yet authorize the works of Chaucer to remain still and to be
occupied; who, no doubt, saw into religion as much almost as even we
do now, and uttereth in his works no less, and seemeth to be a right
Wicklevian, or else there was never any. And that all his works
almost, if they be thoroughly advised, will testify (albeit it be
done in mirth, and covertly); and especially the latter end of his
third book of the Testament of Love, for there purely he toucheth the
highest matter, that is, the communion. Wherein, except a man be
altogether blind, he may espy him at the full:  although in the same
book, (as in all others he useth to do,) under shadows covertly, as
under a visor, he suborneth truth in such sort, as both privily she
may profit the godly-minded, and yet not be espied of the crafty
adversary. And therefore the bishops, belike, taking his works but
for jests and toys, in condemning other books, yet permitted his
books to be read.

     So it pleased God to blind then the eyes of them, for the more
commodity of his people, to the intent that through the reading of
his treatises, some fruit might redound thereof to his church; as no
doubt it did to many. As also I am partly informed, of certain who
knew the parties, who to them reported, that by reading of Chaucer's
works they were brought to the true knowledge of religion. And not
unlike to be true:  for, to omit other parts of his volume, whereof
some are more fabulous than other, what tale can be more plainly told
than the Tale of the Ploughman? or what finger can point out more
directly the pope with his prelates to be antichrist, than doth the
poor pelican reasoning against the greedy griffon? Under which
hypotyposis, or poesy, who is so blind that seeth not by the pelican,
the doctrine of Christ and of the Lollards to be defended against the
Church of Rome? or who is so impudent that can deny that to be true
which the pelican there affirmeth, in describing the presumptuous
pride of that pretended church? Again, what egg can be more like, or
fig, unto another, than the words, properties, and conditions of that
ravening griffon resembleth the true image, that is, the nature and
qualities, of that which we call the Church of Rome, in every point
and degree? And therefore no great marvel if that narration was
exempted out of the copies of Chaucer's works; which notwithstanding
now is restored again, and is extant for every man to read that is
disposed. This Geoffrey Chaucer, being born, as is thought, in
Oxfordshire, and dwelling in Woodstock, lieth buried in the church of
the minster of St. Peter at Westminster, in an aisle on the south
side of the said church, not far from the door leading to the
cloister; and upon his grave-stone first were written these two old
verses: 

Galfridus Chaucer Vates, et fama Poësis
Maternæ, hac sacra sum tumulatus humo.

     Afterwards, about A.D. 1556, one Master Brickham, bestowing
more cost upon his tomb, did add thereunto these verses following: 

Qui fuit Anglorum Vates ter maximus olim,
Galfridus Chaucer conditur hoc tumulo.
Annum si quæras Domini, si tempora mortis,
Ecce notæ subsunt, quæ tibi cuncta notent.
25 Octob. Anno 1400.



145. MARTIN LUTHER -- INTRODUCTION

Here beginneth the Reformation of the church of Christ, in the time
of Martin Luther.
 Although it cannot be sufficiently expressed with
tongue or pen of man, into what miserable ruin and desolation the
church of Christ was brought in those latter days; yet partly by the
reading of these stories afore past, some intelligence may be given
to them which have judgment to mark, or eyes to see, in what
blindness and darkness the world was drowned, during the space of
these four hundred years heretofore and more. By the viewing and
considering of which times and histories, thou mayest understand,
gentle reader, how the religion of Christ, which only consisteth in
spirit and verity, was wholly turned into outward observations,
ceremonies, and idolatry. So many saints we had, so many gods; so
many monasteries, so many pilgrimages; as many churches, as many
relics forged and feigned we had again, so many relics, so many lying
miracles we believed. Instead of the only living Lord, we worshipped
dead stocks and stones:  in place of Christ immortal, we adored mortal
bread:  instead of his blood, we worshipped the blood of ducks. How
the people were led, so that the priests were fed, no care was taken.
Instead of God's word, man's word was set up:  instead of Christ's
Testament, the pope's testament, that is, the canon law:  instead of
Paul, the Master of Sentences took place, and almost full possession.
The law of God was little read, the use and end thereof was less
known; and as the end of the law was unknown, so the difference
between the gospel and the law was not understood, the benefit of
Christ not considered, the effect of faith not expended:  through the
ignorance whereof it cannot be told what infinite errors, sects, and
religions crept into the church, overwhelming the world as with a
flood of ignorance and seduction. And no marvel; for where the
foundation is not well laid, what building can stand and prosper? The
foundation of all our Christianity is only this:  The promise of God
in the blood of Christ his Son, giving and promising life unto all
that believe in him:  giving (saith the Scripture) unto us, and not
bargaining or indenting with us:  and that freely (saith the
Scripture) for Christ's sake; and not conditionally for out merit's
sake.

     Furthermore, freely (saith the Scripture) by grace, that the
promise might be firm and sure; and not by the works that we do,
which always are doubtful. By grace (saith the Scripture) through
promise to all and upon all that believe; and not by the law, upon
them that do deserve. For if it come by deserving, then is it not of
grace:  if it be not of grace, then is it not of promise, and
contrariwise, if it be of grace and promise, then is it not of works,
saith St. Paul. Upon this foundation of God's free promise and grace
first builded the patriarchs, kings, and prophets:  upon this same
foundation also Christ the Lord builded his church:  upon the which
foundation the apostles likewise builded the church apostolical or
catholical.

     This apostolical and catholic foundation so long as the church
did retain, so long it continued sincere and sound:  which endured a
long season after the apostles' time. But after, in process of years, 
through wealth and negligence crept into the church, so soon as this
foundation began to be lost, came in new builders, which would build
upon a new foundation a new church more glorious, which we call now
the Church of Rome; who, being not contented with the old foundation,
and the Head-cornerstone, which the Lord by his word had laid, in
place thereof they laid the groundwork upon the condition and
strength of the law and works. Although it is not to be denied, but
that the doctrine of God's holy law, and of good works according to
the same, is a thing most necessary to be learned, and followed of
all men; yet is it not that foundation whereupon our salvation
consisteth:  neither is that foundation able to bear up the weight of
the kingdom of heaven, but is rather the thing which is builded upon
the foundation; which foundation is Jesus Christ, according as we are
taught of St. Paul, saying, "No man can lay any other foundation
beside that which is laid, Christ Jesus," &c.

     But this ancient foundation, with the old ancient church of
Christ, as I said, hath been now of long time forsaken; and instead
thereof, a new church with a new foundation hath been erected and
framed, not upon God's promise, and his free grace in Christ Jesus,
nor upon free justification by faith, but upon merits and deserts of
men's working. And hereof have they planted all these their new
devices, so infinite, that they cannot well be numbered; as masses-
trecenaries, dirges, obsequies, matins, and hours-singing-service,
vigils, midnight-rising, bare-foot-going, fish-tasting, Lent-fast,
ember-fast, stations, rogations, jubilees, advocation of saints,
praying to images, pilgrimage-walking, works of supererogation,
application of merits, orders, rules, sects of religion, vows of
chastity, wilful poverty, pardons, relations, indulgencies, penance,
and satisfaction, with auricular confession, founding of abbeys,
building of chapels, giving to churches:  and who is able to recite
all their laborious buildings, falsely framed upon a wrong ground;
and all for ignorance of the true foundation, which is the free
justification by faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God.

     Moreover to note, that as this new-found Church of Rome was
thus deformed in doctrine, so no less was it corrupted in order of
life and deep hypocrisy, doing all things only under pretences and
dissembled titles. So, under the pretence of Peter's chair, they
exercised a majesty above emperors and kings. Under the visor of
their vowed chastity, reigned adultery; under the yoke of professed
poverty, they possessed the goods of the temporalty; under the title
of being dead unto the world, they not only reigned in the world, but
also ruled the world; under the colour of the keys of heaven to hang
under their girdle, they brought all the states of the world under
their girdle, and crept not only into the purses of men, but also
into their consciences. They heard their confessions; they knew their
secrets; they dispensed as they were disposed, and loosed what them
listed. And finally, when they had brought the whole world under
their subjections, yet did their pride neither cease to ascend,
neither could their avarice be ever satisfied. And if the example of
Cardinal Wolsey and other cardinals and popes cannot satisfy thee, I
beseech thee, gentle reader! turn over the aforesaid book of "the
Ploughman's Tale" in Chaucer, above-mentioned, where thou shalt
understand much more of their demeanour than I have here described.

     In these so blind and miserable corrupt days of darkness and
ignorance, thou seest, good reader! I doubt not, how necessary it
was, and high time, that reformation of the church should come, which
now most happily and graciously began to work, through the merciful
and no less needful providence of Almighty God; who, although he
suffered his church to wander and start aside, through the seduction
of pride and prosperity a long time, yet at length it pleased his
goodness to respect his people, and to reduce his church into the
pristine foundation and frame again, from whence it was piteously
decayed. Whereof I have now consequently to treat; intending by the
grace of Christ to declare how, and by what means this reformation of
the church first began, and how it proceeded, increasing by little
and little unto this perfection which now we see, and more I trust
shall see.

     And herein we have first to behold the admirable work of God's
wisdom. For as the first decay and ruin of the church before began of
rude ignorance, and lack of knowledge in teachers; so, to restore the
church again by doctrine and learning, it pleased God to open to man
the art of printing, the time whereof was shortly after the burning
of Huss and Jerome. Printing being opened, incontinently ministered
unto the church the instruments and tools of learning and knowledge;
which were good books and authors which before lay hid and unknown.
The science of printing being found, immediately followed the grace
of God; which stirred up good wits aptly to conceive the light of
knowledge and of judgment:  by which light darkness began to be
espied, and ignorance to be detected; truth from error, religion from
superstition, to be discerned, as is above more largely discoursed,
where was touched the invention of printing.

     Furthermore, after these wits stirred up of God, other more,
increasing daily more and more in science, in tongues, and perfection
of knowledge; who now were able not only to discern in matters of
judgment, but also were so armed and furnished with the help of good
letters, that they did encounter also with the adversary, sustaining
the cause and defence of learning against barbarity; of verity
against error; of true religion against superstition. In number of
whom, against many other here unnamed, were Picus, and Franciscus
Mirandula, Laurentius Valla, Franciscus Petrarcha, Doctor de Wesalia,
Revelinus, Grocinus, Doctor Colet, Rhenamus, Erasmus, &c. And here
began the first push and assault to be given against the ignorant and
barbarous faction of the pope's pretended church; who, after that, by
their learned writings and laborious travail, they had opened a
window of light unto the world, and had made, as it were, a way more
ready for others to come after; immediately, according to God's
gracious appointment, followed Martin Luther, with other after him;
by whose ministry it pleased the Lord to work a more full reformation
of his church, as by their acts and proceedings hereafter shall
follow (Christ willing) more amply to be declared.

     And now coming to the time and story of Martin Luther, whom the
Lord did ordain and appoint to be the principal organ and minister
under him, to reform religion; to subvert the see of the pope; first,
before we enter into the tractation hereof, it shall not be
impertinent to the purpose, to infer such prophecies and forewarnings
as were sent before of God, by divers and sundry good men, long
before the time of Luther, which foretold and prophesied of this
reformation of the church to come.

Prophecies going before Martin Luther.

     And first to begin with the prophecy of John Huss and Jerome,
it is both notable, and also before mentioned, what the said John
Huss, at the time of his burning, prophesied unto his enemies,
saying:  That after "a hundred years come and gone, they should give
account to God and to him." Where is to be noted, that counting from
the year 1415, (in the which year John Huss was burned,) or from the
year 1416, (when Jerome did suffer,) unto the year 1516, (when Martin
Luther began first to write,) we shall find the number of a hundred
years expired.

     Likewise to this may be adjoined the prophetical vision or
dream, which chanced to the said John Huss, lying in the dungeon of
the Friars in Constance, a little before he was burned. His dream, as
he himself reporteth it in his epistles writing to Master John Clum,
and as I have also before recorded the same, so will I now repeat the
same again, in like effect of words as he wrote it himself in Latin,
the effect of which Latin is this: 

     "I pray you expound to me the dream which I had this night. I
saw that in my church at Bethlehem (whereof I was parson) they
desired and laboured to abolish all the images of Christ, and did
abolish them. I, the next day following, rose up, and saw many other
painters, who painted both the same, and many more images, and more
fair, which I was glad to behold. Whereupon the painters, with the
great multitude of the people, said, Now let the bishops and priests
come, and put us out these images if they can. Which thing done, much
people rejoiced in Bethlehem, and I with them. And rising up, I felt
myself to laugh."

     This dream Master John of Clum first expounded. Then he, in the
next epistle after, expounded it himself to this effect: 

     "The commandment of God standing, that we must observe no
dreams, yet, notwithstanding, I trust that the life of Christ was
painted in Bethlehem by me, through his word, in the hearts of men;
the which preaching they went about in Bethlehem to destroy, first,
in commanding that no preaching should be, neither in the church of
Bethlehem, nor in the chapels thereby:  secondly, that the church of
Bethlehem should be thrown down to the ground. The same life of
Christ shall be painted up again by more preachers much better than
I, and after a much more better sort, so that a great number of
people shall rejoice thereat; all such as love the life of Christ: 
and also I shall rejoice myself, at what time I shall awake, that is,
when I shall rise again from the dead."

     Also in his forty-eighth epistle he seemeth to have a like
prophetical meaning, where he saith; that he trusted that those
things, which he spake then within the house, should afterwards be
preached above on the house-top, &c.

     And because we are here in hand with the prophecies of John
Huss, it is not to be omitted what he writeth in a certain treatise,
De Sacerdotum et Monachorum carnalium abominatione, thus prophesying
of the reformation of the church.

     "The church," he saith, "cannot be reduced to his former
dignity, and reformed, before all things first be made new (the truth
whereof appeareth by the temple of Solomon); as well the clergy and
priests, as also the people and laity. Or else, except all such as
now be addicted to avarice, from the least to the most, be first
converted and renewed, as well the people as the clerks and priests,
things cannot be reformed. Albeit, as my mind now giveth me, I
believe rather the first, that is, that then shall rise a new people,
formed after the new man, which is created after God. Of the which
people, new clerks and priests shall come forth and be taken, who all
shall hate covetousness and glory of this life, labouring to a
heavenly conversation. Notwithstanding, all these things shall be
done and wrought in continuance and order of time, dispensed of God
for the same purpose. And this God doth, and will do, of his own
goodness and mercy, and for the riches of his patience and
sufferance, giving time and space of repentance to them that have
long lain in their sins, to amend and flee from the face of the
Lord's fury, until at length all shall suffer together, and until
both the carnal people, and priests, and clerks, in process and order
of time, shall fall away and be consumed, as is the cloth consumed
and eaten of the moth," &c.

     With this prophecy of John Huss above-mentioned, speaking of
the hundred years, accordeth also the testimony of Jerome, his fellow
martyr, in these words:  "And I cite you all to answer before the most
high and just Judge, after a hundred years."

     This Jerome was burnt, A.D. 1416; and Luther began to write,
A.D. 1516, which was just a hundred years, according to the right
account of Jerome's prophecy.

     Philip Melancthon, in his Apology, testifieth of one John
Hilton, a monk in Thuringia, who, for speaking against certain abuses
of the place and order where he lived, was cast into prison. At
length being weak and feeble through imprisonment, he sent for the
warden of the convent, desiring and beseeching him to have some
respect of his woeful state and pitiful case. The warden rebuking and
accusing him for what he had done and spoken; he answered again and
said, That he had spoken nothing which might be prejudicial or
hurtful to their monkery, or against their religion:  but there should
come one, (and assigned the year 1516,) who should utterly subvert
all monkery, and they should never be able to resist him, &c.

     Long it were to induce here all prophecies that be read in
histories:  certain I mind briefly to touch and pass over. And first
to omit the revelations of Briget, (whereunto I do not much
attribute,) who, prophesying of the destruction of Rome, Book iv.
cap. 17, saith: 

     "Rome shall be scoured and purged with three things -- with
sword, fire, and the plough. Resembling, moreover, the said Church of
Rome to a plant removed out of the old place into a new:  also to a
body condemned by a judge to have the skin flayed off; the blood to
be drawn from the flesh; the flesh to be cut out in pieces; and the
bones thereof to be broken; and all the marrow to be squeezed out
from the same; so that no part thereof remain whole and perfect," &c.

     But to these speculations of Briget I give no great respect, as
neither I do to the predictions of Katharine de Senis.

     And yet, notwithstanding, Antoninus, writing of the same
Katharine in his third part, reciteth her words thus (prophesying of
the reformation of the church) to Friar Reymund, her ghostly father: 

     "By these tribulations," saith she "God, after a secret manner
unknown to man, shall purge his holy church; and after those things
shall follow such a reformation of the holy church of God, and such a
renovation of the holy pastors, that only the cogitation and
remembrance thereof maketh my spirit to rejoice in the Lord. And, as
I have oftentimes told you heretofore, the spouse, which is now all
deformed and ragged, shall be adorned and decked with most rich and
precious ouches and brooches; and all the faithful shall be glad and
rejoiced to see themselves so beautified with so holy pastors. Yea,
and also the infidels, then allured by the sweet savour of Christ,
shall return to the catholic fold, and be converted to the true
Bishop and Shepherd of their souls. Give thanks therefore to God; for
after this storm he will give a great calm." &c.

     Of the authority of this prophetess I have not to affirm or
judge, but rather to hear what the catholic judges will say of this
their own saint and prophet. For if they do not credit her spirit of
prophecy, why then do they authorize her for a pure saint among the
sisters of dear St. Dominic? If they warrant her prophecy, let them
say then, When was this glorious reformation of the church ever true,
or like to be true, if it be not true now, in this marvellous
alteration of the church in these our latter days? or when was there
any such conversion of Christian people in all countries ever heard
of, since the apostles' time, as hath been since the preaching of
Martin Luther?

     Of Hieronimus Savonarola I wrote before, showing that he
prophesied, that one should pass over the Alps, like to Cyrus, who
should subvert and destroy all Italy:  which may well be applied to
God's word, and the gospel of Christ, spreading now abroad since
Luther's time.

     Theodoric, bishop of Croatia, lived near about the time when
Huss and Jerome were martyred; who, in the end of his prophetical
verses, which are extant in print, declareth,

     "That the see of Rome, which is so horribly polluted with
simony and avarice, shall fall, and no more oppress men with tyranny,
as it hath done, and that it shall be subverted by its own subjects;
and that the church and true piety shall flourish again more than
ever it did before."

     Noviomagus testifieth, that he, A.D. 1620, heard Ostendorpius,
a canon of Daventer, say, that when he was a young man, Doctor
Weselus, a Friesian, which was then an old man, told him, that he
should live to see this new school divinity of Scotus, Aquinas, and
Bonaventure, to be utterly forsaken and exploded of all true
Christians.

     In a book of Charles Boville, mention is made of a certain
vision which one Nicholas, a hermit of Helvetia, had; in which vision
he saw the pope's head crowned with three swords proceeding from his
face, and three swords coming towards it. This vision is also printed
in the books of Martin Luther, with his preface before it.

     Nicholas Medler, being of late superintendent of Brunswick,
affirmed and testified,

     "That he heard and knew a certain priest in his country, which
told the priests there, that they laid aside Paul under their desks
and pews; but the time would come, when Paul should come abroad, and
drive them under the desks and dark stalls, where they should not
appear," &c.

     Matthius Flaccius, in the end of his book entitled, De Testibus
Veritatis, speaketh of one Michael Stifelius: 

     This Michael, being an old man, told him, that he heard the
priests and monks say many times, by old prophecies, that a violent
reformation must needs come against them:  and also that the said
Michael heard Conrad Stifelius his father many times declare the
same:  who also, for the great hatred he bare against this filthy sect
of monks and priests, told to one Peter Pirer, a friend and neighbour
of his, that he should live and see the day; and therefore desired
him, that when the day came, besides those priests which he should
kill for himself, he would kill one priest more for his sake.

     This Stifelius thought, belike, that this reformation should be
wrought by outward violence, and force of sword; but he was therein
deceived; although the adversary useth all forcible means, and
violent tyranny, yet the proceeding of the gospel always beginneth
with peace and quietness.

     In the table of Amersham men I signified a little before, how
one Haggar of London, speaking of this reformation to come, declared,
that the priests should make battle, and have the upper hand a while,
but shortly they should be vanquished and overthrown for ever.

     In the time of Pope Alexander the Sixth, and about A.D. 1500,
as is before specified, the high angel which stood on the top of the
pope's church and castle of St. Angelo, was thrown down with a
terrible thunder into the river Tiber:  whereby might seem to be
declared the ruin and fall of the popedom.

     To this may be adjoined, which in certain chronicles, and in
John Bale, is recorded; which saith, that in the year of our Lord
1516, (which was the same year when Martin Luther began,) Pope Leo
the Tenth did create one and thirty cardinals:  in the which year and
day of their creation, there fell a tempest of thunder and lightning
in Rome, which so struck the church where the cardinals were made,
that it removed the little child Jesus out of the lap of his mother,
and the keys out of St. Peter's hand:  which thing many then did
interpret to signify and foreshow the subversion and alteration of
the see of Rome.

     Hitherto pertaineth also a strange portent and a prodigious
token from heaven, A.D. 1505, in the which year, under the reign of
Maximilian the emperor, there appeared in Germany, upon the vestures
of men, as well of priests as laymen; upon women's garments also, and
upon their rocks as they were spinning, divers prints and tokens of
the nails, of the sponge, of the spear, of the Lord's coat, and of
bloody crosses, &c.:  all which were seen upon their caps and gowns,
as is most certainly testified and recorded by divers which both did
see, and also did write upon the same. Of whom first was Maximilian
the emperor, who both had and showed the same to Franciscus
Mirandula, who wrote thereupon a book in Latin metre called
Staurosticon.

     Of this also writeth John Carion, Functius, Philip Melancthon,
Flaccius, with divers other more. These marks and tokens, as they
were very strange, so they were diversely expounded of many; some
thinking that they portended affliction and persecution of the church
to draw near; some, that God by that token did admonish them, or
foreshowed unto them the true doctrine of their justification, which
only is to be sought in the cross and passion of Christ, and in no
other thing. This I marvel, that Christianus Masseus, and others of
that profession, do leave it out. Belike they saw something in it
that made not to their liking. For, whether it signifieth persecution
to come upon the Germans, they cannot be evil that suffer and bear
the cross with Christ:  or whether it signifieth the true doctrine of
Christ coming to the Germans, it cannot otherwise be, but that the
doctrine of the bishop of Rome must needs be wrong, which is contrary
to this which God hath stirred up in Germany.

     By these and such-like prophecies, it is evident to understand, 
the time not to be far off, when God, of his determinate providence,
was disposed to reform and to restore his church. And not only by
those prophecies the same might well appear, but also, and much
rather, by the hearts of the people at that time; whose minds were so
incensed and inflamed with hatred against the pomp and pride of Rome,
both through all nations, and especially the people of Germany, that
it was easy to perceive the time was near at hand, when the pride of
popish prelacy would have a fall. Such disdain there was, such
contempt and derision began to rise on every side then, against the
pope and the court of Rome, that it might soon appear, by the hearts
of the people, that God was not disposed to have it long stand.

     For neither were their detestable doings so secret, that men
did not see them, neither did any man behold them, having any sparkle
of godliness, that could abide them. And thereupon grew these
proverbs to their derision, in every country, as in Germany it hath
been a proverb amongst them.

"What is this, to see the world now round about,
That for these shaveling priests no man that once may rout?"

     "As soon as a clerk is shorn into his order, by and by the
devil entereth into him."

     "In the name of God, beginneth all evil;" alluding to the
pope's bulls, which commonly so begin.

     "Item, When bulls come from Rome, bind well your purses."

     "The nearer Rome, the farther from Christ."

     "Item, He that goeth once to Rome, seeth a wicked man: 

     "He that goeth twice, learneth to know him: 

     "He that goeth thrice, bringeth him home with him."

     "Item, The court of Rome never regardeth the sheep without the
wool."

     "Once were wooden chalices, and golden priests:  "Now we have
golden chalices, and wooden priests."

     "Once Christian men had blind churches, and light hearts: 

     "Now they have blind hearts, and light churches."

     "Item, Many are worshipped for saints in heaven, whose souls be
burning in hell."

     In France, Gallus Senonensis, writeth four hundred years ago,
that amongst them it was an old saying, "That Satan was let loose at
Rome to destroy the whole church."

     Thomas Becket himself, in his time, writing to the college of
cardinals, denieth it not but to be a common word both through town
and city, "That there is no right in Rome."

     To these may be adjoined also the A, B, C, which we find in the
margin of a certain old register to be attributed to William Thorpe,
whose story we have comprehended before.

"Awake, ye ghostly persons, awake, awake,
Both priest, pope, bishop, and cardinal!
Consider wisely, what ways ye take,
Dangerously being like to have a fall.
Every where the mischief of you all,
Far and near, breaketh out very fast;
God will needs be revenged at the last.
How long have ye the world captived,
In sore bondage of men's traditions?
Kings and emperors ye have deprived,
Lewdly usurping their chief possessions: 
Much misery ye make in all regions.
Now your frauds be almost at their latter cast,
Of God sore to be revenged at the last.
Poor people to oppress ye have no shame,
Quaking for fear of your double tyranny.
Rightful justice ye have put out of frame,
Seeking the lust of your god, the belly.
Therefore I dare you boldly certify,
Very little though you be thereof aghast,
Yet God will be revenged at the last."

     By these and such-like sayings, which may be collected
innumerable, it may soon be seen what hearts and judgments the people
had in those days of the Romish clergy; which thing, no doubt, was of
God as a secret prophecy, that shortly religion should be restored;
according as it came to pass about this present time, when Dr. Martin
Luther first began to write; after Picus Mirandula, and Laurentius
Valla, and last of all Erasmus of Rotterdam, had somewhat broken the
way before, and had shaken the monks' houses. But Luther gave the
stroke, and plucked down the foundation, and all by opening one vein,
long hid before, wherein lieth the touchstone of all truth and
doctrine, as the only principal origin of our salvation, which is,
our free justifying by faith only, in Christ the Son of God. The
laborious travails, and the whole process, and the constant
preachings of this worthy man, because they are sufficiently declared
in the history of John Sleiden, I shall the less need to stay long
thereupon; but only to run over some principal matters of his life
and acts, as they are briefly collected by Philip Melancthon.



146. MARTIN LUTHER
Illustration:  Martin Luther's Birth-Place
Illustration:  Portrait of Martin Luther

     Martin Luther, after he was grown in years, being born at
Eisleben in Saxony, A.D. 1483, was set to the university, first of
Magdeburg, then of Erfurt. In this university of Erfurt, there was a
certain aged man in the convent of the Augustines (who is thought to
be Weselus above mentioned) with whom Luther, being then of the same
order, a friar Augustine, had conference upon divers things,
especially touching the article of remission of sins; the which
article the said aged father opened unto Luther after this sort: 
declaring, that we must not generally believe only forgiveness of
sins to be, or to belong to Peter, to Paul, to David, or such good
men alone; but that God's express commandment is, that every man
should particularly believe his sins to be forgiven him in Christ: 
and further said, that this interpretation was confirmed by the
testimony of Bernard, and showed him the place, in the sermon of the
Annunciation, where it is thus set forth:  "But add thou that thou
believest this, that by him thy sins are forgiven thee. This is the
testimony that the Holy Ghost giveth thee in thy heart, saying, Thy
sins are forgiven thee. For this is the opinion of the apostle, that
man is freely justified by faith."

     By these words Luther was not only strengthened, but was also
instructed of the full meaning of St. Paul, who repeateth so many
times this sentence, "We are justified by faith." And having read the
expositions of many upon this place, he then perceived, as well by
the purpose of the old man, as by the comfort he received in his
spirit, the vanity of those interpretations, which he had read before
of the schoolmen. And so, reading by little and little, with
conferring the sayings and examples of the prophets and apostles, and
continual invoction of God, and excitation of faith by force of
prayer, he perceived that doctrine most evidently. Then began he to
read St. Augustine's books, where he found many comfortable
sentences:  among other, in the exposition of the Psalms, and
specially in the book of the "Spirit and Letter," which confirmed
this doctrine of faith and consolation in his heart not a little. And
yet he laid not aside the sententiaries, as Gabriel and Cameracensis.
Also he read the books of Ocham, whose subtlety he preferred above
Thomas Aquinas and Scotus. He read also and revolved Gerson:  but
above all the rest, he perused all over St. Augustines works with
attentive cogitation. And thus continued he his study at Erfurt the
space of four years in the convent of the Augustines.

     About this time one Staupitz, a famous man, who, ministering
his help to further the erection of a university in Wittenberg, and
endeavouring to have schools of divinity founded in this new
university; when he had considered the spirit and towardness of
Luther, recalled him from Erfurt, to place him in Wittenberg, A.D.
1508, and of his age twenty-six. There his towardness appeared in the
ordinary exercise, both of his disputations in the schools, and
preaching in churches; where many wise and learned men attentively
heard Luther, especially Dr. Mellarstad.

     This Mellarstad would oftentimes say, that Luther was of such a
marvellous spirit, and so ingenious, that he gave apparent
signification; that he would introduce a more compendious, easy, and
familiar manner of teaching, and alter and abolish the order that
then was used.

     There first he expounded the logic and philosophy of Aristotle,
and in the mean while intermitted no whit his study in theology.
Three years after be went to Rome, about certain contentions of the
monks:  and returning the same year, he was graded doctor, at the
expense of the elector Frederic, duke of Saxony, according to the
solemn manner of schools:  for he had heard him preach; well
understood the quietness of his spirit; diligently considered the
vehemency of his words; and had in singular admiration those profound 
matters which in his sermons he ripely and exactly explained. This
degree Staupitz, against his will, enforced upon him; saying merrily
unto him, that God had many things to bring to pass in his church by
him. And though these words were spoken merrily, yet it came so to
pass anon after; as many predictions or presages prove true before a
change.

     After this, he began to expound the Epistle to the Romans, and,
subsequently, the Psalms:  where he showed the difference betwixt the
law and the gospel. He also confounded the error that reigned then in
schools and sermons, teaching that men may merit remission of sins by
their proper works, and that they be just before God by outward
discipline; as the Pharisees taught. Luther diligently reduced the
minds of men to the Son of God; and as John Baptist demonstrated the
Lamb of God who took away the sins of the world; even so Luther,
shining in the church as a bright star after a long cloudy and
obscure say, expressly showed, that sins are freely remitted for the
love of the Son of God, and that we ought faithfully to embrace this
bountiful gift.

     These happy beginnings of so good matters, got him great
authority, considering his life was correspondent to his profession,
the consideration whereof allured to him marvellously the hearts of
his auditors, and also many notable personages.

     All this while Luther yet altered nothing in the ceremonies,
but precisely observed his rule among his fellows. He meddled in no
doubtful opinions, but taught this only doctrine, as most principal
of all others to all men, opening and declaring the doctrine of
repentance, of remission of sins, of faith, of true comfort in times
of adversity. Every man received good taste of this sweet doctrine,
and the learned conceived high pleasure to behold Jesus Christ, the
prophets and apostles, to come forth into light out of darkness;
whereby they began to understand the difference betwixt the law and
the gospel; betwixt the promises of the law, and the promise of the
gospel; betwixt spiritual justice, and civil things; which certainly
could not have been found in Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, nor such-like
school-clerks.

     It happened, moreover, about this time, that many were
provoked, by Erasmus's learned works, to study the Greek and Latin
tongues; who perceiving a more gentle and ready order of teaching
than before, began to have in contempt the monks' barbarous and
sophistical doctrine; and especially such as were of a liberal nature
and good disposition. Luther began to study the Greek and Hebrew
tongue, to this end, that after he had learned the phrase and
property of the tongues, and drawn the doctrine from the very
fountains, he might give more sound judgment.

     As Luther was thus occupied in Germany, which was A.D.1516, Leo
the Tenth of that name, succeeding after Julius the Second, was pope
of Rome, who, under pretence of war against the Turk, sent a jubilee
with his pardons abroad through all Christian realms and dominions,
whereby he gathered together innumerable riches and treasure; the
gatherers and collectors whereof persuaded the people, that whosoever
would give ten shillings, should at his pleasure deliver one soul
from the pains of purgatory. For this they held as a general rule,
that God would do whatsoever they would have him, according to the
saying, Whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, the same shall be
loosed in heaven; but if it were but one jot less than ten shillings,
they preached that it would profit them nothing. This filthy kind of
the pope's merchandise, as it spread through all quarters of
Christian regions, so it came also to Germany, through the means of a
certain Dominic friar named Tetzel, who most impudently caused the
pope's indulgences or pardons to be carried and sold about the
country. Whereupon Luther, much moved with the blasphemous sermons of
this shameless friar, and having his heart earnestly bent with ardent
desire to maintain true religion, published certain propositions
concerning indulgences, which are to be read in the first tome of his
works, and set them openly on the temple that joineth to the castle
of Wittenberg, the morrow after the feast of All Saints, A.D. 1517.

     This beggarly friar, hoping to obtain the pope's blessing,
assembled certain monks, and sophistical divines of his convent, and
forthwith commanded them to write something against Luther. And while
he would not himself seem to be dumb, he began not only to inveigh in
his sermons, but to thunder against Luther; crying, "Luther is a
heretic, and worthy to be persecuted with fire." And besides this, he
burned openly Luther's propositions, and the sermon which he wrote of
indulgences. This rage and fumish fury of this friar, enforced Luther
to treat more amply of the cause, and to maintain his matter.

     And thus rose the beginnings of this controversy; wherein
Luther, neither suspecting nor dreaming of any change that might
happen in the ceremonies, did not utterly reject the indulgences, but
required a moderation in them:  and therefore they falsely accuse him,
which blaze, that he began with plausible matter, whereby he might
get praise, to the end that in process of time he might change the
state of the commonweal, and purchase authority either for himself or
other.

     And certes, he was not suborned or stirred up by them of the
court, (as the Duke of Brunswick wrote,) insomuch that the Duke
Frederic was sorely offended that such competition and controversy
should arise, having regard to the sequel thereof.

     And as this good Duke Frederic was one, of all the princes of
our time, that loved best quietness and common tranquillity, neither
was avaricious, but willingly bent to refer all his counsels to the
common utility of all the world, (as it is easy to be conjectured
divers ways,) so he neither encouraged nor supported Luther, but
often represented semblance of heaviness and sorrow which he bare in
his heart, fearing greater dissensions. But being a wise prince, and
following the counsel of God's rule, and well deliberating thereupon,
be thought with himself, that the glory of God was to be preferred
above all things:  neither was he ignorant what blasphemy it was,
horribly condemned of God, obstinately to repugn the truth. Wherefore
he did as a godly prince should do, he obeyed God, committing himself
to his holy grace and omnipotent protection. And although Maximilian
the emperor, Charles, king of Spain, and Pope Julius, had given
commandment to the said Duke Frederic, that he should inhibit Luther
from all place and liberty of preaching; yet the duke, considering
with himself the preaching and writing of Luther, and weighing
diligently the testimonies and places of the Scripture by him
alleged, would not withstand the thing which he judged sincere. And
yet neither did he this trusting to his own judgment, but was very
anxious and inquisitive to hear the judgment of others, which were
both aged and learned; in the number of whom was Erasmus, whom the
duke desired to declare to him his opinion touching the matter of
Martin Luther; saying and protesting, that he would rather the ground
should open and swallow him, than he would bear with any opinions 
which he knew to be contrary to manifest truth; and therefore he
desired him to declare his judgment in the matter to him freely and
friendly.

     Erasmus, thus being entreated of the duke, began thus jestingly
and merrily to answer the dukes request, saying, that in Luther were
two great faults; first, that he would touch the bellies of monks;
the second, that he would touch the pope's crown; which two matters
in no case are to be dealt withal. Then, opening his mind plainly to
the duke, thus he said, that Luther did well in detecting errors, and
that reformation was to be wished, and very necessary in the church: 
and added moreover, that the effect of his doctrine was true; but
only that he wished in him a more temperate moderation and manner of
writing and handling. Whereupon Duke Frederic shortly after wrote to
Luther, seriously exhorting him to temper the vehemency of his style.
This was at the city of Cologne, shortly after the coronation of the
new emperor, where also Huttenus, Aloisius, Marlianus, Ludovicus
Vives, Halonius, with other learned men, were assembled together,
waiting upon the emperor.

     Futhermore, the same Erasmus, the next year following that,
wrote up to the archbishop of Mentz a certain epistle touching the
cause of Luther; in which epistle thus he signifieth to the bishop: 

     "That many things were in the books of Luther condemned of
monks and divines for heretical, which in the books of Bernard and
Austin are read for sound and godly. That the world is burdened with
men's institutions, with school doctrines and opinions, and with the
tyranny of Begging Friars; which friars, when they are but the pope's
servants and underlings, yet they have so grown in power and
multitude, that they are now terrible, both to the pope himself, and
to all princes; who, so long as the pope maketh with them, so long
they make him more than a God; but if he make any thing against their
purpose or commodity, then they weigh his authority no more than a
dream or fantasy. Once it was counted a heresy when a man repugned
against the gospel, or articles of the faith. Now he that dissenteth
from Thomas Aquinas is a heretic:  whatsoever doth not like them,
whatsoever they understand not, that is heresy. To speak Greek is
heresy, or to speak more finely than they do, that is with them
heresy."

     And thus much by the way concerning the judgment of Erasmus.

Review of Luther's conduct and writings.

     It is also apparent, that Luther promised the Cardinal Cajetan
to keep silence, provided also his adversaries would do the like.
Whereby we may gather, that at that time he determined not to stir
any new debates, but rather coveted the common quietness, and that he
was provoked by little and little to other matters, through the
provoking of unlearned writers.

     Then followed disputations of the difference betwixt Divine and
human law; also of the horrible profanation of the supper of our
Lord, in selling and applying the same for other purposes. Here he
was forced to express the cause of the sacrifice, and to declare the
use of the sacraments.

     Now the godly and faithful Christians, closed in monasteries,
understanding that images ought to be eschewed, began to abandon that
wretched thraldom, in which they were detained. Now Luther, the
plainer to express the doctrine of repentance, of remission of sins,
of faith, and of indulgences, added also to these matters, the
difference of Divine and human laws, the doctrine of the use of our
Lord's supper, of baptism, and of vows; and these were his principal
conflicts. As . touching the question of the Roman bishop's power,
Eckius was the author thereof; and for no other respect, than to
inflame the fiery wrath of the pope and princes against Luther. The
symbol of the apostles, also of Nice and Athanasius; he conserved in
their integrity.

     Further, he sufficiently declareth in divers of his works what
innovation is to be required in the ceremonies and traditions of men;
and wherefore they ought to be altered. And what form of doctrine and
administration of the sacraments he required and approved, is
apparent by the confession which the elector, John, duke of Saxony,
and Prince Philip, landgrave of Hesse, presented to the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, A.D. 1530, in the assembly at Augsburg. It is
manifest also by the ceremonies of the church in this city, and the
doctrine that is preached in our church, the sum whereof is fully
comprised in this confession. I allege this, that the godly may
consider not only what errors he hath corrected and reproved, but
also they may understand that he comprehended also the whole doctrine
necessary for the church; he hath set the ceremonies in their purity,
and given examples to the faithful to reform the churches, and it is
necessary for posterity to know what Luther hath approved.

     I will not here rehearse, who were the first that published
both parts of the supper of our Lord, who first omitted private
masses, and where first the monasteries were abandoned:  for Luther
disputed very little of these before the assembly which was made in
the town of Worms, A.D. 1521:  he changed not the ceremonies, but in
his absence Carolostadt and others altered them. Then Luther
returning, (after Carolostadt had devised and done certain things
rather to breed muttering than otherwise,) manifested by evident
testimonies, published abroad touching his opinion, what he approved,
and what he misliked.

     We know that politic men evermore detested all changes:  and we
must confess, there ensueth some evil upon dissensions, and yet it is
our duty evermore in the church, to advance God's ordinance above
human constitutions. The eternal Father pronounced this voice of his
Son:  This is my well beloved Son, hear him! And he menaced eternal
wrath to all blasphemers, that is, such as endeavour to abolish the
manifest verity. And therefore Luther did as behoved a Christian
faithfully to do, considering he was an instructer of the church of
God. It was his office, I say, to reprehend pernicious errors, which
the rabble of epicures most impudently heaped one upon another, and
it was expedient his auditors dissented not from his opinion, since
he taught purely. Wherefore, if alteration be hateful, and many
perils grow of dissension, as we certainly see many, whereof we be
right sorry, they are partly in fault that spread abroad these
errors, and partly they that with devilish disdain presently maintain
them. I do not recite this to defend Luther and his auditors, but
also that the faithful may consider now, and in time to come, what is
the governance of the true church of God, and what it hath always
been:  how God hath gathered to himself one eternal church, by the
voice of the gospel, of this lump of sin, and filthy heap of human
corruption; among whom the gospel shineth as a spark in the dark. As
in the time of the Pharisees, Zachary, Elizabeth, Mary, and many
others, reverenced and observed the true doctrine; so have many gone
before us, who purely invocated God, some understanding more clearly
than others the doctrine of the gospel. Such a one was the old man of
whom I wrote, that oftentime comforted Luther, when his astonyings
assailed him; and after a sort declared unto him the doctrine of the
faith. And that God may preserve henceforth the light of his gospel,
shining in many, let us pray with fervent affection, as Isaiah
prayeth for his hearers:  Seal the law in my disciples. Further, this
advertisement showeth plainly that coloured superstitions are not
permanent, but abolished by God:  and since this is the cause of
changes, we ought diligently to endeavour, that errors be neither
taught, nor preached in the church.

     But I return to Luther. Even as at the beginning he treated of
this matter, without any particular affection, so, though he was of a
fiery nature, and subject to wrath, yet he always remembered his
office, and prohibited wars to be attempted, and distinguished wisely
offices wherein was any difference; as the bishop, to feed the flock
of God; and the magistrates, by authority of the sword committed unto
them, to repress the people subject unto them. Wherefore when Satan
contendeth by slanders to dissipate the church of God, and
contumeliously to rage against him, and delighteth to do evil, and
rejoiceth to behold us wallow in the puddle of error and blindness,
smiling at our destruction; he laboureth all he can to inflame and
stir up mischievous instruments and seditious spirits to sow
sedition; as Monetarius and his like. Luther repelled boldly these
rages, and not only adorned, but also ratified, the dignity and bands
of politic order and civil government. Therefore, when I consider in
my mind how many worthy men have been in the church, that in this
erred, and were abused; I believe assuredly that Luther's heart was
not only governed by human diligence, but with a heavenly light;
considering how constantly he abode within the limits of his office.

     Luther held not only in contempt the seditious doctors of that
time, as Monetarius and the Anabaptists; but especially these horned
bishops of Rome, who, arrogantly and impudently, by their devised
decrees, affirmed, that St. Peter had not the charge alone to teach
the gospel, but also to govern commonweals, and exercise civil
jurisdiction. Moreover, he exhorted every man to render unto God that
which appertained unto God, and to Cæsar that which belonged unto
Cæsar; and said, that all should serve God with true repentance,
knowledge, and maintaining of his true doctrine, invocation, and
works, wrought with a pure conscience:  and as touching civil policy,
that every one should obey the magistrates under whom he liveth, in
all civil duties and reverences, for God's sake. And such a one was
Luther. He gave unto God what belonged unto God:  he taught God; he
invocated God; and had other virtues necessary for a man that
pleaseth God. Further, in politic conversation he constantly avoided
all seditious counsels. I judge these virtues to be such excellent
ornaments, that greater and more divine cannot be required in this
mortal life. And albeit that the virtue of this man is worthy of
commendation, and the rather for that he used the gifts of God in all
reverence; yet our duty is to render condign thanks unto God, that by
him he hath given us the light of the gospel, and to conserve and
enlarge the remembrance of his doctrine. I weigh little the slander
of the epicures and hypocrites, who scoff at and condemn the manifest
truths; but I stay wholly hereupon, that the universal church hath
consented perpetually to this very doctrine, which is preached in our
church, whereunto we must frame our life and devotion conformably.
And I believe that this is the doctrine whereof the Son of God
speaketh, If any love me, he will keep my commandments, and my Father
will love him, and we will come to him, and plant our dwelling with
him. I speak of the sum of the doctrine, as it is understood and
explained in our churches, by the faithful and learned ministers. For
albeit that some one oftentimes expoundeth the same more aptly and
elegantly than some other; yet, as touching the effect, the learned
and faithful do agree in all points.

     Then weighing and perpending with myself long time, the
doctrine that hath been of all times, it seemeth unto me, that since
the apostles there have been four notable alterations after the first
purity of the gospel. Origen had his time; albeit there were some of
a sound and sacred opinion, as Methodius, who reproved certain
suspected doctrines of Origen, that he converted the gospel into
philosophy in the hearts of many; that is to say, he advanced this
persuasion, that the moral discipline deserveth remission of sins,
and that this is that justice, whereof is said, The just shall live
by faith. That age lost almost the whole difference of the law and
the gospel, and forgot the words of the apostles; for they understood
not the natural signification of these words:  Letter, Spirit,
Justice, Faith. Now when the propriety of words was lost, which he
notes of the very things, it was necessary that other things should
be contrived.

     Out of this seed sprang the error of Pelagius, which wandered
largely abroad:  and therefore, albeit the apostles had given unto the
church a pure doctrine, as clear and wholesome fountains, yet Origen
intermixed the same with some corruption in that part. Then, to
correct the errors of that time, or at least some part of them, God
raised up St. Austin, who purged in some part the fountains; and I
doubt not, if he were judge of dissensions at this day, but he would
speak for us, and defend our cause. Certainly, as concerning free
remission, justification by faith, the use of the sacraments and
indifferent things, he consenteth wholly with us. And, albeit that in
some places he expoundeth more eloquently and aptly what he will say
than in others, yet if in reading any do carry with them a godly
spirit and quick understanding, all evil judgment ceaseth; they shall
soon perceive that he is of our opinion. And whereas our adversaries
sometimes do cite sentences selected out of his books against us, and
with clamour provoke us to the ancient fathers, they do it not for
any affection they bear unto the truth or antiquity, but maliciously
to cloak them with the authority of the ancient fathers, which
antiquity never knew of any of these horned beasts and dumb idols, as
we have known in these days. Nevertheless it is certain, there were
seeds of superstition in the time of the fathers and ancient doctors;
and therefore St. Austin ordained something of vows, although he
wrote not thereof so strangely as others:  for the best sometimes
shall be spotted with the blemish of such follies as reign in their
age. For as naturally we love our country, so fondly we favour the
present fashions, wherein we be trained and educated. And very well
alluded Euripides to this effect: 

"What customs we in tender youth
By nature's lore receive;
The same we love and like always,
And loath our lust to leave."

     But would to God, that such as vaunt they follow St. Austin,
would always represent one like opinion and mind, as St. Austin: 
certainly they would not so clip his sentences, to serve their
purposes. The light restored by St. Austin's works hath much profited
posterity; for Prosper, Maximus, Hugo, and some other like writers,
that governed studies to St. Bernard's time, have for the most part
imitated the rule of St. Austin. And this, while the regiment and
riches of the bishops still increased:  and thereof ensued a monstrous
regiment; profane and ignorant men governed the church, among whom,
certain were instructed in sciences and practices of the Roman court,
and some others exercised in pleadings.

     Then the orders of Dominican and Franciscan friars began; who,
beholding the excess and riches of the bishops, and contemning their
ungodly manners, determined to live in more modest order, or, as I
might say, to enclose them in the prisons of discipline:  but first
ignorance increased the superstitions. Then after, when they
considered men's minds wholly addicted to the study of the civil
laws, (for pleading at Rome advanced many to great authority, and
enriched them,) they endeavoured to revoke men to the study of
divinity. but they missed of their purpose, and their counsel failed
them. Albert, and such like, that were given to Aristotle's doctrine,
began to convert the doctrine of the church into profane philosophy.

     The fourth age not only corrupted the fountains of the gospel,
but also gave out poison, that is to say, opinions manifestly
approving all idolatries. Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, and their like,
have brought in so many labyrinths and false opinions, that the godly
and sound sort of divines have always desired a more plain and purer
kind of doctrine:  neither can we deny without great impudency but it
was expedient to alter this kind of doctrine, when it is manifest
that such as employed their whole age in this manner of teaching,
understood not a great part of the sophisms in their disputations.
Further, it is plainly idolatry confirmed, when they teach the
application of sacrifice by work wrought; when they allow the
invocation of saints; when they deny that sins be freely remitted by
faith; when of ceremonies they make a slaughter of consciences.
Finally, there are many other horrible and pernicious devices, that
when I think on them, Lord! how I tremble and quake for fear.

     Now to return, and to treat something orderly of the acts and
conflicts of Luther with his adversaries. After that Tetzel, the
aforesaid friar, with his fellow monks and friarly fellows, had cried
out with open mouth against Luther, in maintaining the pope's
indulgences; and that Luther again, in defence of his cause, had set
up propositions against the open abuses of the same, marvel it was to
see how soon these propositions were sparkled abroad in sundry and
far places, and how greedily they were caught up in the hands of
divers both far and near. And thus the contention of this matter
increasing between them, Luther was compelled to write thereof more
largely and fully than otherwise he thought; which was A.D. 1517.

     Yet all this while Luther never thought of any alteration to
come of any ceremony, much less such a reformation of doctrine and
ceremonies as afterwards did follow; but only hearing that he was
accused to the bishop of Rome, he did write humbly unto him:  in the
beginning of which writing he declareth the inordinate outrage of
those his pardon-mongers, who so excessively did pill and poll the
simple people, to the great slander of the church, and shame to his
Holiness. And so proceeding, in the end of the said his writing thus
he submitteth himself: 

     "Wherefore, most holy father, I offer myself prostrate under
the feet of your Holiness, with all that I am, and that I have. Save
me, kill me, call me, recall me, approve me, reprove me, as you shall
please. Your voice, the voice of Christ in you speaking, I will
acknowledge. If I have deserved death, I shall be contented to die: 
for the earth is the Lord's, and all the fulness thereof, who is to
be blessed for ever. Amen."

     This was A.D. 1518.

     After that Martin Luther, provoked thus by Tetzel, had declared
his mind in writing lowly and humbly, and had set up certain
propositions to be disputed; not long after, among other monks and
friars steppeth up one Silvester de Priero, a Dominic friar, who
first began to publish abroad a certain impudent and railing dialogue
against him. Unto whom Luther answered again, first alleging the
place of the apostle in 1 Thess. v., that we must prove all things.
Also the place in Gal. ii., that if an angel from heaven do bring any
other gospel than that we have received, he ought to be accursed.
Item, he alleged the place of Austin unto Jerome, where the said
Austin saith, That he was wont to give this honour only to the books
of canonical Scripture, that whosoever were the writers thereof, he
believeth them verily not to have erred. But as touching all other
men's writings, were they never so holy men, or learned, he doth not
believe them therefore, because they so say; but in that respect as
they do agree with the canonical Scripture, which cannot err. Item,
he alleged the place of the canon law; wherein he proved, that these
pardon-sellers, in their setting forth of the pope's indulgences,
ought to go no further by the law, than is enjoined them within the
letters of their commission. And in the latter part of his answer,
thus Luther writeth to the reader, "Let opinions remain opinions, so
they be not yokes to the Christians. Let us not make men's opinions
equal with the articles of faith, and to the decrees of Christ and
Paul." "Moreover, I am ashamed," quoth he, "to hear the common saying
of these divine school-doctors, who, holding one thing in schools,
and thinking otherwise in their own judgment, thus are wont secretly
among themselves, and with their privy friends talking together, to
say, 'Thus we do hold, and thus would we say being in the schools;
but yet (be it spoken here amongst us) it cannot be so proved by the
Holy Scriptures,'" &c.

     Next after this Silvester, stepped forth Eckius, and impugned
the conclusions of Luther. Against whom encountered Dr. Andreas
Bedenstein, archdeacon of Wittenberg, making his apology in defence
of Luther.

     Then was Martin Luther cited, the seventh of August, by one
Hierome, bishop of Ascalon, to appear at Rome. About which time
Thomas Cajetan, cardinal, the pope's legate, was then lieger at the
city of Augsburg, who before had been sent down in commission, with
certain mandates from Pope Leo, unto that city. The university of
Wittenberg, understanding of Luther's citation, eftsoons directed up
their letters with their public seal to the pope, in Luther's behalf.
Also another letter they sent to Carolus Miltitius, the pope's
chamberlain, being a German born. Furthermore, good Frederic ceased
not for his part to solicit the matter with his letters and earnest
suit with Cardinal Cajetan, that the cause of Luther might be freed
from Rome, and removed to Augsburg, in the hearing of the cardinal.
Cajetan, at the suit of the duke, wrote unto the pope; from whom he
received this answer again, the three and twentieth of the aforesaid
month of August.

     "That he had cited Luther to appear personally before him at
Rome, by Hierome, bishop of Ascalon, auditor of the chamber; which
bishop diligently had done what was commanded him:  but Luther,
abusing and contemning the gentleness offered, did refuse not only to
come, but also became more bold and stubborn, continuing, or rather
increasing, in his former heresy, as by his writings did appear.
Wherefore he would, that the cardinal should cite and call up the
said Luther to appear at the city of Augsburg before him; adjoining
withal, the aid of the princes of Germany, and of the emperor, if
need required; so that when the said Luther should appear, he should
lay hand upon him, and commit him to safe custody; and after, he
should be brought up to Rome. And if he perceived him to come to any
knowledge or amendment of his fault, he should release him and
restore him to the church again; or else he should be interdicted,
with all other his adherents, abettors, and maintainers, of
whatsoever state or condition they were, whether they were dukes,
marquises, earls, barons, &c. Against all which persons and degrees,
he willed him to extend the same curse and malediction (only the
person of the emperor excepted); interdicting, by the censure of the
church, all such lands, lordships, towns, tenements, and villages, as
should minister any harbour to the said Luther, and were not obedient
unto the see of Rome. Contrariwise, to all such as showed themselves
obedient, he should promise full remission of all their sins.
 Likewise the pope directeth other letters also at
the same time to Duke Frederic, complaining, with many grievous
words, against Luther.

     The cardinal, thus being charged with injunctions from Rome,
according to his commission, sendeth with all speed for Luther to
appear at Augsburg before him.

     About the beginning of October, Martin Luther, yielding his
obedience to the Church of Rome, came to Augsburg at the cardinal's
sending, (at the charges of the noble prince elector, and also with
his letters of commendation,) where he remained three days before he
came to his speech; for so it was provided by his friends, that he
should not enter talk with the cardinal before a sufficient warrant
or safe-conduct was obtained of the Emperor Maximilian. Which being
obtained, eftsoons he entered, offering himself to the speech of the
cardinal, and was there received of the cardinal very gently; who,
according to the pope's commandment, propounded unto Martin Luther
three things, or, as Sleiden saith, but two:  to wit,

     I. That he should repent and revoke his errors.

     II. That he should promise, from that time forward, to refrain
from the same.

     III. That he should refrain from all things that might by any
means trouble the church.

     When Martin Luther required to be informed wherein he had
erred, the legate brought forth the Extravagant of Clement, which
beginneth, Unigenitus, &c., because that he, contrary to that canon,
had held and taught in his fifty-eighth proposition, that the merits
of Christ are not the treasure of indulgences or pardons. Secondly,
the cardinal, contrary to the seventh proposition of Luther,
affirmed, that faith is not necessary to him that receiveth the
sacrament.

     Furthermore, another day, in the presence of four of the
emperor's council, having there a notary and witnesses present,
Luther protested for himself, and personally, in this manner
following: 

     "Imprimis, I Martin Luther, a Friar Augustine, protest, that I
do reverence and follow the Church of Rome in all my sayings and
doings, present, past, and to come; and if any thing hath been, or
shall be, said by me to the contrary, I count it, and will that it be
counted and taken, as though it had never been spoken.

     "But because the cardinal hath required, at the commandment of
the pope, three things of me to be observed:  First, That I should
return again to the knowledge of myself:  Secondly, That I should
beware of falling into the same again hereafter:  Thirdly, That I
should promise to abstain from all things which might disquiet the
church of God:  I protest here this day, that whatsoever I have said,
seemeth unto me to be sound, true, and catholic:  yet for the further
proof thereof, I do offer myself personally, either here or
elsewhere, publicly to give a reason of my sayings. And if this
please not the legate, I am ready also in writing to answer his
objections, if he have any against me; and touching these things, to
hear the sentence and judgment of the university of the empire,
Basil, Friburg, and Louvain."

     Hereto when they had received an answer in writing, they
departed.

     After this, Luther by and by prepareth an answer to the legate,
teaching, that the merits of Christ are not committed unto men:  That
the pope's voice is to be heard when he speaketh agreeable to the
Scriptures:  That the pope may err:  That he ought to be reprehended.
[Acts xv.] Moreover he showed, that in the matter of faith, not only
the general council, but also every faithful Christian, is above the
pope, if he lean to better authority and reason:  That the Extravagant
containeth untruths:  That it is an infallible verity, that none is
just:  That it is necessary, for him that cometh to the receiving of
the sacrament, to believe:  That faith in the absolution and remission
of sins, is necessary:  That he ought not, nor might not, decline from
the verity of the Scripture; That he sought nothing but the light of
the truth, &c.

     But the cardinal would hear no Scriptures; he disputed without
Scriptures; devised glosses and expositions of his own head; and by
distinctions, (wherewith the divinity of the Thomists is full,) like
a very Proteus, he avoided all things. After this, Luther, being
commanded to come no more into the presence of the legate except he
would recant, notwithstanding abode there still, and would not
depart. Then the cardinal sent for Johannes Staupitz, vicar of the
Augustines, and moved him earnestly to bring Luther to recant of his
own accord. Luther tarried the next day also, and nothing was said
unto him. The third day, moreover, he tarried, and delivered up his
mind in writing: 

     First, Luther thanked the cardinal for his courtesy and great
kindness, which he perceived by the words of Staupitz toward him; and
therefore was the more ready to gratify him in whatsoever kind of
office he could do him service:  confessing moreover, that where he
had been somewhat sharp and eager against the pope's dignity, that
was not so much of his own mind, as it was to be ascribed to the
importunity of certain which gave him occasion. Notwithstanding, as
he acknowledged his excess therein, so he was ready to show more
moderation in that behalf hereafter, and also promised to make amends
for the same unto the bishop; and that in the pulpit, if he pleased.
And as touching the matter of pardons, he promised also to proceed no
further in any mention thereof, so that his adversaries likewise were
bound to keep silence. But whereas he was pressed to retract his
sentence before defended, forasmuch as he had said nothing but with a
good conscience, and which was agreeable to the firm testimonies of
the Scripture, therefore he humbly desired the determination thereof
to be referred to the bishop of Rome; for nothing could be more
grateful to him, than to hear the voice of the church speaking, &c.
 Who doth not see by this so humble and honest
submission of Luther, but that if the bishop of Rome would have been
answered with any reason, or contented with sufficient mean, he had
never been touched any further of Luther? But the secret purpose of
God had a further work herein to do; for the time now was come, when
God thought good that pride should have a fall. Thus while the
immeasurable desire of that bishop sought more than enough, (like to
Æsop's dog coveting both to have the flesh and the shadow,) not only
he missed what he gaped for, but also lost that which he had. But to
the purpose of our matter again:  this writing Luther delivered to the
cardinal, the third day after he was commanded out of his sight;
which letter or writing the cardinal did little regard. When Luther
saw that he would give no answer nor countenance to the letter; yet,
notwithstanding, he remained, after that, the fourth day, and nothing
was answered. The fifth day likewise was passed with like silence,
and nothing done. At length, by the counsel of his friends, and
especially because the cardinal had said before, that he had a
commandment to imprison Luther and John Staupitz the vicar; after
that he had made and set up his appeal where it might be seen and
read, he departed; thinking that he had showed such dangerous
obedience long enough. Luther, a beholder and a doer of these things,
recordeth the same, and showeth the cause why he submitted himself to
the Church of Rome:  declaring also, that even those things which are
most truly spoken, yet ought to be maintained and defended with
humility and fear. Some things he suppressed and concealeth, which he
supposeth the reader to understand, not without grief and sorrow. At
length he protesteth, that he reverenceth and followeth the Church of
Rome in all things, and that he setteth himself only against those,
who, under the name of the Church of Rome, go about to set forth and
commend Babylon unto us.

     Thus you have heard how that Luther, being rejected from the
speech and sight of Cajetan the cardinal, after six days' waiting,
departed by the advice of his friends, and returned unto Wittenberg;
leaving a letter in writing to be given to the cardinal, wherein he
declared sufficiently:  first his obedience in his coming; the reasons
of his doctrine; his submission reasonable to the see of Rome; his
long waiting after he was repelled from the cardinal's speech; the
charges of the duke; and finally, the cause of his departing. Besides
this letter to the cardinal, he left also an appellation to the
bishop of Rome, from the cardinal, which he caused to be affixed
before his departure.

     After that Luther was thus departed and returned again into his
country, Cajetan writeth to Duke Frederic a sharp and a biting 
letter, in which, first he signifieth unto him his gentle
entertainment and good will showed to reduce Luther from his error.
Secondly, he complaineth of the sudden departing of him, and of
Staupitz. Thirdly, he declareth the pernicious danger of Luther's
doctrine against the Church of Rome. Fourthly, he exhorteth the duke,
that as he tendereth his own honour and safety, and regardeth the
favour of the high bishop, he will send him up to Rome, or expel him
out of his dominions, forasmuch as such a pestilence breeding, as
that was, could not, neither ought by any means long so to be
suffered.

     To this letter of the cardinal the duke answereth again at
large, purging both Luther and himself; Luther, in that he, following
his conscience, grounded upon the word of God, would not revoke that
for an error, which could be proved no error. And himself he excuseth
thus:  that where it is required of him to banish him his country, or
to send him up to Rome, it would be little honesty for him so to do,
and less conscience, unless he knew just cause why he should do so;
which, if the cardinal would or could declare unto him, there should
lack nothing in him which were the part of a Christian prince to do.
And therefore he desired him to be a mean unto the bishop of Rome,
that innocency and truth be not oppressed before the crime or error
be lawfully convicted.

     This done, the duke sendeth the letter of the cardinal unto
Martin Luther, who answered again to the prince; showing first how he
came obediently unto Cajetan with the emperor's warrant, and what
talk there was between them:  how Cajetan pressed him, against his
conscience and manifest truth, to revoke his errors. First, that the
merits of Christ's passion were not the treasure of the pope's
pardons:  secondly, that faith was necessary in receiving the
sacraments. Albeit in the first he was content to yield to the
cardinal; in the second, because it touched a great part of our
salvation, he could not with a safe conscience relent, but desired to
be taught by the Scripture, or at least, that the matter might be
brought into open disputation in some free place of Germany, where
the truth might be discussed and judged of learned men. The cardinal,
not pleased with this, in great anger cast out many menacing words,
neither would admit him any more to his presence or speech; whereas
he yet, notwithstanding, persisting in his obedience to the Church of
Rome, gave attendance, waiting upon the cardinal's pleasure a
sufficient time.

     At last when no answer would come, after he had waited the
space of five or six days to his great detriment and greater danger,
by the persuasion of his friends he departed whereat if the cardinal
were displeased, he had the more cause to blame himself. "And now,
whereas the cardinal threateneth me," saith he, "not to let the
action fall, but that the process thereof shall be pursued at Rome,
unless I either come and present myself, or else be banished your
dominions; I am not so much grieved for mine own cause, as that you
should sustain for my matter any danger or peril. And therefore,
seeing there is no place nor country which can keep me from the
malice of mine adversaries, I am willing to depart hence, and to
forsake my country, whithersoever it shall please the Lord to lead
me; thanking God who hath counted me worthy to suffer thus much for
the glory of Christ's name."

     Here, no doubt, was the cause of Luther in great danger; being
now brought to this strait, that both Luther was ready to fly the
country, and the duke again was as much afraid to keep him, had not
the marvellous providence of God, who had this matter in guiding,
here provided a remedy where the power of man did fail, by stirring
up the whole university of Wittenberg; who, seeing the cause of truth
thus to decline, with a full and general consent addressed their
letters unto the prince, in defence of Luther and of his cause;
making their humble suit unto him, that he, of his princely honour,
would not suffer innocency, and the simplicity of truth so clear as
is the Scripture, to be foiled and oppressed by mere violence of
certain malignant flatterers about the pope; but that the error first
may be showed and convicted, before the party be pronounced guilty.

     By the occasion of these letters, the duke began more seriously
in his mind to consider the cause of Luther, and to read his works,
and also to hearken to his sermons:  whereby, through God's holy
working, he grew to knowledge and strength; perceiving in Luther's
quarrel more than he did before. This was about the beginning of
December, A.D. 1518.

     As this passed on, Pope Leo, playing the lion at Rome, in the
mean time, in the month of November, (to establish his seat against
this defection which he feared to come,) had sent forth new
indulgences into Germany, and all quarters abroad, with a new edict,
wherein he declared this to be the catholic doctrine of the holy
mother Church of Rome, prince of all other churches, that bishops of
Rome, who are successors of Peter, and vicars of Christ, have this
power and authority given to release and dispense, also to grant
indulgences, available both for the living and for the dead lying in
the pains of purgatory:  and this doctrine he charged to be received
of all faithful Christian men, under pain of the great curse, and
utter separation from all holy church. This popish decree and
indulgence, as a new merchandise or ale-stake to get money, being set
up in all quarters of Christendom for the holy father's advantage,
came also to be received in Germany about the month of December.
Luther, in the mean time, hearing how they were about in Rome to
proceed and pronounce against him, provided a certain appellation
conceived in due form of law, wherein he appealeth from the pope to
the general council.

     When Pope Leo perceived, that neither his pardons would prosper
to his mind, nor that Luther could be brought to Rome; to essay how
to come to his purpose by crafty allurements, he sent his
chamberlain, Carolus Miltitius, above mentioned, (who was a German,)
into Saxony, to Duke Frederic, with a golden rose, after the usual
ceremony accustomed every year to be presented to him; with secret
letters also to certain nobleman of the duke's council, to solicit
the pope's cause, and to remove the duke's mind, if it might be, from
Luther. But before Miltitius approached into Germany, Maximilian the
emperor deceased in the month of January, A.D. 1519. At that time two
there were who stood for the election; to wit, Francis, the French
king, and Charles, king of Spain, who was also duke of Austria, and
duke of Burgundy. To make the matter short, through the means of
Frederic, prince elector, (who, having the offer of the preferment,
refused the same,) the election fell to Charles, called Charles the
Fifth, surnamed Prudence:  which was about the end of August.
Illustration:  The debate at Leipsic

     In the month of June before, there was a public disputation
ordained at Leipsic, which is a city in Misnia, under the dominion of
George, duke of Saxony, uncle to Duke Frederic. This disputation
first began through the occasion of John Eckius, a friar, and Andreas
Carolostadt, doctor of Wittenberg. This Eckius had impugned certain
propositions or conclusions of Martin Luther, which he had written
the year before touching the pope's pardons. Against him Carolostadt
wrote in defence of Luther. Eckius again, to answer Carolostadt, set
forth an apology, which apology Carolostadt confuted by writing. Upon
this began the disputation, with safe-conduct granted by Duke George
to all and singular persons that would resort to the same. To this
disputation came also Martin Luther, with Philip Melancthon, who, not
past a year before, was newly come to Wittenberg; Luther not thinking
then to dispute in any matter, because of his appellation above
mentioned, but only to hear what there was said and done.

     First, before the entry into the disputation it was agreed,
that the acts should be penned by notaries, and after to be divulged
abroad. But Eckius afterwards went back from that, pretending that
the penning of the notaries would be a hinderance and a stay unto
them, whereby the heat of them in their reasoning should the more
languish, and their vehemency abate. But Carolostadt without notaries
would not dispute. The sum of their disputations was reduced to
certain conclusions; amongst which the Greeks call ?????????? [Greek: 
aythaireton]:  that is, "Whether a man have of himself any election or
purpose to do that is good:  or, (to use the terms of the school,)
"Whether a man of congruence may deserve grace, doing that which in
him doth lie?" Herein when the question was to be discussed, what the
will of man may do of itself without grace, they, through heat of
contention, (as the manner is,) fell into other by-matters and
ambages little or nothing appertaining to that which Carolostadt
proposed. Eckius affirmed, that the pure strength to do good is not
in man's will, but is given of God to man, to take interest and
increase of man again, which first he seemed to deny. Then, being
asked of Carolostadt, whether the whole and full good work that is in
man proceedeth of God; to this he answered, "the whole good work, but
not wholly: " granting, that the will is moved of God; but to consent,
to be in man's power. Against this reasoning Carolostadt alleged
certain places of Austin, and especially of St. Paul, who saith, that
God worketh in us both to will and to perform. And this sentence of
Carolostadt seemed to overcome. Eckius, for his assertion, inferred
certain extracts out of Bernard, which seemed little to the purpose.
And thus was a whole week lost about this contentious and sophistical
altercation between Eckius and Carolostadt.

     Luther (as was said) came, not thinking at all to dispute; but,
having free liberty granted by the duke, and under the pope's
authority, was provoked, and forced against his will, to dispute with
Eckius. The matter of their controversy was about the authority of
the bishop of Rome. Here is first to be admonished, that Luther
before had set forth in writing this doctrine:  That they that do
attribute the pre-eminency to the Church of Rome, have no foundation
for them, but out of the pope's decrees, set forth not much past four
hundred years heretofore; which decrees he affirmed to be contrary to
all ancient histories, above a thousand years past; contrary also to
the Holy Scriptures, and unto the Nicene council.

     Against this assertion Eckius set up a contrary conclusion;
saying, that those who hold that the supremacy and pre-eminency of
the Church of Rome above all other churches was not before the time
of Pope Silvester the First, do err, forasmuch as they that succeeded
in the see and faith of Peter, were always received for the
successors of Peter, and vicars of Christ on earth.

     This being the last of all the other themes of Eckius, yet
thought he chiefly to begin with this against Luther, to bring him
into more displeasure with the bishop of Rome; wherein Luther himself
much refused to dispute, alleging that matter to be more odious than
necessary for that present time, and that also, for the bishop of
Rome's sake, he had much rather keep silence in the same. Whereunto,
if he must needs be urged, he would the fault should be understood of
all men to be where it was; namely, in his adversaries who provoked
him thereunto, and not in himself. Eckius again, clearing himself,
translateth all the fault unto Luther, who first, in his treatise De
Indulgentiis Papæ defended, that before Pope Silvester's time the
Church of Rome had no place of majority or pre-eminence above other
churches:  and also before, the Cardinal Cajetan affirmed, that Pope
Pelagius wrested many places of the Scripture out of their sense,
unto his own affection and purpose:  "Wherefore the fault hereof,"
said he, "to him rather is to be imputed, who ministered the first
occasion."

     Thus Luther being egged and constrained to dispute, whether he
would or no, the question began to be propounded touching the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome; which supremacy Eckius did contend
to be founded and grounded upon God's law. Martin Luther, on the
other side, denied not the supremacy of the bishop of Rome above
other churches, nor denied the same, moreover, to be universal over
all churches; but only he affirmed it not to be instituted by God's
law. Upon this question the disputation did continue the space of
five days; during all which season, Eckius very dishonestly and
uncourteously demeaned himself, studying by all means how to bring
his adversary into the hatred of the auditors, and into danger of the
pope. The reasons of Eckius were these:  "Forasmuch as the church,
being a civil body, cannot be without a head, therefore, as it
standeth with God's law that other civil regiments should not be
destitute of their head, so is it by God's law requisite, that the
pope should be the head of the universal church of Christ." To this
Martin Luther answered, that he confesseth and granteth the church
not to be headless, so long as Christ is alive, who is the only Head
of the church; neither doth the church require any other bead beside
him, forasmuch as it is a spiritual kingdom, not earthly:  and he
alleged for him the place of Colossians i. Eckius again produceth
certain places out of Jerome and Cyprian, which made very little to
prove the primacy of the pope to hold by God's law. As touching the
testimony of Bernard, neither was the authority of that author of any
great force in this case, nor was the place alleged so greatly to the
purpose.

     Then came he to the place of St. Matthew, chap. xvi., Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my church, &c. To this was
answered, that this was a confession of faith, and that Peter there
represented' the person of the whole universal church; as Austin doth
expound it. Also that Christ in that place meaneth himself to be the
Rock, as is manifest to collect, both by his words, and the order of
the sentence, and many other conjectures. Likewise to the place of
St. John, Feed my sheep; which words Eckius alleged properly and
peculiarly to be spoken to Peter alone. Martin answered, that after
these words spoken, equal authority was given to all the apostles,
where Christ saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost:  whose sins
so-ever ye remit, they are remitted, &c. "By these words," saith he,
"Christ, assigning to them their office, doth teach what it is to
feed; and what he ought to be, that feedeth.

     After this, Eckius came to the authority of the council of
Constance, alleging this amongst other articles:  That it standeth
upon necessity of our salvation, to believe the bishop of Rome to be
supreme head of the church; alleging moreover, that in the same
council it was debated and discussed, that the general council could
not err. Whereunto Martin Luther again did answer discreetly, saying,
that all the articles which John Huss did hold in that council, were
not condemned for heretical; with much other matter more. Again, of
what authority that council of Constance is to be esteemed, that he
left to other men's judgments. "This is most certain," said he, "that
no council hath such authority to make new articles of faith." Here
Martin Luther began to be cried out of by Eckius and his complices,
for diminishing the authority of general councils:  although indeed he
meant nothing less, but ever laboured to confirm the authority of the
same, yet was he called heretic and schismatic, and one of the
Bohemians' faction, with many other terms besides of reproachful
contumely. Eckius then granted the authority of the apostles to be
equal; and yet not to follow thereby, the authority of all bishops
therefore to be equal; "for between apostleship and ministry," said
he, "there is great difference."

     To conclude, Eckius in no case could abide, that any creature
should decline from any word or sentence of the pope's decrees, or
the constitutions of the forefathers. To this again Luther answered,
grounding himself upon the place in Galatians ii., where St. Paul,
speaking of the principal apostles, saith, And of them which seemed
to be great, what they were before, it maketh no matter to me; for
God accepteth no man's person. Nevertheless they that were of some
reputation did avail nothing at all, &c. Eckius to this said, that as
touching the authority of the apostles, they were all chosen of
Christ, but were ordained bishops by St. Peter. And whereas Luther
brought in the constitution of the decree, which saith, Yea, let not
the bishop of Rome be called universal bishop, &c. To this Eckius
answered in this sort:  that the bishop of Rome ought not to be called
universal bishop; yet he may be called (saith he) bishop of the
universal church. And thus much touching the question of the pope's
supremacy.

     From this matter they entered next to purgatory, wherein Eckius
kept no order; for when they should have disputed what power the pope
hath in purgatory, Eckius turned the scope of the question, and
proved that there is purgatory; and alleged for him the place of
Maccabees. Luther, leaning upon the judgment of Jerome, affirmed the
book of Maccabees not to be canonical. Eckius again replied, the book
of Maccabees to be of no less authority than the Gospels. Also he
alleged the place, 1 Cor. iii., He shall be saved, yet so as it were
by fire. Moreover, he inferred the place of Matthew v., Agree thou
with thine adversary while thou art in the way with him, lest he
commit thee to prison; from whence thou shalt not escape till thou
hast paid the uttermost farthing, &c. To this he added also the place
of the Psalms, We have passed though the fire and water, &c. How
these places be wrested to purgatory, let the reader discern and
judge.

     Then was inferred the question of indulgences, whereof Eckius
seemed to make but a toy, and a matter of nothing, and so passed it
over.

     At last they came to the question of penance; touching which
matter, the reasons of Eckius digressed much from the purpose, which
went about to prove, that there be some manner of pains of
satisfaction:  which thing Luther did never deny. But that for every
particular offence such particular penance is exacted of God's
justice upon the repentant sinner, as is in man's power to remit or
release, as pleaseth him; such penance neither Luther, nor any other
true Christian, did admit.

     And thus have ye the chief effect of this disputation between
Luther and Eckius at Leipsic, which was in the month of July, A.D.
1519.

     About the beginning of the same year, Ulderic Zuinglius came
first to Zurich, and there began to teach; who, in the sixteenth
article in his book of articles, recorded, that Luther and he, both
at one time, one not knowing nor hearing of another, began to write
against the pope's pardons and indulgences. Albeit, if the time be
rightly counted, I suppose we shall find that Luther began a year or
two before Zuinglius. Notwithstanding, this doth Sleidan testify,
that in this present year, when Sampson, a Franciscan, came with the
pope's pardons to Zurich, Ulderic Zuinglius did withstand him, and
declared his chaffer and pardons to be but a vain seducing of the
people to inveigle away their money.

     The next year ensuing, which was 1520, the friars and doctors
of Louvain, and also of Cologne, condemned the books of Luther as
heretical; against whom Luther again effectually defended himself,
and charged them with obstinate violence and malicious impiety. After
this, within few days flashed out from Rome the thunderbolt of Pope
Leo against the said Luther, notwithstanding he so humbly and
obediently before had reverenced both the person of the pope, and
recognised the authority of his see, and also had dedicated unto him
the book entitled Of Christian Liberty; in which book these two
points principally he discusseth and proveth: 

     "I. That a Christian man is free, and lord of all things, and
subject to none.

     "II. That a Christian man is a diligent underling and servant
of all men, and to every man subject."

     Moreover, in the same year he set out a defence of all his
articles, which the pope's bull had before condemned.

     Another book also he wrote, to the nobility of Germany, in the
which book he impugneth and shaketh the three principal walls of the
papists:  the first whereof is this: 

     "I. Whereas the papists say, that no temporal or profane
magistrate hath any power upon the spirituality, but they have power
over the other.

     "II. Where any place of Scripture, being in controversy, is to
be decided, they say, No man may expound the Scripture, or be judge
thereof, but only the pope.

     "III. When any council is brought against them, they say, that
no man hath authority to call a council, but only the pope."

     Moreover, in the aforesaid book divers other matters he
handleth and discourseth:  That the pope can stop no free council;
also what things ought to be handled in councils; that the pride of
the pope is not to be suffered; what money goeth out of Germany
yearly to the pope, amounting to the sum of three millions of
florins. The true meaning of this verse he expoundeth:  Tu supplex
ora, to protege, toque labora; wherein the three estates, with their
offices and duties, are described; to wit, the minister, the 
magistrate, and the subjects. Furthermore, in the said book he
proveth and discusseth, that the emperor is not under the pope; but
contrariwise, that the donation of Constantine is not true, but
forged:  that priests may have wives:  that the voices of the people
ought not to be separate from the election of ecclesiastical persons: 
that interdicting and suspending of matrimony at certain times is
brought in by avarice:  what is the right use of excommunication:  that
there ought to be fewer holidays:  that liberty ought not to be
restrained in meats:  that wilful poverty and begging ought to be
abolished:  what damage and inconvenience have grown by the council of
Constance; and what misfortunes Sigismund the emperor sustained, for
not keeping faith and promise with John Huss and Jerome:  that
heretics should be convinced not by fire and faggot, but by evidence
of Scripture, and God's word:  how schools and universities ought to
be reformed:  what is to be said and judged of the pope's decretals: 
that the first teaching of children ought to begin with the gospel: 
Item, he writeth in the same book against excessive apparel among the
Germans:  also against their excess in spices, &c.

     In this year, moreover, followed, not long after, the
coronation of the new emperor Charles the Fifth, which was in the
month of October, at Aix-la-Chapelle. After which coronation, being
solemnized about the month of November, Pope Leo sent again to Duke
Frederic, two cardinals his legates, of whom the one was Hierome
Aleander, who, after a few words of high commendation first premised
to the duke touching his noble progeny, and other his famous virtues,
they made two requests unto him in the pope's name:  first, that he
would cause all books of Luther to be burned; secondly, that he would
either see the said Luther there to be executed, or else would make
him sure, and send him up to Rome, unto the pope's presence.

     These two requests seemed very strange unto the duke; who,
answering again to the cardinals, said, that he, being long absent
from thence about other public affairs, could not tell what there was
done, neither did he communicate with the doings of Luther.
Notwithstanding this, he heard that Eckius was a great perturber not
only of Luther, but of other learned and good men of his university.
As for himself, he was always ready to do his duty; first, in sending
Luther to Cajetan the cardinal at the city of Augsburg; and
afterwards, at the pope's commandment, would have sent him away out
of his dominion, had not Meltitius, the pope's own chamberlain, given
contrary counsel to retain him still in his own country, fearing lest
that in other countries he might do more harm, where he was less
known:  and so now was as ready to do his duty, wheresoever right and
equity did so require. But forasmuch as in this cause he seeth much
hatred and violence showed on the one part, and no error yet
convicted on the other part, but that it had rather the approbation
of divers well learned and sound men of judgment; and forasmuch as
also the cause of Luther was not yet heard before the emperor,
therefore he desired the said legates to be a mean to the pope's
Holiness, that certain learned persons of gravity and upright
judgment might be assigned to have the hearing and determination of
this matter, and that his error first might be known, before he were
made a heretic, or his books burned:  which being done, when he should
see his error by manifest and sound testimonies of Scripture
reproved, Luther should find no favour at his hands. Otherwise he
trusted that the pope's Holiness would exact no such thing of him,
which he might not with equity, and honour of his place and estate,
reasonably perform, &c.

     Then the cardinals (declaring to the duke again, that they
could no otherwise do, but according to the form of their prescript
commission they must proceed) took the books of Luther, and shortly
after set fire upon them, and openly burnt them. Luther, hearing
this, in like manner called all the multitude of students and learned
men in Wittenberg, and there, taking the pope's decrees, and the bull
lately sent down against him, openly and solemnly, accompanied with a
great number of people following him, set them likewise on fire, and
burnt them; which was the tenth of December, A.D. 1520.



147. THE DIET OF WORMS.

     A little before these things thus passed between the pope and
Martin Luther, the emperor had commanded and ordained a sitting or
assembly of the states of all the empire to be holden at the city of
Worms, against the sixth day of January next ensuing; in the which
assembly, through the means of Duke Frederic, the emperor gave forth,
that he would have the cause of Luther there brought before him; and
so it was. For at what time the assembly was commenced in the city of
Worms, the day and month aforesaid, which was the sixth of January;
afterwards, upon the sixth of March following, the emperor, through
the instigation of Duke Frederic, directed his letters unto Luther;
signifying, that forasmuch as he had set abroad certain books, he
therefore, by the advice of his peers and princes about him, had
ordained to have the cause brought before him in his own hearing; and
therefore he granted him licence to come, and return home again. And
that he might safely and quietly so do, and be thereof assured, he
promised unto him, by public faith and credit, in the name of the
whole empire, his passport and safe-conduct; as by the instrument
which he sent unto him, he might more fully be certified. Wherefore,
without all doubt or distrust, he willed him eftsoons to make his
repair unto him, and to be there present the twenty-first day after
the receipt thereof:  and because he should not misdoubt any fraud or
injury herein, he assured to him his warrant and promise.

     Martin Luther being thus provided for his safe-conduct by the
emperor, after he had been first accursed at Rome upon Maundy
Thursday by the pope's censure, shortly after Easter speedeth his
journey toward the emperor at Worms, where the said Luther, appearing
before the emperor and all the states of Germany, how constantly he
stuck to the truth, and defended himself, and answered his
adversaries, and what adversaries he had, here followeth in full
history, with the acts and doings which there happened; according as
in our former edition partly was before described.
 In the year of our salvation 1521, about seventeen
days after Easter, Martin Luther entered into Worms, being sent for
by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who, the first year of his empire,
made an assembly of princes in the aforesaid city. And whereas Martin
Luther had published three years before, certain propositions to be
disputed in the town of Wittenberg, in Saxony, against the tyranny of
the pope, (which, notwithstanding, were torn to pieces, condemned,
and burned by the papists, and yet by no manifest Scriptures, nor
probable reason, convinced,) the matter began to grow to a tumult and
uproar; and yet Luther maintained all this while openly his cause
against the clergy. Whereupon it seemed good to certain, that Luther
should be called; assigning unto him a herald-at-arms, with a letter
of safe-conduct by the emperor and princes. Being sent for, he came,
and was brought to the knights of the Rhodes' place, where he was
lodged, well entertained, and visited of many earls, barons, knights
of the order, gentlemen, priests, and the commonalty, who frequented
his lodging till night.

     To conclude, he came, contrary to the expectation of many, as
well adversaries as others. For albeit he was sent for by the
emperor's messenger, and had letters of safe-conduct; yet for that a
few days before his access, his books were condemned by public
proclamation, it was much doubted of by many that he would not come: 
and the rather, for that his friends deliberated together in a
village nigh hand, called Oppenheim (where Luther was first
advertised of these occurrents); and many persuaded him not to
adventure himself to such a present danger, considering how these
beginnings answered not to the faith of promise made. Who, when he
had heard their whole persuasion and advice, he answered in this
wise:  "As touching me, since I am sent for, I am resolved and
certainly determined to enter Worms, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ; yea, although I knew there were as many devils to resist me,
as there are tiles to cover the houses in Worms."

     The fourth day after his repair, a gentleman named Ulrick, of
Pappenheim, lieutenant-general of the men-at-arms of the empire, was
commanded by the emperor before dinner to repair to Luther, and to
enjoin him at four o'clock in the afternoon to appear before the
imperial Majesty, the princes electors, dukes, and other estates of
the empire, to understand the cause of his sending for; whereunto he
willingly agreed, as his duty was. And after four o'clock, Ulrick of
Pappenheim, and Caspar Sturm, the emperor's herald, (who conducted
Martin Luther from Wittenberg to Worms,) came for Luther, and
accompanied him through the garden of the knights of the Rhodes'
place, to the earl Palatine's palace; and, lest the people should
molest him, that thronged in, he was led by secret stairs to the
place where he was appointed to have audience. Yet many, who
perceived the pretence, violently rushed in, and were resisted,
albeit in vain:  many ascended the galleries, because they desired to
behold Luther.

     Thus standing before the emperor, the electors, dukes, earls,
and all the estates of empire assembled there, he was first
advertised by Ulrick of Pappenheim to keep silence, until such time
as he was required to speak. Then John Eckius above mentioned, who
then was the bishop of Treves' general official, with a loud and
intelligible voice, first in Latin, then in Dutch, according to the
emperor's commandment, said and proponed this sentence in manner as
ensueth, or like in effect: 

     "Martin Luther! the sacred and invincible imperial Majesty hath
enjoined, by the consent of all the estates of the holy empire, that
thou shouldest be appealed before the throne of his Majesty, to the
end I might demand of thee these two points.

     "First, Whether thou confess these books here, [for he showed a
heap of Luther's books written in the Latin and Dutch tongues,] and
which are in all places dispersed, entitled with thy name, be thine,
and thou dost affirm them to be thine, or not?

     "Secondly, Whether thou wilt recant and revoke them, and all
that is contained in them, or rather meanest to stand to that thou
hast written?"

     Then, before Luther prepared to answer, Master Jerome Scurffe,
a lawyer at Wittenberg, required that the titles of the books should
be read. Forthwith the aforesaid Eckius named certain of the books,
and those principally which were imprinted at Basil; among which he
nominated his Commentaries upon the Psalter, his book of Good Works,
his Commentary upon the Lord's Prayer, and divers other which were
not contentious.

     After this Luther answered thus in Latin and in Dutch: 

     "Two things are proponed unto me by the imperial Majesty: 
First, whether I will avouch for mine all those books that bear my
name. Secondly, whether I will maintain or revoke any thing that
hitherto I have devised and published:  whereunto I will answer as
briefly as I can.

     "In the first, I can do none other than recognise those books
to be mine which lastly were named, and certainly I will never recant
any clause thereof. In the second, to declare whether I will wholly
defend, or call back any thing comprised in them:  forasmuch as there
be questions of faith, and the salvation of the soul, (and this
concerneth the word of God, which is the greatest and most excellent
matter that can be in heaven or earth, and the which we ought duly
evermore to reverence,) this might be accounted in me a rashness of
judgment, and even a most dangerous attempt, if I would pronounce any
thing before I were better advised; considering I might recite
something less than the matter importeth, and more than the truth
requireth, if I did not premeditate that which I would speak. The
which two things well considered, doth set before mine eyes this
sentence of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein it is said, Whosoever
shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my Father. I require
then for this cause, and humbly beseech the imperial Majesty to grant
me, liberty and leisure to deliberate; so that I may satisfy the
interrogation made unto me, without prejudice of the word of God, and
peril of mine own soul."

     Whereupon the princes began to deliberate. This done, Eckius,
the prolocutor, pronounced what was their resolution, saying,

     "Albeit, Master Luther! thou hast sufficiently understood by
the emperor's commandment the cause of thy appearance here, and
therefore dost not deserve to have any further respite given thee to
determine; yet the emperor's Majesty, of his mere clemency, granteth
thee one day to meditate for thine answer, so that to-morrow, at this
instant hour, thou shalt repair to exhibit thine opinion, not in
writing, but to pronounce the same with lively voice."

     This done, Luther was led to his lodging by the herald. But
herein I may not be oblivious, that in the way going to the emperor,
and when be was in the assembly of princes, he was exhorted by others
to be courageous, and manly to demean himself, and not to fear them
that kill the body, but not the soul; but rather to dread Him, that
is able to send both body and soul to everlasting fire.

     Furthermore, he was encouraged with this sentence; When thou
art before kings, think not what thou shalt speak, for it shall be
given thee in that hour, Matt. x.

     The next day, after four o'clock, the herald came and brought
Luther from his lodging to the emperor's court, where he abode till
six o'clock, for that the princes were occupied in grave
consultations; abiding there, and being environed with a great number
of people, and almost smothered for the press that was there. Then
after, when the princes were set, and Luther entered, Eckius, the
official, began to speak in this manner: 

     "Yesterday, at this hour, the emperor's Majesty assigned thee
to be here, Master Luther! for that thou didst affirm those books
that we named yesterday to be thine. Further, to the interrogation by
us made, whether thou wouldest approve all that is contained in them,
or abolish and make void any part thereof, thou didst require time of
deliberation, which was granted, and is now expired; albeit thou
oughtest not to have opportunity granted to deliberate, considering
it was not unknown to thee wherefore we cited thee. And as concerning
the matter of faith, every man ought to be so prepared, that at all
times, whensoever he shall be required, he may give certain and
constant reason thereof; and thou especially, being counted a man of
such learning, and so long time exercised in theology. Then go to;
answer even now to the emperor's demand, whose bounty thou hast
proved in giving thee leisure to deliberate. Wilt thou now maintain
all thy books which thou hast acknowledged, or revoke any part of
them, and submit thyself?"

     The official made this interrogation in Latin and in Dutch.
Martin Luther answered in Latin and in Dutch in this wise, modestly
and lowly, and yet not without some stoutness of stomach, and
Christian constancy; so that his adversaries would gladly have had
his courage more humbled and abased, but yet more earnestly desired
his recantation; whereof they were in some good hope, when they heard
him desire respite of time to make his answer.

     His answer was this: 

     "Most magnificent emperor, and you most noble princes, and my
most gentle lords! I appear before you here at this hour prescribed
unto me yesterday, yielding the obedience that I owe; humbly
beseeching, for God's mercy, your most renowned Majesty, and your
Graces and Honours, that ye will minister to me this courtesy, to
attend this cause benignly, which is the cause (as I trust) of
justice and verity; and if by ignorance I have not given unto every
one of you your just titles, or if I have not observed the ceremonies
and countenances of the court, offending against them; it may please
you to pardon me of your benignities, as one that only hath
frequented cloisters, and not courtly civilities. And first, as
touching myself, I can affirm or promise no other thing but only
this:  that I have taught hitherto, in simplicity of mind, that which
I have thought to tend to God's glory, and to the salvation of men's
souls.

     "Now, as concerning the two articles objected by your most
excellent Majesty, Whether I would acknowledge those books which were
named, and be published in my name; or whether I would maintain and
not revoke them:  I have given resolute answer to the first, in the
which I persist, and shall persevere for evermore, that these books
be mine, and published by me in my name; unless it hath since
happened, by some fraudulent misdealing of mine enemies, there be any
thing foisted into them, or corruptly corrected. For I will
acknowledge nothing but that I have written, and that which I have
written I will not deny.

     "Now to answer to the second article; I beseech your most
excellent Majesty, and your Graces, to vouchsafe to give ear. All my
books are not of one sort:  there be some in which I have so simply
and soundly declared and opened the religion of Christian faith, and
of good works, that my very enemies are compelled to confess them to
be profitable and worthy to be read of all Christians. And truly the
pope's bull (how cruel and tyrannous soever it be) judgeth certain of
my books inculpable; albeit the same, with severe sentence,
thundereth against me, and with monstrous cruelty condemneth my
books:  which books if I should revoke, I might worthily be thought to
neglect and transgress the office of a true Christian, and to be one
alone that repugneth the public confession of all people. There is
another sort of my books which containeth invectives against the
papacy, and others of the pope's retinue, as have, with their
pestiferous doctrine, and pernicious examples, corrupted the whole
state of our Christianity; neither can any deny or dissemble this,
(whereunto universal experience and common complaint of all bear
witness,) that the consciences of all faithful men be most miserably
entrapped, vexed, and cruelly tormented by the pope's laws and
doctrines of men; also that the goods and substance of Christian
people are devoured, especially in this noble and famous country of
Germany; and yet, without order, and in most detestable manner, are
suffered still to be devoured without all measure, by incredible
tyranny; notwithstanding that they themselves have ordained to the
contrary in their own proper laws, as in the 9th and 25th
distinctions, and in the 1st and 2nd questions; where they themselves
have decreed, that all such laws of popes which be repugnant to the
doctrines of the gospel, and the opinions of the ancient fathers, are
to be judged erroneous, and reproved. If then I shall revoke these, I
can do none other but add more force to their tyrannny, and open not
only windows, but wide gates to their impiety, which is like to
extend more wide, and more licentiously, than ever it durst
heretofore. And by the testimony of this my retraction, their
insolent kingdom shall be made more licentious, and less subject to
punishment, intolerable to the common people, and also more confirmed
and established; especially if this be bruited, that I, Luther, have
done this by the authority of your most excellent Majesty, and the
sacred Roman empire. O Lord! what a cover or shadow shall I be then,
to cloak their naughtiness and tyranny. The rest, or third sort of my
books, are such as I have written against certain private and
singular persons; to wit, against such as with tooth and nail labour
to maintain the Romish tyranny, and to deface the true doctrine and
religion which I have taught and professed, As touching these, I
plainly confess, I have been more vehement than my religion and
profession required. For I make myself no saint, and I dispute not of
my life, but of the doctrine of Christ. And these I cannot without
prejudice call back. For by this recantation it will come to pass,
that tyranny and impiety shall reign, supported by my means; and so
shall they exercise cruelty against God's people more violently and
ragingly than before. Nevertheless, for that I am a man, and not God,
I can none otherwise enterprise to defend my books, than did my very
Lord Jesus Christ defend his doctrine; who, being examined of his
learning before Annas, and having received a buffet of the minister,
said, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, John xviii. If
the Lord, who was perfect and could not err, refused not to have
testimony given against his doctrine, yea, of a most vile servant,
how much the more then I, that am but vile corruption, and can of
myself do nothing but err, ought earnestly to see and require if any
will bear witness against my doctrine. Therefore I require, for God's
mercy, your most excellent Majesty, your Graces and right honourable
Lordships, or whatsoever he be of high or low degree, here to lay in
his testimony, to convict my errors, and confute me by the
Scriptures, either out of the prophets, or the apostles; and I will
be most ready, if I be so instructed, to revoke any manner of error;
yea, and will be the first that shall consume mine own books and burn
them.

     "I suppose hereby it may appear, that I have perpended and well
weighed before the perils and dangers, the divisions and dissensions,
which have arisen throughout the whole world by reason of my
doctrine, whereof I was vehemently and sharply yesterday admonished: 
concerning which divisions of men's minds what other men do judge I
know not; as touching myself, I conceive no greater delectation in
any thing, than when I behold discords and dissensions stirred up for
the word of God; for such is the course and proceeding of the gospel: 
Jesus Christ saith, I came not to send peace but a sword; I came to
set a man at variance with his father, Matt. x.

     "And further, we must think, that our God is marvellous and
terrible in his counsels; lest perhaps that which we endeavour with
earnest study to achieve and bring to pass, (if we begin first with
condemning of his word,) the same rebound again to a huge sea of
evil; and lest the new reign of this young and bounteous Prince
Charles, (in whom, next after God, we all conceive singular hope,) be
lamentably, unfortunately, and miserably begun. I could exemplify
this with authorities of the Scriptures more effectually, as by
Pharaoh, the king of Babylon, and the kings of Israel, who then most
obscured the bright sun of their glory, and procured their own ruin,
when by sage counsels they attempted to pacify and establish their
governments and realms, and not by God's counsels; for it is he that
entrappeth the wily in their wiliness, and subverteth mountains
before they be aware. Wherefore it is good, and God's work, to dread
the Lord.

     "I speak not this, supposing that such politic and prudent
heads have need of my doctrine and admonition, but because I would
not omit to profit my country, and offer my duty or service, that may 
tend to the advancement of the same. And thus I humbly commend me to
your most excellent Majesty, and your honourable Lordships;
beseeching you that I may not incur your displeasures, neither be
contemned of you, through the pursuit of my adversaries. I have
spoken."

     These words pronounced, then Eckius, the emperor's prolocutor,
with a stern countenance, began and said, that Luther had not
answered to any purpose; neither it behoved him to call in question
things in time past, concluded and defined by general councils; and
therefore they required of him a plain and direct answer, whether he
would revoke or no? -- Then Luther said: 

     "Considering your sovereign Majesty, and your Honours, require
a plain answer; this I say and profess as resolutely as I may,
without doubting or sophistication, that if I be not convinced by
testimonies of the Scriptures, and by probable reasons, (for I
believe not the pope, neither his general councils, which have erred
many times, and have been contrary to themselves,) my conscience is
so bound and captived in these Scriptures and word of God which I
have alleged, that I will not, nor may not, revoke any manner of
thing; considering it is not godly or lawful to do any thing against
conscience, Hereupon I stand and rest:  I have not what else to say.
God have mercy upon me!"

     The princes consulted together upon this answer given by
Luther; and when they had diligently examined the same, the
prolocutor began to repel him thus: 

     "Martin, thou hast more immodestly answered than beseemed thy
person, and also little to the purpose. Thou dividest thy books into
three sorts, in such order as all that thou hast said maketh nothing
to the interrogation proponed:  and therefore, if thou hadst revoked
those wherein the greatest part of thine errors is contained, the
emperor's Majesty, and the noble clemency of others, would have
suffered the rest that be sound, to sustain no injury. But thou dost
revive, and bringest to light again, all that the general council of
Constance hath condemned, the which was assembled of all the nation
of Germany, and now dost require to be convinced with Scriptures;
wherein thou errest greatly. For what availeth it to renew
disputation of things so long time past condemned by the church and
councils, unless it should be necessary to give a reason to every man
of every thing that is concluded? Now were it so, that this should be
permitted to every one that gainstandeth the determination of the 
church and councils, that he may once get this advantage, to be
convinced by the Scriptures, we shall have nothing certain and
established in Christendom. And this is the cause wherefore the
emperor's Majesty requireth of thee a simple answer, either negative
or affirmative, whether thou mindest to defend all thy works as
Christian, or no?"

     Then Luther, turning to the emperor and the nobles, besought
them not to force or compel him to yield against his conscience,
confirmed with the Holy Scriptures, without manifest arguments
alleged to the contrary by his adversaries.

     "I have declared and rendered," said he, "mine answer simply
and directly, neither have I any more to say, unless mine
adversaries, with true and sufficient probations grounded upon the
Scripture, can reduce and resolve my mind, and refel mine errors
which they lay to my charge. I am tied, as I said, by the Scriptures;
neither may I, or can, with a safe conscience assent unto them. For,
as touching general councils, with whose authority only they press
me, I am able to prove, that they have both erred, and have defined
many times things contrary to themselves. And therefore the authority
of them," he said, "not to be sufficient, for the which he should
call back those things, the verity whereof standeth so firm and
manifest in the Holy Scripture, that neither of him it ought to be
required, neither could he so do without impiety."

     Whereunto the official again answered, denying that any man
could prove the councils to have erred. But Luther alleged that he
could, and promised to prove it; and now night approaching, the lords
rose and departed. And after Luther had taken his leave of the
emperor, divers Spaniards scorned and scoffed the good man in the way
going toward his lodging, hallooing and whooping after him a long
while.

     Upon the Friday following, when the princes electors, dukes,
and other estates were assembled, the emperor sent to the whole body
of the council a certain letter, containing in effect as followeth: 

     "Our predecessors, who were truly Christian princes, were
obedient to the Romish Church, which Martin Luther presently
impugneth. And therefore, inasmuch as he is not determined to call
back his errors in any one point, we cannot, without great infamy and
stain of honour, degenerate from the examples of our elders, but will
maintain the ancient faith, and give aid to the see of Rome. And
further, we be resolved to pursue Martin Luther and his adherents, by
excommunications, and other means that may be devised, to extinguish
his doctrine. Nevertheless we will not violate our faith, which we
have promised him, but mean to give order for safe return to the
place whence he came."
 The princes electors, dukes, and other estates of
the empire, sat and consulted upon this sentence, on Friday all the
afternoon, and Saturday the whole day, so that Luther yet had no
answer of the emperor.

     During this time, divers princes, earls, barons, knights of the
order, gentlemen, priests, monks, with other the laity and common
sort, visited him. All these were present at all hours in the
emperor's court, and could not be satisfied with the sight of him.
Also there were bills set up, some against Luther, and some, as it
seemed, with him. Notwithstanding many supposed, and especially such
as well conceived the matter, that this was subtilly done by his
enemies, that thereby occasion might be offered to infringe the safe-
conduct given him; the which the Roman ambassadors with all diligence
endeavoured to bring to pass.

     The Monday following, before supper, the archbishop of Treves
advertised Luther, that on Wednesday next he should appear before
him, at nine o'clock before dinner, and assigned him the place. On
St. George's day, a certain chaplain of the archbishop of Treves,
about supper-time, came to Luther by the commandment of the bishop,
signifying, that at that hour and place prescribed, he must, the
morrow after, have access to his master.

     The morrow after St. George's day, Luther, obeying the
archbishop's commandment, entered his palace, being accompanied
thither with his said chaplain, and one of the emperor's heralds, and
such as came in his company out of Saxony to Worms, with other his
chief friends.

     Whereat Dr. Vœus, the marquis of Baden's chaplain, began to
declare and protest, in the presence of the archbishop of Treves,
Joachim, marquis of Brandenburg, George, duke of Saxony, the bishops
of Augsburg and Brandenburg, the earl George, John Bock of Strasburg,
Verdeheymer and Peutiger, doctors,

     That Luther was not called to be conferred with, or to
disputation, but only that the princes had procured licence of the
emperor's Majesty, through Christian charity, to have liberty granted
unto them to exhort Luther benignly and brotherly. -- He said
further, that albeit the councils had ordained divers things, yet
they had not determined contrary matters. And albeit they had greatly
erred, yet their authority was not therefore abased; or at the least,
not so erred, that it was lawful for every man to impugn their
opinions; inferring moreover many things of Zaccheus and the
centurion, also of the traditions, and of constitutions, and of
ceremonies ordained of men:  affirming that all these were established
to repress vices, according to the quality of times; and that the
church could not be destitute of human constitutions. It is true,
said he, that by the fruits the tree may be known; yet of these laws
and decrees of men, many good fruits have proceeded; and St. Martin,
St. Nicholas, and many other saints have been present at the
councils.

     Moreover, that Luther's book would breed a great tumult and
incredible troubles; and that he abused the common sort with his book
of Christian Liberty, encouraging them to shake off their yoke, and
to confirm in them a disobedience:  that the world now was at another
stay, than when the believers were all of one heart and soul, and
therefore it was requisite and behoveful to have laws. It was to be
considered, said he, albeit he had written many good things, and no
doubt of a good mind, as De triplice Justitia, and other matters, yet
how the devil now, by crafty means, goeth about to bring to pass,
that all his works for ever should be condemned. For by these books
which he wrote last, men, said he, would judge and esteem him, as the
tree is known, not by the blossom, but by the fruit.

     Here he added something of the noon devil, and of the spirit
coming in the dark, and of the flying arrow. All his oration was
exhortatory, full of rhetorical places of honesty, of utility of
laws, of the dangers of conscience, and of the common and particular
wealth; repeating oft this sentence in the proem, middle, and
epilogue of his oration:  That this admonition was given him of a
singular good will, and great clemency. In the shutting up of his
oration he added menacings, saying, that if he would abide in his
purposed intent, the emperor would proceed further, and banish him
from the empire; persuading him deliberately to ponder, and to advise
these and other things. Martin Luther answered: 

     "Most noble princes, and my most gracious lords! I render most
humble thanks for your benignities and singular good wills, whence
proceedeth this admonition; for I know myself to be so base, as by no
means I can deserve to be admonished of so mighty estates." Then he
frankly pronounced that he had not reproved all councils, but only
the council of Constance; and for this principal cause, for that the
same had condemned the word of God, which appeared in the
condemnation of this article proponed by John Huss:  "The church of
Christ is the communion of the predestinate." "It is evident," said
he, "that the council of Constance abolished this article, and
consequently the article of our faith:  I believe the holy church
universal." And said, that he was ready to spend life and blood, so
he were not compelled to revoke the manifest word of God; for in
defence thereof we ought rather to obey God than men:  and that in
this he could not avoid the scandal or offence of faith; for there be
two manner of offences, to wit, of charity, and of faith. The slander
of charity consisteth in manners and in life:  the offences of faith
or doctrine rest in the word of God:  and as touching this last, he
could escape it no manner of ways; for it lay not in his power to
make Christ not to be a stone of offence. If Christ's sheep were fed
with pure pasture of the gospel; if the faith of Christ were
sincerely preached, and if there were good ecclesiastical
magistrates, who duly would execute their office; we should not need,
said he, to charge the church with men's traditions. Further, that he
knew well we ought to obey the magistrates and higher powers, how
unjustly and perversely soever they lived:  we ought also to be
obedient to their laws and judgment:  all which he had taught, said
he, in all his works; adding further, that he was ready to obey them
in all points, so that they enforced him not to deny the word of God.

     These words finished, Luther was bade to stand aside, and the
princes consulted what answer they might give him. This done, they 
called him into a parlour, where the aforesaid Doctor Vœus repeated
his former matters, admonishing Luther to submit his writings to the
emperor, and to the princes' judgment. Luther answered humbly and
modestly,

     That he could not, neither would, permit that men should say he
would shun the judgment of the emperor, princes, and superior powers
of the empire. So far was it off that he would refuse to stand their
trial, that he was contented to suffer his writings to be discussed,
considered, and judged of the simplest, so that it were done with the
authority of the word of God, and the Holy Scripture:  and that the
word of God made so much for him, and was so manifest unto him, that
he could not give place, unless they could confound his doctrine by
the word of God. This lesson, said he, he learned of St. Augustine,
who writeth, that he gave this honour only to those books which are
called canonical; that he believed the same only to be true. As
touching other doctors, albeit in holiness and excellency of learning
they passed, yet he would not credit them further than they agreed
with the touchstone of God's word. Further, said he, St. Paul giveth
us a lesson, writing to the Thessalonians:  Prove all things, follow
that is good. And to the Galatians:  Though an angel should descend
from heaven, if he preach any other doctrine, let him be accursed,
and therefore not to be believed!

     Finally, he meekly besought them not to urge his conscience,
captived in the bands of the word of God and Holy Scripture, to deny
the same excellent word. And thus he commended his cause and himself
to them, and especially to the emperor's Majesty, requiring their
favour, that he might not be compelled to do any thing in this matter
against his conscience:  in all other causes he would submit himself,
with all kind of obedience and due subjection.

     As Luther had thus ended his talk, Joachim, elector, marquis of
Brandenburg, demanded if his meaning was this, that he would not
yield, unless he were convinced by the Scripture?" Yea, truly, right
noble lord!" quoth Luther, "or else by ancient and evident reasons."
And so the assembly brake, and the princes repaired to the emperor's
court.

     After their departure the archbishop of Treves, accompanied
with a few his familiars, namely, John Eckius his official, and
Cochleus, commanded Luther to repair into his parlour. With Luther
was Jerome Scurffe, and Nicholas Ambsdorff, for his assistants. Then
the official began to frame an argument, like a sophist and canonist,
defending the pope's cause; that for the most part at all times Holy
Scriptures have engendered errors, as the error of Helvidius the
heretic, out of that place in the gospel, where is expressed, Joseph
knew not his wife till she was delivered of her first child. Further,
he went about to overthrow this proposition:  that the catholic church
is the communion of saints.

     Martin Luther and Jerome Scurffe reproved (but modestly) these
follies, and other vain and ridiculous matters, which Eckius brought
forth, as things not serving to the purpose. Sometime Cochleus would
come in with his five eggs, and laboured to persuade Luther to desist
from his purpose, and utterly to refrain thenceforth to write or
teach; and so they departed.

     About evening the archbishop of Treves advertised Luther by
Ambsdorff, that the emperor's promise made unto him was prolonged two
days, and in the mean season he would confer with him the next day,
and for that cause he would send Peutinger, and the doctor of Baden,
(which was Vœus,) the morrow after to him; and he himself would also
talk with him.

     The Friday after, which was St. Mark's day, Peutinger, and the
doctor of Baden, travailed in the forenoon to persuade Luther simply
and absolutely to submit the judgment of his writings to the emperor
and empire. He answered, he would do it, and submit any thing they
would have him, so they grounded with authority of Holy Scripture;
otherwise he would not consent to do any thing:  for God said by his
prophet, (saith he,) Trust ye not in princes, nor in the children of
men, in whom there is no health. Also, Cursed be he that trusteth in
man. And seeing that they did urge him more vehemently, he answered,
"We ought to yield no more to the judgment of men, than the word of
God doth suffer." So they departed, and prayed him to advise for
better answer; and said, they would return after dinner. And after
dinner they returned, exhorting him as before, but in vain. They
prayed him, that at least he would submit his writing to the judgment
of the next general council. Luther agreed thereunto, but with this
condition, that they themselves should present the articles collected
out of his books to be submitted to the council, in such sort, as,
notwithstanding the sentence awarded by the council, should be
authorized by the Scripture, and confirmed with the testimonies of
the same.

     They then, leaving Luther, departed, and reported to the
archbishop of Treves, that he had promised to submit his writings in
certain articles to the next council, and in the mean space he would
keep silence; which Luther never thought:  who neither with
admonitions, nor yet menaces, could be induced to deny or submit his
books to the judgments of men, (he had so fortified his cause with
clear and manifest authorities of the Scripture,) until they could
prove by sacred Scripture and apparent reasons to the contrary.

     It chanced then by the special grace of God, that the
archbishop of Treves sent for Luther, thinking presently to hear him.
And when he perceived otherwise than Peutinger and the doctor of
Baden had told him, he said that he would for no good, but that he
had heard himself speak; for else he was even now going to the
emperor, to declare what the doctors had reported.

     Then the archbishop entreated Luther, and conferred with him
very gently, first removing such as were present, as well of the one
side as of the other. In this conference Luther concealed nothing
from the archbishop; affirming, that it was dangerous to submit a
matter of so great importance to them, who, after they had called him
under safe-conduct, attempting him with new commandments, had
condemned his opinion and approved the pope's bull.

     Moreover the archbishop, bidding a friend of his draw nigh,
required Luther to declare what remedy might be ministered to help
this. Luther answered, that there was no better remedy than such as
Gamaliel alleged in the fifth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, as
witnesseth St. Luke, saying, If this counsel, or this work, proceed
of men, it shall come to nought; but if it be of God, ye cannot
destroy it. And so he desired that the emperor might be advertised to
write the same to the pope, that he knew certainly, if this his
enterprise proceeded not of God, it would be abolished within three,
yea, within two years.

     The archbishop inquired of him what he would do, if certain
articles were taken out of his books, to be submitted to the general
council. Luther answered, "So that they be not those which the
council of Constance condemned." The archbishop said, "I fear they
will be the very same; but what then?" Luther replied, "I will not,
nor I cannot, hold my peace of such, for I am sure by their decrees
the word of God was condemned; therefore I will rather lose head and
life, than abandon the manifest word of my Lord God."

     Then the archbishop, seeing Luther would in no wise give over
the word of God to the judgment of men, gently bade Luther farewell;
who at that instant prayed the archbishop to entreat the emperor's
Majesty to grant him gracious leave to depart. He answered, he would
take order for him, and speedily advertise him of the emperor's
pleasure.

     Within a small while after, John Eckius, the archbishop's
official, in the presence of the emperor's secretary, who had been
Maximilian's chancellor, said unto Luther in his lodging, by the
commandment of the emperor:  that since he had been admonished
diversely of the imperial Majesty, the electors, princes, and estates
of the empire, and that, notwithstanding, he would not return to
unity and concord, there remained that the emperor, as advocate of
the catholic faith, should proceed further:  and it was the emperor's
ordinance, that he should in twenty-one days return boldly under
safe-conduct, and be safely guarded to the place whence he came; so
that in the mean while he stirred no commotion among the people in
his journey, either in conference, or by preaching.

     Luther, hearing this, answered very modestly and Christianly,
"Even as it hath pleased God, so is it come to pass; the name of the
Lord be blessed! "He said further, he thanked most humbly the
emperor's Majesty, and all the princes and estates of the empire,
that they had given to him benign and gracious audience, and granted
safe-conduct to come and return. Finally, he said, he desired none
other of them, than a reformation according to the sacred word of
God, and consonancy of Holy Scriptures, which effectually in his
heart he desired:  otherwise he was pressed to suffer all chances for
the imperial Majesty, as life, and death, goods, fame, and reproach;
reserving nothing to himself, but the only word of God, which he
would constantly confess to the latter end; humbly recommending him
to the emperor's Majesty, and to all the princes and other estates of
the sacred empire.

     The morrow after, which was the six and twentieth day of April,
after he had taken his leave of such as supported him, and other, his
benevolent friends that oftentimes visited him, and had broken his
fast, at ten of the clock he departed from Worms, accompanied with
such as repaired thither with him; having space of time Iimited unto
him, as is said, for one and twenty days, and no more. The emperor's
herald, Casper Sturm, followed and overtook him at Oppenheim, being
commanded by the emperor to conduct him safely home.

The usual prayer of Martin Luther.

     "Confirm, O God! in us that thou hast wrought, and perfect the
work that thou hast begun in us, to thy glory:  so be it."

     Martin Luther, thus being dismissed of the emperor, according
to the promise of his safe-conduct made, as you have heard, departed
from Worms toward his country, the six and twentieth of April,
accompanied with the emperor's herald, and the rest of his company,
having only one and twenty days to him granted for his return, and no
more. In the which mean space of his return he writeth to the
emperor, and to other nobles of the empire, repeating briefly to them
the whole action and order of things there done, desiring of them
their lawful good will and favour; which, as he hath always stood in
need of, so now he most earnestly craveth, especially in this, that
his cause, which is not his, but the cause of the whole church
universal, may be heard with indifferency and equity, and may be
decided by the rule and authority of Holy Scripture:  signifying
moreover, that whensoever they shall please to send for him, he shall
be ready at their commandment, at any time or place, upon their
promise of safety, to appear, &c.

     During the time of these doings, the doctors and schoolmen of
Paris were not behind with their parts, but, to show their cunning,
condemned the books of Luther, extracting out of the same, especially
out of the book De Captivitate Babylonica, certain articles as
touching the sacraments, laws, and decrees of the church, equality of
works, vows, contrition, absolution, satisfaction, purgatory,
freewill, privileges of holy church, councils, punishment of
heretics, philosophy, school-divinity, with other more. Unto whom
Philip Melancthon maketh answer, and also Luther himself, albeit
pleasantly and jestingly.
Illustration:  Portrait of Philip Melancthon

     It was not long after this, but Charles, the new emperor, to
purchase favour with the pope, (because he was not yet confirmed in
his empire,) provideth and directeth out a solemn writ of outlawry
against Luther, and all them that take his part; commanding the said
Luther, wheresoever he might be gotten, to be apprehended, and his
books burned. By which decree, proclaimed against Luther, the emperor
procured no small thank with the pope; insomuch that the pope,
ceasing to take part with the French king, joined himself wholly to
the emperor. In the mean time Duke Frederic, to give some place for
the time to the emperor's proclamation, conveyed Luther a little out
of sight secretly, by the help of certain noblemen whom he well knew
to be faithful and trusty unto him in that behalf. There Luther,
being close and out of company, wrote divers epistles, and certain
books also, unto his friends; among which he dedicated one to his
company of Augustine friars, entitled, De abroganda Missa:  which
friars the same time being encouraged by him, began first to lay down
their private masses. Duke Frederic, fearing lest that would breed
some great stir or tumult, caused the censure and judgment of the
whole university of Wittenberg to be asked in the matter; committing
the doing thereof to four; Justus Jonas, Philip Melancthon, Nicholas
Ambsdorff, Johannes Dulcius.

     The minds of the whole university being searched, it was showed
to the duke, that he should do well and godly, by the whole advice of
the learned there, to command the use of the mass to be abrogated
through his dominion:  and though it could not be done without tumult,
yet that was no let why the course of true doctrine should be stayed
for the multitude, which commonly overcometh the better part; neither
ought such disturbance to be imputed to the doctrine taught, but to
the adversaries, which willingly and wickedly kick against the truth,
whereof Christ also giveth us forewarning before. For fear of such
tumults therefore, we ought not to surcease from that which we know
is to be done, but constantly must go forward in defence of God's
truth, howsoever the world doth esteem us, or rage against it. Thus
showed they their judgment to Duke Frederic.

     It happened moreover about the same year and time, that King
Henry also, pretending an occasion to impugn the book De Captivitate
Babylonica, wrote against Luther. In which book, first, he reproveth
Luther's opinion about the pope's pardons; secondly, he defended the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome; thirdly, he laboureth to refel all
his doctrine of the sacraments of the church.

     This book, albeit it carried the king's name in the title, yet
it was another that ministered the motion, another that framed the
style. But whosoever had the labour of this book, the king had the
thank and also the reward; for consequently upon the same, the bishop
of Rome gave to the said King Henry, for the style against Luther,
the style and title of "Defender of the Christian Faith;" and to his
successors for ever.

     Shortly after this, within the compass of the same year, Pope
Leo, after he had warred against the Frenchmen, and had gotten from
them, through the emperor's aid, the cities of Parma, Placentia, and
Milan, &c., he, sitting at supper, and rejoicing at three great gifts
that God had bestowed upon him:  first, that he, being banished out of
his country, was restored to Florence again with glory; secondly,
that he had deserved to be called apostolic; thirdly, that he had
driven the Frenchmen out of Italy:  after he had spoken these words,
he was stricken with a sudden fever, and died shortly after, being of
the age of forty-seven years; albeit some suspect that he died of
poison. Successor to whom was Pope Adrian the Sixth, schoolmaster
some time to Charles the emperor, who lived not much above one year
and a half in his papacy; during whose small time these three
especial things were incident:  a great pestilence in Rome, wherein
above a hundred thousand people were consumed; the loss of Rhodes by
the Turk; and thirdly, the capital war which the said Pope Adrian,
with the emperor, and the Venetians, and the king of England, did
hold against Francis the French king. This Pope Adrian was a German
born, brought up at Louvain, and as in learning he exceeded the
common sort of popes, so in moderation of life and manners he seemed
not altogether so intemperate as some other popes have been:  and yet,
like a right pope, nothing degenerating from his see, he was a mortal
enemy against Martin Luther and his partakers. In his time, shortly
after the council of Worms was broken up, another meeting or assembly
was appointed by the emperor at Nuremberg, of the princes, nobles,
and states of Germany, A.D. 1522.



148. ASSEMBLY AT NUREMBERG

     Unto this assembly the said Adrian sent his letters in manner
of a brief, with an instruction also unto his legate Cheregatus, to
inform him how to proceed, and what causes to allege against Luther,
before the princes there assembled. His letter, with the instruction
sent, because they are so hypocritically shadowed over with a fair
show and colour of painted zeal and religion, and beareth resemblance
of great truth and care of the church, able to deceive the outward
ears of them which are not inwardly in true religion instructed:  I
thought therefore to give to the reader a sight thereof, to the
intent that by the experience of them he may learn hereafter, in
cases like, to be prudent and circumspect in not believing over-
rashly the smooth talk or pretended persuasions of men, especially in
church matters, unless they carry with them the simplicity of plain
truth; going not upon terms, but grounded upon the word and revealed
will of God, with particular demonstrations, proving that by the
Scripture which they pretend to persuade. First, the letter of this
pope, conceived and directed against Luther, proceedeth in this
effect: 

     "Right honourable brethren, and dear children, greeting and
apostolic benediction. After that we were first promoted (through
God's divine providence) to the office of the see apostolic, he which
hath so advanced us is our witness, how we, both day and night
revolving in our minds, did cogitate nothing more than how to satisfy
the parts of a good pastor, in attending to the health and cure of
the flock, both universally and singularly committed unto us:  so that
there is no one particular sheep through the whole universal flock so
infected, so sick, or so far gone astray, whom our desire is not to
recover, to seek out, and to reduce into the Lord's fold again. And
chiefly, from the first beginning of our pastoral function, our care
hath always been, as well by our messengers, as our daily letters,
how to reclaim the minds of Christian princes from these intestine
wars and dissensions among themselves to peace and concord; or at
least, if they would needs fight, that they would convert their
strength and armour against the common enemies of our faith. And to
declare this not only in word, but rather in deed, God doth know with
what charges and expenses we have burdened ourselves, to extend our
subsidy and relief to the soldiers of Rhodes for defence of
themselves, and of the Christian faith, against the Turkish tyranny,
by whom they were besieged.

     "And now, to bend our care from these foreign matters, and to
consider our inward troubles at home, we hear, to the great grief of
our heart, that Martin Luther, a new raiser-up of old and damnable
heresies, first after the fatherly advertisements of the see
apostolic; then after the sentence also of condemnation awarded
against him, and that by the assent and consent of the best learned,
and of sundry universities also; and lastly, after the imperial
decree of our well-beloved son Charles, elect emperor of the Romans,
and catholic king of Spain, being divulged through the whole nation
of Germany; yet hath neither been by order restrained, nor of himself
hath refrained from his madness begun, but daily more and more,
forgetting and contemning all Christian charity and godliness,
ceaseth not to disturb and replenish the world with new books,
fraught full of errors, heresies, contumelies, and sedition, (whether
upon his own head, or by the help of other,) and to infect the
country of Germany, and other regions about, with this pestilence;
and endeavoureth still to corrupt simple souls and manners of men,
with the poison of his pestiferous tongue. And (which is worst of
all) hath for his favourers and supporters, not of the vulgar sort
only, but also divers personages of the nobility; insomuch that they
have begun also to invade the goods of priests (which perhaps is the
chief ground of this stir begun) contrary to their obedience which
they owe to ecclesiastical and temporal persons, and now also at last
have grown unto civil war and dissension among themselves. Which
thing how unfortunately it falleth out now, at this present season,
especially amongst us Christians, you may soon repute with
yourselves, and consider. For although the apostle hath told us
before, That heresies must needs be, that they which be tried may be
made manifest, &c., yet was there never time either so convenient to
raise up heresies, or so necessary for the repressing thereof when
any such are raised, as now:  For whereas the devil, the perpetual
enemy of mankind, roaring in the shape of a lion, by the power of the
Turks doth continually invade the flock of Christ; how can we then
resist the violent invasions of him oppressing us without, so long as
we nourish at home the same devil, under the colour of a wily dragon,
sowing such heresies, discords, and seditious among ourselves? And
albeit it were in our power easily to vanquish these foreign
adversaries, yet were that but labour lost, serving to no profit, to
subdue our enemies without, and at home with heresies and schisms to
be divided.

     "We remember, before the time of our papacy, when we were in
Spain, many things we heard then of Luther, and of his perverse
doctrine; which rumours and tidings, although of themselves they were
grievous to be heard, yet more grievous they were for this, because
they proceeded out of that country, where we ourself, after the
flesh, took our first beginning. But yet this comfort we had,
supposing that either for the iniquity, or else for the foolishness
thereof being so manifest, this doctrine would not long hold;
reputing thus with ourself, that such pestiferous plants, translated
from other countries into Germany, would never grow up to any proof
in that ground, which was ever wont to be a weeder out of all
heresies and infidelity. But now, since this evil tree (whether by
God's judgment correcting the sins of the people, or by the
negligence of such as first should have resisted such beginnings)
hath so enlarged, and spread his branches so far; you therefore, both
princes and people of Germany, must this consider and provide, lest
you, which, at the first springing up of this evil, might
peradventure be excused, as no doers thereof, now, through this your
over-much sufferance, might be found inexcusable, and seem to consent
to that which you do not resist.

     "Here we omit and pass over, what enormity, and more than
enormity, that is, that such a great and so devout a nation should by
one friar (who, relinquishing the catholic faith and Christian
religion, which he before professed, playeth the apostate, and hath
lied to God) be now seduced from that way, whichfirst Christ our
Redeemer and his blessed apostles have opened unto us; which so many
martyrs, so many holy fathers, so many great, learned men, and also
your own fore-elders, and old ancestors, have always hitherto walked
in; as though only Luther had all wit and cunning; as though he only
now first had received the Holy Ghost (as the heretic Montanus used
to boast of himself); or as though the church (from which Christ our
Saviour promised himself never to depart) hath erred hitherto always
in dark shadows of ignorance and perdition, till now it should be
illuminate with new resplendent beams of Luther. All which things
there is no doubt but to such as have judgment will seem ridiculous,
but yet may be pernicious to simple and ignorant minds; and to other,
which being weary of all good order, do gape still for new changes,
may breed matter and occasion of such mischiefs, as partly yourselves
have experience already. And therefore do you not consider, O princes
and people of Germany! that these be but prefaces and preambles to
those evils and mischiefs which Luther, with the sect of his
Lutherans, do intend and purpose hereafter? Do you not see plainly,
and perceive with your eyes, that this defending of the verity of the
Gospel, first begun by the Lutherans to be pretended, is now manifest
to be but an invention to spoil your goods, which they have long
intended? or do you think that these sons of iniquity do tend to any
other thing, than under the name of liberty to supplant obedience,
and so to open a general licence to every man to do what him listeth?
And suppose you that they will any thing regard your commandments, or
esteem your laws, which so contemptuously vilipend the holy canons
and decrees of the fathers, yea, and the most holy councils also, (to
whose authority the emperor's laws have always given room and place,)
and not only vilipend them, but also, with a diabolical audacity,
have not feared to rend them in pieces, and set them on a lighted
fire? They which refuse to render due obedience to priests, to
bishops, yea, to the high bishop of all, and which daily before your
own faces make their booties of church goods, and of things
consecrated to God; think ye that they will refrain their
sacrilegious hands from the spoil of laymen's goods? yea, that they
will not pluck from you whatsoever they can rap or reave? Finally, to
conclude, how can you hope that they will more spare you, or hold
their murdering hands from your throats, which have been so bold to
vex, to kill, to slay the Lord's anointed, which are not to be
touched? Nay, think you not contrary, but this miserable calamity
will at length redound upon your goods, your houses, wives, children,
dominions, possessions, and these your temples which you hallow and
reverence; except you provide some speedy remedy against the same.

     "Wherefore we exhort your fraternities, nobilities, and
devotions of all and singular in the Lord, and beseech you for
Christian charity and religion, (for which religion your forefathers
ofttimes have given their blood to uphold and increase the same,) and
notwithstanding require you also, in virtue of that obedience which
all Christians owe to God, and blessed St. Peter, and to his vicar
here in earth, that setting aside all other quarrels and dissensions
among yourselves, you confer your helping hands every man to quench
this public fire, and endeavour and study, the best way ye can, how
to reduce the said Martin Luther, and all other favourers of these
tumults and errors, to better conformity and trade both of life and
faith. And if they which be infected shall refuse to hear your
admonitions, yet provide that the other part, which yet remaineth
sound, by the same contagion be not corrupted. He, to whom all
secrets of men are open, doth know how we, both for our nature, and
also for our pastoral office, whereto we are called, are much more
prone to remit, than to revenge. But when this pestiferous canker
cannot with supple and gentle medicines be cured, more sharp salves
must be proved, and fiery searings. The putrefied members must be cut
off from the body, lest the sound parts also be infected. So God did
cast down into hell the schismatical brethren, Dathan and Abiram; and
him that would not obey the authority of the priest, God commanded to
be punished with death. So Peter, prince of the apostles, denounced
sudden death to Ananias and Sapphira, who lied unto God. So the old
and godly emperors commanded Jovinian and Priscillian, as heretics,
to be beheaded. So St. Jerome wished Vigilant, as a heretic, to be
given to the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved
in the day of the Lord. So also did our predecessors in the council
of Constance condemn to death John Huss and his fellow Jerome, which
now appeareth to revive again in Luther. The worthy acts and examples
of which forefathers, if you in these doings (seeing otherwise ye
cannot) shall imitate, we do not doubt but God's merciful clemency
shall eftsoons relieve his church; which, being now sore vexed of
infidels, hath her eyes chiefly and principally directed upon you, as
being the most puissant and most populous nation that we have in
Christendom.

     "Wherefore, upon the blessing of Almighty God, and of blessed
St. Peter, which here we send unto you, take courage unto you, as
well against the false dragon, as the strong lion, that both these,
that is, as well the inward heresies, as the foreignenemies, by you
being overcome, you may purchase to your honours an immortal victory,
both here and in the world to come. This we give you to understand,
that whatsoever the Lord hath given us to aid you withal, either in
money or authority, we will not fail to support you herein, yea, and
to bestow our life also in this holy quarrel, and for the health of
our sheep to us committed. Other things as touching the matter of
Luther, we have committed to this Cheregatus our legate, whom we have
directed purposely for the same unto your assembly, whom we wish you
to credit, as being our trusty legate.

     "Given at St. Peter's at Rome, under the ring of the fisher,
the 25th day of November, A.D. 1522, in the first year of our
pontificate."
 By this letter above prefixed, thou halt, gentle
reader! to note and understand, what either wily persuasions or
strength of authority could devise against Luther, here not to have
lacked. If plausible terms, or glozing sentences, or outward facing
and bracing, could have served, where no ground of Scripture is
brought, this might seem apparently a pithy epistle. But if a man
should require the particulars or the specialties of this doctrine
which he here reprehendeth, to be examined and tried by God's word,
there is no substance in it, but only words of office, which may seem
well to serve for waste paper. And yet I thought to exhibit the said
letter unto thee, to the intent that the more thou seest man's
strength with all his policy bent against Luther, the more thou
mayest consider the almighty power of God, in defending the cause of
this poor man against so mighty enemies.

     Now hear further what instructions the said Pope Adrian sent to
his legate Cheregatus, how and by what reasons to move and inflame
the princes of Germany to the destruction of Luther and his cause,
and yet was not able to bring it to pass.

Instructions given by Pope Adrian to Cheregatus his legate, touching
his proceedings in the diet of Nuremberg, how and by what persuasions
to incense the princes against Luther.

     "Imprimis, you shall declare to them the great grief of our
heart for the prospering of Luther's sect, to see the innumerable
souls, redeemed with Christ's blood, and committed to our pastoral
government, to be turned away from the true faith and religion into
perdition by this occasion; and that especially in the nation of
Germany, being our native country, which hath been ever heretofore,
till these few years past, most faithful and devout in religion; and
therefore our desire to be the greater that this pestilence should be
stopped betimes, lest the same happen to that country of Germany,
which happened of late to Bohemia. And as for our part, there shall
be no lack to help forward what we may; as likewise we desire them to
endeavour themselves to the uttermost of their power, whom these
causes ought to move, which here we direct unto you to be declared
unto them.

     "First, the honour of God, which, before all other things,
ought to be preferred, whose honour by these heresies is greatly
defaced, and his worship not only diminished, but rather wholly
corrupted. Also the charity toward our neighbour, by which charity
every man is bound to reduce his neighbour out of error; otherwise
God will require at their hands all such as by their negligence do
perish.

     "The second cause to move them against Luther, is the infamy of
their nations; which, being counted beforetime always most Christian,
now by these sectaries of Luther, is evil spoken of in all other
quarters.

     "The third cause is the respect of their own honour, which
notoriously will be distained, if they which most excel in nobility
and authority among the Germans, shall not bend all their power to
expel these heresies:  first, for that they shall appear to be
degenerate from their progenitors, who, being present at the
condemnation of John Huss and of other heretics, are said, some of
them, with their own hands to have led John Huss to the fire.
Secondly, for that they, or the greater part of them, approving with
their authority the imperial edict set forth of late in condemnation
of Martin Luther, now, except they shall follow the execution of the
same, shall be noted inconstant, or may be thought to favour the
same; seeing it is manifest, that they may easily exterminate him if
they were disposed.

     "The fourth cause is the injury wrought by Luther to them,
their parents, and progenitors, forasmuch as their fathers,
progenitors, and themselves also, have always holden the same faith
which the catholic Church of Rome hath appointed; contrary to which
faith Luther, with his sectaries, now doth hold, saying, that many
things are not to be believed which their aforesaid ancestors have
holden to be of faith. It is manifest, therefore, that they be
condemned of Luther for infidels and heretics; and so consequently,
by Luther's doctrine, all their fore-elders and progenitors which
have deceased in this our faith, be in hell; for error in faith
importeth damnation.

     "The fifth cause to move them is, that they should well advise
and consider the end whereunto all these Lutherans do tend; which is,
that under the shadow of evangelical liberty, they may abolish all
superiority and power. For although, at the first beginning, they
pretended only to annul and repress our power ecclesiastical, as
being falsely and tyrannously usurped against the gospel; yet,
forasmuch as liberty is all their foundation and pretence, (by the
which liberty, the secular power and magistrates cannot bind men by
any commandments, be they never so just or so reasonable, to obey
them under pain of mortal sin,) it is manifest that their scope is to
enfeeble and infringe, as much or more, the secular state also,
although covertly they pretend to salve it; to the end, that when the
secular princes shall believe this their working not to be directed
against them, but only against the usurped domination of the church
and churchmen, then the laity, (which commonly hath been always
against men of the church,) holding with them, shall suffer the
churchmen to be devoured; which done, no doubt but, they will
afterward practise the like upon the secular princes and potentates,
which now they attempt against our ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

     "The sixth clause to move and persuade them against Luther is
this, for them to consider the fruits which follow of that sect; as
slanders, offences, disturbance, robberies, murders, seditions,
dissensions, which this sect hath, and daily doth stir up through
whole Germany:  also blasphemies, slanderous words, scoffings, jests,
and bitter taunts, which are ever in their mouths; against which,
unless that they shall find a present remedy, it is to be feared lest
the desolation of God's wrath will fall upon Germany, being so
divided; or rather upon the princes of Germany, who, having the sword
given of God into their hands for the suppression of malefactors,
suffer such enormities among their subjects. Cursed is he, (saith the
prophet,) which doth the work of the Lord negligently, and holdeth
back his sword from the blood of wicked doers, Jer. xxviii.

     "The seventh reason is, that the princes should consider how
Luther useth the same way of seducing the people of Christ, as hath
the venomous viper Mahomet practised in deceiving so many thousands
of souls, in permitting to them the liberty of those things which
flesh desireth, and afterward in exempting them from such things as
be more sharp in the law; but that Luther a little more temperately
handleth the matter, whereby he may deceive more effectually; for
Mahomet giveth licence to have many wives, and to divorce and marry
others at their pleasure. This Luther, to draw unto him the favour of
nuns, monks, and priests, such as be lascivious in flesh, preacheth
that vows of perpetual continency be unlawful, and much less to be
obligatory; and therefore permitteth unto them that they may marry;
forgetting, by the way, what the apostle writeth of young widows,
saying, That when they wax wanton against Christ, then will they
marry; having condemnation, because they have made void their first
faith, 1 Tim. v. 12.

     "These and other such-like reasons being opened and laid before
them, you shall then in our name exhort the aforesaid princes,
prelates, and people, to awake and employ their diligence how to
gainstand, first, the injury of these Lutherans toward God, and
toward his holy religion; secondly, their villany toward the whole
nation of the Germans and their princes, and especially the shameful
contumely towards their fathers and elders, whom in effect they
condemn to hell. In consideration whereof you shall call upon them to
remember themselves, and to proceed effectually to the execution of
the apostolical sentence, and of the emperor's edict; giving pardon
to them that will amend and acknowledge their fault:  the other, who
obstinately persist in their error, punishing with the rod of strict
severity, according to the decrees of the canons and laws of the
church; that, by their example, such as stand may remain in faith,
and they which are fallen may be reduced.

     "And if any shall object again, that Luther was condemned by
the apostolic see before he was heard, and that his cause ought first
to have been heard and adjudged before he was convicted, you shall
answer, that those things which pertain to faith are to be believed
for their own authority, and not to be proved. 'Take away,' saith
Ambrose, 'arguments where faith is sought:  there the fishers, not the
philosophers, must be trusted.' Truth it is, and we grant no less but
that lawful defence and hearing ought not to be denied in such cases,
where question is of the fact, whether it were done or not; as
whether he spake, preached, wrote, or not. But where the matter is of
God's law, or in cause of the sacraments, there must we always stand
to the authority of holy fathers, and of the church. Now all things
almost, wherein Luther dissenteth from other, are reproved before by
divers councils; neither ought those things to be called into
question, which have been defined before by general councils, and the
universal church; but ought to be received by faith:  for else he doth
injury to the synod of the church, who so bringeth again into
controversy things once rightly discussed and settled. Otherwise what
certainty can there be amongst men, or what end shall there be of
contending and disputing, if it shall be lawful for every lewd and
presumptuous person to decline from the things which havebeen
received and ratified by the consent, not of one, nor of a few, but
of so many ages, so many wise heads, and of the catholic church,
which God never permitteth to err in matters unto faith appertaining?
And how can it otherwise be chosen, but that all must be full of
disturbance, offences, and confusion, unless the things which have
been once, yea, many times, by ripe judgment constituted, be observed
of all men as inviolable? Wherefore, seeing Luther and his fellows do
condemn the councils of holy fathers, do burn the holy canons, do
confound all things at their pleasure, and do disquiet the whole
world, what remaineth, but that they are to be rejected and exploded,
as enemies and perturbers of public peace?

     "Further, this you shall say unto them, that we confess
ourselves, and deny not, but that God suffereth this persecution to
be inflicted upon his church for the sins of men, especially of
priests and prelates of the clergy. For certain it is, that the hand
of the Lord is not shortened, that he cannot save; but our sins have
divided between God and us; and therefore he hideth his face from us
that he will not hear us. The Scripture testifieth, that the sins of
the people do issue out from the sins of the priests. 'And
therefore,' saith Chrysostom, 'Christ, going about to cure the sick
city of Jerusalem, first entered into the temple, to correct the sins
of the priests, like a good physician, which first beginneth to cure
the disease from the very root.' We know that in this holy see there
have been many abominable things of long time wrought and practised;
as abuses in matters spiritual, and also excesses in life and
manners, and all things turned clean contrary. And no marvel if the
sickness, first beginning at the head, that is, at the high bishops,
have descended aftewards to inferior prelates. All we (that is,
prelates of the church) have declined every one after his own way;
neither hath there been one that hath done good, no not one.
Wherefore need it is, that all we give glory to God, and that we
humble our souls to him, considering every one of us from whence he
hath fallen; and that every one do judge himself, before he be judged
of God in the rod of his fury. For the redress whereof you shall
insinuate unto them, and promise in our behalf, that in us shall be
lacking no diligence of a better reformation, first beginning with
our own court:  that like as, this contagion first from thence
descended into all the inferior parts, so reformation and amendment
of all that is amiss, from the same place again, shall take his
beginning; whereunto they shall find us so much the more ready, for
that we see the whole world so desirous of the same. We ourselves, as
you know, never sought this dignity, but rather coveted, if we
otherwise might, to lead a private life, and in a quiet state to
serve God; and also would utterly have refused the same, had not the
fear of God, and the manner of our election, and misdoubting of some
schism to follow after, have urged us to take it. And thus took we
the burden upon us, not for any ambition of dignity, or to enrich our
friends and kinsfolks, but only to be obedient to the will of God,
and for reformation of the catholic church, and for relief of the
poor, and especially for the advancement of learning and learned men,
with such other things more as appertaineth to the charge of a good
bishop and lawful heir of St. Peter. And though all errors,
corruptions, and abuses be not straight-ways amended by us, men ought
not thereat to marvel. The sore is great, and far grown, and is not
single, but of manifold maladies together compacted; and therefore to
the curing thereof we must proceed by little and little, first
beginning to cure the greater and the most dangerous, lest, while we
intend to amend all, we destroy all. 'All sudden mutations,' saith
Aristotle, 'in a commonwealth, are perilous;' and, He that wringeth
too hard, straineth out blood, Prov. xxx.

     "And whereas in your last letters you wrote, that the princes
complain, how this see hath been, and is, prejudicial to their
ordinances and agreements, hereunto you shall thus answer:  that such
excesses, which have been done before our time, ought not to be
imputed to us, who always have misliked these derogations; and
therefore bid them so assure themselves, that though they had
required no such matter, we of our own accord would have refrained
the same; partly for that it is good, right, and reason, that every
one have that which is due unto him; and partly also that the said
noble nation of Germany shall have by us no hinderance, but
furtherance rather, so much as in us shall lie to do for them.

     "And as touching the processes which they desired to have
removed away a rota, and to be referred down to the parties, you
shall signify unto them, that we will gratify them herein as much as
honestly we may. But because our auditors are now presently absent
from the city, by reason of the plague, we cannot be informed as yet
touching the quality of those processes. As soon as they shall
return, (which we hope will be shortly,) we shall do in the princes'
favour what reasonably we may.

     "Further:  whereas we understand, that there be many fresh,
flourishing wits in Germany, and many well-learned men, which are not
seen unto, but be rejected and unlooked to, while in the mean time,
through the apostolical provisions, dignities and promotions are
bestowed upon tapsters anddancers, and unfit persons; we will,
therefore, that you inquire out what those learned men are, and what
be their names, to the intent that when any such vacation of
benefices in Germany doth fall, we, of our voluntary motion, may
provide for them accordingly. For why? we consider how much it is
against God's glory, and against the health and the edification of
souls, that benefices and dignities of the church have now so long
time been bestowed upon unworthy and unable persons.

     "As touching the subsidy for the Hungarians, we send no other
information to you, but that which we gave you at your departure;
save only that we will you to extend your diligence therein, as we
also will do the like, in soliciting the matter with the princes and
cities of Italy, that every one may help after his ability."

     These popish suggestions and instructions of the pope himself
against Luther, I thought, Christian reader! to set before thine
eyes, to the intent thou mayst see here (as in a pattern, and go no
farther) all the crimes, objections, exclamations, suspicions,
accusations, slanders, offensions, contumelies, rebukes, untruths,
cavillations, railings, whatsoever they have devised, or can devise,
invent, articulate, denounce, infer, or surmise, against Luther and
his teaching. They cry, Heresy, heresy! but they prove no heresy.
They cry, Councils, councils! and yet none transgresseth councils
more than themselves. If councils go always with Scripture, then
Luther goeth with them; if councils do jar sometimes from the
Scripture, what heresy is in Luther in standing with Scripture
against those councils? And yet neither hath he hitherto spoken
against any councils, save only the council of Constance. They
inflame kings and princes against Luther, and yet they have no cause
wherefore. They accuse him for teaching liberty. If they mean the
liberty of the flesh, they accuse him falsely; if they mean the
liberty of the spirit, they teach wickedly which teach contrary:  and
yet when they have all said, none live so licentiously as themselves.
They pretend the zeal of the church, but under that church lieth
their own private welfare and belly-cheer. They charge Luther with
disobedience, and none are so disobedient to magistrates and civil
laws as they. They lay to his charge oppression and spoiling of
laymen's goods; and who spoileth the laymen's livings so much as the
pope? For probation hereof, let the pope's accounts be cast, what he
raketh out of every Christian realm. Briefly, turn only the names of
the persons, and instead of Luther's name, place the name of the
pope, and the effect of this letter above prefixed shall agree upon,
none more aptly than upon the pope himself and his own sectaries.

     Now to proceed further in the process of this aforesaid matter,
let us see what the princes again for their parts answer to these
aforesaid suggestions and instructions of Pope Adrian, sent unto them
in the diet of Nuremberg, in the cause of Luther:  the answer of whom
here followeth underwritten: 

     "The noble and renowned prince Lord Ferdinand, lieutenant to
the emperor's Majesty, with other reverend peers in Christ, and
mighty princes electors, and other states and orders of this present
assembly of the Roman empire in Nuremberg convented, have gratefully
received, and diligently perused, the letters sent in form of a
brief, with the instructions also of the most holy father in Christ
and lord, Lord Adrian, the high bishop of the holy and universal
Church of Rome, presented unto them in the cause of Luther's faction.
By the which aforesaid letters and writings, first, whereas they
understand his Holiness to have been born, and to have had his native
origin and parentage out of this noble nation of Germany, they do not
a little rejoice. Of whose egregious virtues and ornaments, both of
mind and body, they have heard great fame and commendation, even from
his tender years:  by reason whereof they are so much the more joyous
of his advancement and preferment, by such consent of election, to
the high top of the apostolical dignity, and yield to God most hearty
thanks for the same:  praying also, from the bottom of their hearts,
for his excellent clemency, and perpetual glory of his name, and for
health of souls, and purity of the universal church, that God will
give his Holiness long continuance of felicity:  having no misdoubt
but that by such a full and consenting election of such a pastor of
the universal catholic church, great profit and commodity will ensue.
Which thing to hope and look for, his Holiness openeth to them an
evident declaration in his own letters, testifying and protesting
what a care it is to him both day and night, how to discharge his
pastoral function, in studying for the health of the flock to him
committed; and especially in converting the minds of Christian
princes from war to peace. Declaring moreover what subsidy and relief
his Holiness hath sent to the soldiers of Rhodes, &c. All which
things they, perpending with themselves, conceive exceeding hope and
comfort in their minds, thus reputing and trusting that this concord
of Christian princes will be a great help and stay to the better
quieting of things now out of frame; without which neither the state
of the commonwealth nor of Christian religion can be rightly
redressed, and much less the tyranny of the barbarous Turks
repressed.

     "Wherefore the excellent prince, lord lieutenant to the
emperor's Majesty, with the other princes electors, and orders of
this present assembly, most heartily do pray, that his Holiness will
persist in this his purpose and diligence, as he hath virtuously
begun, leaving no stone unremoved, how the disagreeing hearts of
Christian princes may be reduced to quiet and peace or if that will
not be, yet at least some truce and intermission of domestical
dissensions may be obtained for the necessity of the time now
present, whereby all Christians may join their powers together, with
the help of God, to go against the Turk, and to deliver the people of
Christ from his barbarous tyranny and bondage; whereunto both the
noble prince lord lieutenant, and other princes of Germany, will put
to their helping hands, to the best of their ability.

     "And whereas by the letters of his Holiness, with his
instruction also exhibited unto them by his legate, they understand
that his Holiness is afflicted with great sorrow for the prospering
of Luther's sect, whereby innumerable souls committed to his charge
are in danger of perdition, and therefore his Holiness vehemently
desireth some speedy remedy against the same to be provided, with an
explication of certain necessary reasons and causes, whereby to move
the German princes thereunto; and that they will tender the execution
of the apostolic sentence, and also of the emperor's edict set forth
touching the suppressing of Luther:  To these the lord lieutenant, and
other princes and states, do answer, that it is to them no less grief
and sorrow than to his Holiness; and also do lament as much for these
impieties and perils of souls, and inconveniences which grow in the
religion of Christ, either by the sect of Luther, or any otherwise. 
Further, what help or counsel shall lie in them for the extirpating
of errors, and decay of souls' health, what their moderation can do,
they are willing and ready to perform; considering how they stand
bound and subject, as well to the pope's Holiness, as also to the
emperor's Majesty. But why the sentence of the apostolic see, and the
emperor's edict against Luther, hath not been put in execution
hitherto, there have been (said they) causes great and urgent, which
have led them thereto:  as first, in weighing and considering with
themselves, that great evils and inconveniences would thereupon
ensue. For the greatest part of the people of. Germany have always
had this persuasion, and now, by reading of Luther's books, are more
therein confirmed, that great grievances and inconveniences have come
to this nation of Germany by the court of Rome:  and therefore, if
they should have proceeded with any rigour in executing the pope's
sentence, and the emperor's edict, the multitude would conceive and
suspect in their minds, this to be done for subverting the verity of
the gospel, and for supporting and confirming the former abuses and
grievances, whereupon great wars and tumults, no doubt, would have
ensued:  which thing unto the princes and states there hath been well
perceived by many arguments; for the avoiding whereof, they thought
to use more gentle remedies, serving more opportunely for the time.

     "Again, whereas the reverend lord legate (said they) in the
name of the pope's Holiness, hath been instructed, to declare unto
them, that God suffereth this persecution to rise in the church for
the sins of men, and that his Holiness doth promise therefore to
begin the reformation with his own court, that as the corruption
first sprang from thence to the inferior parts, so the redress of all
again should first begin with the same. Also, whereas his Holiness,
of a good and fatherly heart, doth testify in his letters, that he
himself did always mislike that the court of Rome should intermeddle
so much, and derogate from the concordats of the princes, and that
his Holiness doth fully purpose in that behalf, during his papacy,
never to practise the like, but so to endeavour, that every one, and
especially the nation of the Germans, may have their proper due and
right, granting especially to the said nation his peculiar favour: 
who seeth not by these premises, but that this most holy bishop
omitteth nothing which a good father, or a devout pastor, may or
ought to do to his sheep? or who will not be moved hereby to a loving
reverence, and to amendment of his defaults, namely, seeing his
Holiness so intendeth to accomplish the same in deed, which in word
he promiseth, according as he hath begun?

     "And thus undoubtedly both the noble lord lieutenant, and all
other princes and states of the empire, well hope that he will, and
pray most heartily that he may do, to the glory of our eternal God,
to the health of souls, and to the tranquillity of the public state.
For unless such abuses and grievances, with certain other articles
also, which the secular princes (assigned purposely for the same)
shall draw out in writing, shall be faithfully reformed, there is no
true peace and concord between the ecclesiastical and secular
estates, nor any true extirpation of this tumult and errors in
Germany, that can be hoped. For partly by long wars, partly by reason
of other grievances and hinderances, this nation of Germany hath been
so wasted and consumed in money, that scarcely it is able to sustain
itself in private affairs, and necessary upholding of justice within
itself; much less then to minister aid and succour to the kingdom of
Hungary, and to the Croatians, against the Turk. And whereas all the
states of the sacred Roman empire do not doubt, but the pope's
Holiness doth right well understand how the German princes did grant
and condescend for the money of annats to be levied to the see of
Rome for term of certain years, upon condition that the said money
should be converted to maintain war against the Turkish infidels, and
for defence of the catholic faith:  and whereas the term of these
years is now expired longsince, when the said annats should be
gathered, and yet that money hath not been so bestowed to that use,
whereto it was first granted; therefore if any such necessity should
now come, that any public helps or contributions against the Turk
should be demanded of the German people, they would answer again, Why
is not that money of annats, reserved many years before to that-use,
now to be bestowed and applied? and so would they refuse to receive
any more such burdens for that cause to be laid upon them.

     "Wherefore the said lord lieutenant, and other princes and
degrees of the empire, make earnest petition, that the pope's
Holiness will with a fatherly consideration expend the premises, and
surcease hereafter to require such annats, which are accustomed after
the death of bishops and other prelates, or ecclesiastical persons,
to be paid to the court of Rome, and suffer them to remain to the
chamber of the empire, whereby justice and peace may be more
commodiously administered, the tranquillity of the public state of
Germany maintained; and also, by the same, due helps may be ordained
and disposed to other Christian potentates in Germany, against the
Turk, which otherwise without the same is not to be hoped for.

     "Item, Whereas the pope's Holiness desireth to be informed,
what way were best to take in resisting these errors of the
Lutherans:  to this the lord lieutenant, with other princes and
nobles, do answer, that whatsoever help or counsel they can devise,
with willing hearts they will be ready thereunto. Seeing therefore
the state, as well ecclesiastical as temporal, is far out of frame,
and have so much corrupted their ways; and seeing not only of
Luther's part, and of his sect, but also by divers other occasions
besides, so many errors, abuses, and corruptions have crept in; much
requisite and necessary it is, that some effectual remedy be
provided, as well for redress of the church, as also for repressing
the Turk's tyranny. Now what more present or effectual remedy can be
had, the lord lieutenant, with other estates and princes, do not see,
than this, that the pope's Holiness, by the consent of the emperor's
Majesty, do summon a free Christian council in some convenient place
of Germany, as at Strasburg, or at Mentz, or at Cologne, or at Metz;
and that with as much speed as conveniently may be, so that the
congregating of the said council be not deferred above one year in
the which council it may be lawful for every person that there shall
have interest, either temporal or ecclesiastical, freely to speak and
consult, to the glory of God, and health of souls, and the public
wealth of Christendom, without impeachment or restraint; whatsoever
oath or other bond to the contrary notwithstanding; yea, and it shall
be every good man's part there to speak, not only freely, but to
speak that which is true, to the purpose, and to edifying, and not to
pleasing or flattering, but simply and uprightly to declare his
judgment, without all fraud or guile. And as touching by what ways
these errors and tumults of the German people may best be stayed and
pacified in the mean time, until the council be set, the aforesaid
lord lieutenant, with the other princes, thereupon have consulted and
deliberated; that forasmuch as Luther, and certain of his fellows, be
within the territory and dominion of the noble Duke Frederic, the
said lord lieutenant and other states of the empire shall so labour
the matter with the aforenamed prince, duke of Saxony, that Luther
and his followers shall not write, set forth, or print any thing
during the said mean space; neither do they doubt but that the said
noble prince of Saxony, for his Christian piety, and obedience to the
Roman empire, as becometh a prince of such excellent virtue, will
effectually condescend to the same.

     "Item, The said lord lieutenant and princes shall labour so
with the preachers of Germany, that they shall not in their sermons
teach or blow into the people's ears such matter, whereby the
multitude may be moved to rebellion or uproar, or be induced into
error; and that they shall preach and teach nothing but the true,
pure, sincere, and holy gospel, and approved Scripture, godly,
mildly, and Christianly, according to the doctrine and exposition of
the Scripture; being approved and received of Christ's church,
abstaining from all such things which are better unknown than learned
of the people, and which to be subtilly searched, or deeply
discussed, it is not expedient. Also, that they shall move no
contention of disputation among the vulgar sort; but whatsoever
hangeth in controversy, the same they shall reserve to the
determination of the council to come.

     "Item, The arcbbishops, bishops, and other prelates within
their diocesees, shall assign godly and learned men, having good
judgment in the Scripture, which shall diligently and faithfully
attend upon such preachers and if they shall perceive the said
preachers either to have erred, or to have uttered any thing
inconveniently, they shall godly, mildly, and modestly advertise and
inform them thereof, in such sort as no man shall justly complain the
truth of the gospel to be impeached. But if the preachers, continuing
still in their stubbornness, shall refuse to be admonished, and will
not desist from their lewdness, then shall they be restrained and
punished by the ordinaries of the place, with punishment for the same
convenient.

     Furthermore, the said princes and nobles shall provide and
undertake, so much as shall be possible, that, from henceforth,
during the aforesaid time, no new book shall be imprinted, especially
none of these famous libels, neither shall they privily or apertly be
sold. Also, order shall be taken amongst all potentates, that if any
shall set out, sell, or imprint any new work, it shall first be seen
and perused of certain godly, learned, and discreet men appointed for
the same; so that if it be not admitted and approved by them, it
shall not be permitted to be published in print, or to come abroad.
Thus, by these means, they hope well, that the tumults, errors, and
offences among the people shall cease; especially if the pope's
Holiness himself shall begin with an orderly and due reformation, in
the aforesaid grievances above mentioned, and will procure such a
free and Christian council as hath been said; and so shall the people
be well contented and satisfied. Or if the tumult shall not so fully
be calmed as they desire, yet the greater part thus will be quieted;
for all such as be honest and good men, no doubt, will be in great
expectation of that general council, so shortly, and now ready at
hand, to come. Finally, as concerning priests which contract
matrimony, and religious men leaving their cloisters, whereof
intimation was also made by the apostolical legate, the aforesaid
princes do consider, that forasmuch as in the civil law there is no
penalty for them ordained, they shall be referred to the canonical
constitutions, to be punished thereafter accordingly; that is, by the
loss of their benefices and privileges, or other condign censures: 
and that the said ordinaries shall in no case be stopped or inhibited
by the secular powers, from the correction of such:  but that they
shall add their help and favour to the maintenance of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and shall direct out their public edicts and precepts,
that none shall impeach or prohibit the said ordinaries in their
ecclesiastical castigation, upon such transgressors to be
administered.

     "To conclude; the redoubled prince, lord lieutenant, and other
princes, estates, and orders of the public empire, vehemently and
most heartily do pray and beseech, that the pope's Holiness, and the
reverend lord his legate, will accept and take all the premises to be
no otherwise spoken and meant, than of a good, free, sincere, and a
Christian mind:  neither is there any thing that all the aforesaid
princes, estates, and nobles, do more wish and desire, than the
furtherance and prosperous estate of the holy catholic Church of
Rome, and of his Holiness; to whose wishes, desires, and obedience,
they offer and commend themselves most ready and obsequious, as
faithful children."

     Thus hast thou, loving reader! the full discourse both of the
pope's letter, and of his legate's instructions, with the answer also
of the states of Germany to the said letter and instructions to them
exhibited in the diet of Nuremberg:  in the which diet what was
concluded, and what order and consultation was taken, first touching
the grievances of Germany, which they exhibited to the pope, then
concerning a general council to be called in Germany, also for
printing, and preaching, and for priests' marriage, hath been
likewise declared, &c.

     The occasion of this matter, moved against priests' marriage,
came first by the ministers of Strasburg, which about this time began
to take wives, and therefore were cited by the bishop of Strasburg to
appear before him at a certain day, as violators of the laws of holy
church, the holy fathers, the bishops of Rome, and of the emperor's
Majesty, to the prejudice both of their own order of priesthood, and
majesty of Almighty God:  but they referred their cause to the hearing
of the magistrates of the same city; who, being suitors for them unto
the bishops, laboured to have the matter either released, or at least
to be delayed for a time.

     Long it were to recite all the circumstances following upon
this diet or assembly of Nuremberg, how their decree was received of
some, of some neglected, of divers diversely wrested and expounded.
Luther, writing his letters upon the same decree to the princes, thus
made his exposition of the meaning thereof:  that whereas the
preachers were commanded to preach the pure gospel, after the
doctrine of the church received, he expounded the meaning thereof to
be, not after the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, or Scotus, or such
other late school writers, but after the doctrine of Hilary, Cyprian,
and Austin, and other ancient doctors; and yet the doctrine of the
said ancestors no further to be received, but as they should agree
with the Scripture.

     Secondly, as concerning new books not to be sold nor printed,
he expounded the meaning thereof to extend no further, but that the
text of the Bible and books of the Holy Scripture might be printed
notwithstanding, and published to all men.

     And as for the prohibition of priests' marriage, he writeth to
the princes, and desireth them to bear with the weakness of men;
declaring that branch of their decree to be very hard, which though
it standeth with the pope's law, yet it accordeth not with the
gospel, neither conduceth to good manners, nor to honesty of life,
&c.

     Furthermore, Whereas in the same session of Nuremberg, mention
was made before of certain grievances collected to the number of a
hundred, and exhibited to the bishop of Rome, it were tedious
likewise to insert them all; yet to give some taste of a few I judge
it not unprofitable, to the intent that the world may see and judge,
not only what abuses and corruptions, most monstrous and incredible,
lay hid under the glorious title of the holy Church of Rome, but also
may understand, with what hypocrisy and impudence the pope taketh
upon him so grievously to complain upon Master Luther and others;
when in all the universal church of Christ, there is none so much to
be blamed all manner of ways, as he himself, according as by these
heinous complaints of the German princes, here following, against the
pope's intolerable oppressions and grievances, may right well appear.
Which grievances being collected by the princes of Germany at
Nuremberg, to the number of a hundred, I wish might be fully and at
large set forth to the studious reader, whereby might appear the
subtle sleights and intolerable frauds of that pretended church. But
forasmuch as it were too long to comprehend the whole, I have thought
good to exhibit some part thereof for example, as giving only a
certain taste, whereby thou mayst more easily conceive what to think
and esteem of all the residue, which both to me would be tedious to
write, and perhaps more grievous to thee to hear.

Certain grievances or oppressions of Germany, against the court of
Rome, collected and exhibited by the princes, at the council of
Nuremberg, to the number of a hundred, whereof certain specialties
here follow.

     Forbidding of marriage in divers degrees, not forbidden by
God's law.

     Forbidding of meats, not forbidden by God's law. Of times of
marriage restrained, and afterwards released for money.

     Complaint for selling remission of sins for money.

     But especially the burden and grievance of the pope's
indulgences and pardons be most importable; when the bishops of Rome,
under pretence of building some church in Rome, or to war against the
Turk, do make out their indulgences with their bulls; persuading and
promising to the simple people strange and wonderful benefits of
remission a pœna et culpa, that is, from all their sins and
punishment due for the same, and that not in this life only, but also
after this life, to them that be dead, burning in the fire of
purgatory. Through the hope and occasion thereof, true piety is
almost extinct in all Germany, while every evil-disposed person
promiseth to himself, for a little money, licence and impunity to do
what him listeth:  whereupon followeth fornication, incest, adultery,
perjury, homicide, robbing and spoiling, rapine, usury, with a whole
flood of all mischiefs, &c.

     Complaint against the immunities of clergymen.

     Complaint of excommunication being abused in Church of Rome.

     Complaint that the church is burdened with a number of
holidays, which ought to be diminished.

     The suspending and hallowing of church-yards complained of,
gainful to the pope, and chargeable to the people.

     Complaint against officials, and other ecclesiastical judges.

     How the ecclesiastical judges do annex certain special causes,
being lay matters, unto their own jurisdiction, and will by no means
release the same, except for money.

     The gain that riseth to the clergy by false slanders and
rumours.

     Complaint against spiritual judges taking secular causes from
the civil magistrates, for gain of money.

     Complaint against ecclesiastical judges inter-meddling with
cases of the secular court, but will not suffer their cases once to
be touched of the other.

     Complaint against certain misorders of cathedral churches, for
using double punishment for one offence against the law.

     Complaint of officials for maintaining unlawful usury.

     Complaint of officials permitting unlawful cohabiting with
another, when the husband or wife is long absent.

     Complaint of canons in cathedral churches, which have their
bishop sworn unto them before he be chosen.

     Complaints against incorporations or impropriations, and other
pilling of the people by churchmen.

     Buying and selling of burials complained of.

     Chaste and continent priests compelled to pay tribute for
concubines.

     Also in many places the bishops and their officials do not only
suffer priests to have concubines, so that they pay certain sums of
money, but also compel continent and chaste priests, which live
without concubines, to pay tribute for concubines, affirming that the
bishop hath need of money:  which being paid, it shall be lawful for
them either to live chaste, or keep concubines. How wicked a thing
this is, every man doth well understand and know.
 These, with many other burdens and grievances
more, to the number of a hundred, the secular states of Germany
delivered to the pope's legate; having (as they said) many more and
more grievous grievances besides these, which had likewise much need
of redress:  but because they would not exceed the limits of
reasonable brevity, they would content themselves (they said) with
these aforesaid hundred, reserving the rest to a more apt and more
convenient opportunity; stedfastly trusting and hoping, that when
those hundred grievances already by them declared, should be
abolished, the other would also decay and fall with them. Of the
which aforesaid grievances and complaints here is moreover to be
noted, that a great part was offered up before to the emperor at the
council of Worms; but because no redress thereof did follow,
therefore the secular states of Germany thought good to exhibit the
same now again, with divers more annexed thereunto, to Cheregatus,
the pope's legate in this present assembly of Nuremberg, desiring him
to present the same to Pope Adrian. This was about A.D. 1523; which
being done, the assembly at Nuremberg brake up for a time, and was
prorogued to the next year following.

     In this mean time Pope Adrian died. After him succeeded Pope
Clement the Seventh, who, the next year following, which was A.D.
1524, sent down his legate, Cardinal Campeius, unto the council of
the German princes assembled again at Nuremberg, about the month of
March, with letters also to Duke Frederic, full of many fair
petitions and sharp complaints, &c. But as touching the grievances
above-mentioned, no word nor message at all was sent, neither by
Campeius, nor by any other. Thus, where any thing was to be
complained of against Luther, either for suppression of the liberty
of the gospel, or for upholding of the pope's dignity, the pope was
ever ready with all diligence to call upon the princes; but where any
redress was to be required for the public wealth of Christian people,
or touching the necessary reformation of the church, herein the pope
neither giveth ear nor answer.



149.LUTHER AFTER THE DIET OF WORMS; HIS TEACHINGS AND DEATH.

     And thus, having discoursed such matters occurrent between the
pope and princes of Germany at the synod of Nuremberg, let us now
proceed, returning again to the story of Luther, of whom ye heard
before, how he was kept secret and solitary for a time, by the advice
and conveyance of certain nobles in Saxony, because of the emperor's
edict above-mentioned. In the mean time, while Luther had thus
absented himself out of Wittenberg, Andreas Carolostadt, proceeding
more roughly and eagerly in causes of religion, had stirred up the
people to throw down images in the temples, besides other things
more. For the which cause Luther, returning again into the city,
greatly misliked the order of their doings, and reproved the rashness
of Carolostadt, declaring that their proceedings herein were not
orderly, but that pictures and images ought first to be thrown outof
the hearts and consciences of men; and that the people ought first to
be taught that they are to be saved before God, and please him only
by faith; and that images serve to no purpose:  this done, and the
people well instructed, there was no danger in images, but they would
fall of their own accord. Not that he repugned to the contrary, (he
said,) as though he would maintain images to stand or to be suffered,
but that this ought to be done by the magistrate; and not by force,
upon every private man's head, without order and authority.

     Furthermore, Luther, writing of Carolostadt, affirmeth, that he
also joined with the sentence of them which began then to spread
about certain parts of Saxony, saying, that they were taught of God
that all wickedness being utterly suppressed, and all the wicked
doers slain, a new full perfection of all things must be set up, and
the innocent only to enjoy all things, &c.

     The cause why Luther so stood against that violent throwing
down of images, and against Carolostadt, seemeth partly to arise of
this, by reason that Pope Adrian, in his letters sent to the princes
and states of Germany, doth grievously complain and charge the sect
of Luther for sedition and tumults, and rebellion against
magistrates, as subverters and destroyers of all order and obedience,
as appeareth by the words of the pope's letter before expressed;
therefore Martin Luther, to stop the mouth of such slanderers, and to
prevent such sinister suspicions, was enforced to take this way as he
did; that is, to proceed as much as he might by order and authority.

     Wherein are to be noted by the way two special points touching
the doctrine and doings of Martin Luther, especially for all such who
in these our days now, abusing the name and authority of Luther,
think themselves to be good Lutherans, if they suffer images still to
remain in temples, and admit such things in the church, which
themselves do wish to be away. The first is, the manner how and after
what sort Luther did suffer such images to stand; for although he
assented not, that the vulgar and private multitude tumultuously by
violence should rap them down; yet that is no argument now for the
magistrate to let them stand. And though he allowed not the ministers
to stir up the people by forcible means to promote religion; yet that
argueth not those magistrates to be good Lutherans, which may and
should remove them, and will not.

     The second point to be noted is, to consider the cause why that
Luther did so stand with standing of images; which cause was time,
and not his own judgment; for albeit in judgment he wished them away,
yet time so served not thereunto then, as it serveth now:  for then
the doctrine of Luther, first beginning to spring, and being but in
the blade, was not yet known whereto it tended, nor to what it would
grow, but rather was suspected to tend to disobedience and sedition;
and therefore the pope, hearing of the doings of Carolostadt in
Wittenberg, and of other like, took his ground thereby to charge the
sect of Luther with sedition, uproars, and dissolute liberty of life.
And this was the cause why Luther (compelled then by necessity of
time to save his doctrine from slander of sedition and tumult being
laid to him by the pope, as ye have heard) was so much offended with
Carolostadt and others, for their violence used against images, For
otherwise, had it not been for the pope's accusations, there is no
doubt but Luther would have been as well contented with abolishing of
images, and other monuments of popery, as he was at the same time
contented to write to the Friars Augustine for abrogating of private
masses. And therefore as Luther in this doing is to be excused, the
circumstances considered, so the like excuse, perhaps, will not serve
the over-much curious imitation of certain Lutherans in this present
age now; which, considering only the fact of Luther, do not mark the
purpose of Luther, neither do expend the circumstances and time of
his doings; being not much unlike to the ridiculous imitators of King
Alexander the Great, which thought it not sufficient to follow him in
his virtues, but they would also counterfeit him in his stooping, and
all other gestures besides. But to these living now in the church, in
another age than Luther did, it may seem, after my mind, sufficient
to follow the same way after Luther, or to walk with Luther to the
kingdom of Christ, though they jump not also in every footstep of of
his, and keep even the same pace and turnings in all points as he
did.
[Footnote:  A Roman Catholic bishop, Dr. Milner, in his Letters to a
Prebendary, (seventh edition, London, 1825, pp. 113-118,) has
favoured us with a series of the coarsest expressions which can be
selected from the writings of Luther, to deduce from them, that
Luther's morality was prostrated, that his sentiments were depraved,
and that his motives and actions were the result of pride, bigotry,
and ambition. Dr. Milner closes his observations with these words,
"There are other passages in great numbers, too indecent to admit of
being translated at all; indeed I almost blush to soil my paper with
transcribing some of them into my notes below, in the original
Latin." This learned doctor of the popish church shrinks, with wonted
modesty, from his own translation of Luther's addresses to his royal
antagonist Henry the Eighth; but how would his delicacy have been
offended had he heard Mr. John Clark, the king's orator, before the
Consistory of Leo the Tenth, (in presenting his master's book to that
spiritual head of the church,) break out into such epithets as these
which follow; unless, indeed, they were deemed excusable, as spoken
of "an execrable, venomous, and pernicious heretic." [See page 1 of
Henry the Eighth's own book, entitled, Assertio Septem Sacramentorum.
Faithfully translated, &c., by T. W., gent., London, 1688.] The
orator denounces Luther as "this furious monster," with "his stings
and poisons, whereby he intends to infect the whole world." Or again,
"What so hot and inflamed force of speaking can be invented
sufficient to declare the crime of that most filthy villain?" [see
page 2.] Or, in reading forward, how would his ear have been jarred
with the expressions, "idol and vain phantom," "a mad dog, to be
dealt with drawn swords," and "a viper's madness!" How startling to
hear three times repeated from the mouth of the most holy father Pope
Leo, the title of "terrible monster;" or to hear him, the head of a
church that professes to be no persecutor of protestants, (because
she persecutes all heretics alike,) speak in definite terms of
"driving away from our Lord's flock the wolves; and cutting off, with
the material sword, the rotten members that infect the mystical body
of Christ: " [see the pope's bull to King Henry.] And, lastly, how
would the tender feelings of Dr. Milner have been wounded had he read
King Henry's own words, in his "Address to the Reader," animadverting
upon Luther as "one risen up, who, by the instigation of the devil,
under pretext of charity, stimulated with anger and hatred, spues out
the poison of vipers against the church! "Again, how inconsistent 
with the meekness of Christianity, for the Defender of the Faith to
speak thus of Luther:  "Oh, that detestable trumpeter of pride,
calumnies, and schisms! what an infernal wolf, &c., what a great
member of the devil is he! &c. Every Christian mind must deeply
regret the coarse and vulgar expressions used by the orator, the
pope, the king, and Luther, in common with other writers of that age: 
that such should have been the expressions of Luther is deeply to be
lamented, as the life and conversation of Christians should be
characteristic of the religion which they profess:  at the same time
it will be perceived, that Luther was the more readily betrayed into
errors of this kind in consequence of the bold and uncompromising
character of his mind, a quality as much to be admired by every
protestant, as it was dreaded by the papists:  they could not refute
his arguments, founded upon scripture; they dared not injure his
person, beloved and esteemed by the people. That the tender mercies
of the Romish Church would not have spared Luther, unless secured
from danger by a more powerful arm, we may gather from John Clark's
oration to the pope, on presenting to the pontiff King Henry's book;
who, speaking of the poisoning of Socrates, adds these words
respecting Luther:  "Could this destroyer of the Christian religion
expect any better from true Christians, for his extreme wickedness
against God?" And again, King Henry the Eighth, in his Address to the
Reader, speaking of Luther's repentance, adds, If Luther refuses
this, it will shortly come to pass, if Christian princes do their
duty, that their errors, and himself, if he perseveres therein, may
be burned in the fire."

     Whatever may have been the errors of Luther, they teach us this
truth; that weak and unstable must be that proud and boasting church,
which shook from its base to its summit, as Luther divulged and
propagated his Scriptural, and alas, in those days, "strange"
doctrines. The success which crowned the labours of this "puny
brother," (as King Henry calls him in the last sentence of his book,)
we must ascribe to the honour of God and the glory of his grace, who
hath "chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise,
and the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty; and who hath chosen base things of the world, and things
which are despised, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought
things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence." --
Seeley's Edition of Fox, vol. iv. p. 317.]

     And contrariwise, of the other sort, much less are they to be
commended, which running as much on the contrary string, are so
precise, that because of one small blemish, or for a little stooping
of Luther in the sacrament, therefore they give clean over the
reading of Luther, and fall almost into utter contempt of his books: 
whereby is declared, not so much the niceness and curiousness of
these our days, as the hinderance that cometh thereby to the church
is greatly to be lamented. For albeit the church of Christ (praised
be the Lord) is not unprovided of sufficient plenty of worthy and
learned writers, able to instruct in 'matters of doctrine; yet in the
chief points of our consolation, where the glory of Christ, and the
power of his passion, and strength of faith, are to be opened to our
conscience; and where the soul, wrestling for death and life,
standeth in need of serious consolation, the same may be said of
Martin Luther, among all this other variety of writers, that St.
Cyprian was wont to say of Tertullian," Give me my master." And
albeit that Luther went a little awry, and dissented from Zuinglius,
in this one matter of the sacrament; yet in all other states of
doctrine they did accord, as appeared in the synod holden at Marburg,
by Prince Philip, landgrave of Hesse, which was A.D. 1529, where both
Luther and Zuinglius were present, and, conferring together, agreed
in these articles: 

     "1. On the Unity and Trinity of God. 2. In the incarnation of
the Word. 3. In the passion and, resurrection of Christ, 4. In the
article of original sin. 5. In the article of faith in Christ Jesus.
6. That this faith cometh not of merits, but by the gift of God. 7.
That this faith is our righteousness. 8. Touching the extern word. 9.
Likewise they agreed in the articles of baptism. 10. Of good works.
11. Of confession. 12. Of magistrates. 13. Of men's traditions. 14.
Of baptism of infants. 15. Lastly, concerning the doctrine of the
Lord's supper; this they did believe, and hold:  first, that both
kinds thereof are to be ministered to the people, according to
Christ's institution; and that the mass is no such work for the which
a man may obtain grace both for the quick and the dead. Item, that
the sacrament (which they call of the altar) is a true sacrament of
the body and blood of the Lord. Item, that the spiritual manducation
of his body and blood is necessary for every Christian man. And
furthermore, that the use of the sacrament tendeth to the same effect
as doth the word, given and ordained of Almighty God, that thereby
infirm consciences may be stirred to belief by the Holy Ghost," &c.

     In all these sums of doctrine above recited, Luther and
Zuinglius did consent and agree; neither were their opinions so
different in the matter of the Lord's supper, but that in the
principal points they accorded. For if the question be asked of them
both, What is the material substance of the sacrament, which our
outward senses do behold and feel? they will both confess bread, and
not the accidents only of bread. Further, if the question be asked,
Whether Christ be there present? they will both confess his true
presence to be there; only in the manner of presence they differ.
Again, ask, Whether the material substance laid before our eyes in
the sacrament is to be worshipped? they will both deny it, and judge
it idolatry. And likewise for transubstantiation, and the sacrifice
of the mass, they both do abhor, and do deny the same:  as also that
the communion to be in both kinds administered, they do both assent
and grant.

     Only their difference is in this, concerning the sense and
meaning of the words of Christ, "This is my body," &c., which words
Luther expoundeth to be taken nakedly and simply as the letter
standeth, without trope or figure; and therefore holdeth the body and
blood of Christ truly to be in the bread and wine, and so also to be
received with the mouth. Uldricus Zuinglius, with Johannes
Œcolampadius, and other more, do interpret these words otherwise; as
to be taken not literally, but to have a spiritual meaning, and to be
expounded by a trope or figure, so that the sense of these words,
"This is my body," is thus to be expounded:  "This signifieth my body
and blood." With Luther consented the Saxons; with the side of
Zuinglius went the Helvetians. And as time did grow, so the division
of these opinions increased in sides, and spread in farther realms
and countries:  the one part being called, of Luther, Lutherans; the
other having the name of Sacramentaries. Notwithstanding, in this one
unity of opinion both the Lutherans and Sacramentaries do accord and
agree, that the bread and wine therepresent are not transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ, (as it is said,) but are a true
sacrament of the body and blood.

     But hereof sufficient, touching this division between the
Lutherans and the Zuinglians. In which division, if there have been
any defect in Martin Luther, yet is that no cause why either the
papists may greatly triumph, or why the protestants should despise
Luther:  for neither is the doctrine of Luther touching the sacrament
so gross, that it maketh much with the papists; nor yet so discrepant
from us, that therefore he ought to be exploded. And though a full
reconciliation of this difference cannot well be made, (as some have
gone about to do,) yet let us give to Luther a moderate
interpretation; and if we will not make things better, yet let us not
make them worse than they be, and let us hear, if not with the
manner, yet at least with the time of his teaching; and finally, let
it not be noted in us, that we should seem to differ in charity more
(as Bucer said) than we do in doctrine. But of this more hereafter,
(Christ willing,) when we come to the history of John Frith.

     They which write the lives of saints use to describe and to
extol their holy life and godly virtues, and also to set forth such
miracles as be wrought in them by God; whereof there lacketh no
plenty in Martin Luther, but rather time lacketh to us, and
opportunity to tarry upon them, having such haste to other things.
Otherwise what a miracle might this seem to be, for one man, and a
poor friar, creeping out of a blind cloister, to be set up against
the pope, the universal bishop, and God's mighty vicar on earth; to
withstand all his cardinals, yea, and to sustain the malice and
hatred almost of the whole world being set against him; and to work
that against the said pope, cardinals, and Church of Rome, which no
king nor emperor could ever do, yea, durst never attempt, nor all the
learned men before him could ever compass:  which miraculous work of
God, I account nothing inferior to the miracle of David overthrowing
great Goliath. Wherefore if miracles do make a saint, (after the
pope's definition,) what lacketh in Martin Luther, but age and time
only, to make him a saint? who, standing openly against the pope,
cardinals, and prelates of the church, in number so many, in power so
terrible, in practice so crafty, having emperors and all the kings of
the earth against him; who, teaching and preaching Christ the space
of nine and twenty years, could, without touch of all his enemies, so
quietly, in his own country where he was born, die and sleep in
peace. In which Martin Luther, first to stand against the pope was a
great miracle; to prevail against the pope, a greater; so to die
untouched, may seem greatest of all, espepecially having so many
enemies as he had. Again, neither is it any thing less miraculous, to
consider what manifold dangers he escaped besides:  as when a certain
Jew was appointed to come to destroy him by poison, yet was it so by
the will of God, that Luther had warning thereof before, and the face
of the Jew sent to him by picture, whereby he knew him, and avoided
the peril.

     Another time, as he was sitting in a certain place upon his
stool, a great stone there was in the vault over his head where he
did sit; which being staid miraculously so long as he was sitting, as
soon as he was up, immediately fell upon the place where he sat, able
to have crushed him all in pieces, if it had lighted upon him.

     And what should I speak of his prayers, which were so ardent
unto Christ, that (as Melancthon writeth) they which stood under his
window where he stood praying, might see his tears falling and
dropping down. Again, with such power he prayed, that he (as himself
confesseth) had obtained of the Lord, that so long as he lived, the
pope should not prevail in his country; after his death (said he) let
them pray who could.

     And as touching the marvellous works of the Lord, wrought here
by men, if it be true which is credibly reported by the learned, what
miracle can be more miraculous, than that which is declared of a
young man about Wittenberg, who, being kept bare and needy by his
father, was tempted by way of sorcery to bargain with the devil, or a
familiar, as they call him; to yield himself body and soul into the
devil's power, upon condition to have his wish satisfied with money.
So that upon the same an obligation was made by the young man,
written with his own blood, and given to the devil. This case you see
how horrible it was, and how damnable. Now hear what followed. Upon
the sudden wealth and alteration of this young man, the matter first
being noted, began afterwards more and more to be suspected, and at
length, after long and great admiration, was brought unto Martin
Luther to be examined. The young man, whether for shame or fear, long
denied to confess, and would disclose nothing; yet God so wrought,
being stronger than the devil, that he uttered unto Luther the whole
substance of the case, as well touching the money, as the obligation.
Luther understanding the matter, and pitying the lamentable state of
the man, willed the whole congregation to pray, and he himself ceased
not with his prayers to labour; so that the devil was compelled at
the last to throw in his obligation at the window, and bade him take
it again unto him:  which narration, if it be so true, as certainly it
is of him reported, I see not the contrary, but that this may well
seem comparable with the greatest miracle, in Christ's church, that
was since the apostles' time.

     Furthermore, as he was mighty in his prayers, so in his sermons
God gave him such a grace, that when he preached, they which heard
him thought every one his own temptation severally to be noted and
touched. Whereof, when signification was given unto him by his
friends, and he demanded how that could be:  "Mine own manifold
temptations," said he, "and experiences are the cause thereof." For
this thou must understand, good reader! that Luther from his tender
years was much beaten and exercised with spiritual conflicts, as
Melancthon in describing of his life doth testify. Also Hieronymus
Wellerus, scholar and disciple of the said Martin Luther, recordeth,
that he oftentimes heard Luther his master thus report of himself,
that he had been assaulted and vexed with all kinds of temptations,
saving only one, which was with covetousness; with this vice be was
never, said he, in all his life troubled, nor once tempted.

     And hitherto concerning the life of Martin Luther, who, living
to the year of his age sixty-three, he continued writing and
preaching about twenty-nine years. As touching the order of his
death, the words of Melancthon be these: 

An intimation given by Philip Melancthon to his auditory at
Wittenberg, of the decease of Martin Luther, A.D. 1546.

     To the scholars assembled to hear the lecture of the Epistle to
the Romans, Philip Melancthon recited publicly this that followeth,
at nine of the clock before noon; advertising he gave this
information, by the counsel of other lords, for that the auditors,
understanding the express truth, (forasmuch as the lords knew
certainly, fame would blow slanderous blasts every where of the death
of Luther,) should not credit flying tales and false reports.

     "My friends, ye know that we have enterprised to expound
grammatically the Epistle to the Romans, in which is contained the
true doctrine of the Son of God, which our Lord, by his singular
grace, hath revealed unto us at this present by the reverend father,
and our dearly beloved master, Martin Luther. Notwithstanding we have
received heavy news, which has so augumented my dolour, that I am in
doubt if I may continue henceforth in scholastical profession, and
exercise of teaching. The cause wherefore I commemorate this thing
is, for that I am so advised by other lords, that ye may understand
the true sequel of things, lest yourselves blaze abroad vain tales of
this fatal chance, or give credit to other fables, which commonly are
accustomed to be spread every where.

     "Wednesday last past, and the seventeenth of February, Doctor
Martin Luther sickened a little before supper of his accustomed
malady, to wit, of the oppression of humours in the orifice or
opening of the stomach, whereof I remember I have seen him oft
diseased in this place. This sickness took him after supper, with the
which he vehemently contending, required secess into a by-chamber,
and there he rested on his bed two hours, all which time his pains
increased; and as Dr. Jonas was lying in his chamber, Luther awaked,
and prayed him to rise, and to call up Ambrose, his children's
schoolmaster, to make fire in another chamber; into the which when he
was newly entered, Albert, earl of Manseld, with his wife, and divers
others, (whose names for haste in these letters were not expressed,)
at that instant came into his chamber. Finally, feeling his fatal
hour to approach, before nine of the clock in the morning, on the
eighteenth of February, he commended himself to God with this devout
prayer: 

     "'My heavenly Father, eternal and merciful God! thou hast
manifested unto me thy dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, I have taught
him, I have known him; I love him as my life, my health, and my
redemption; whom the wicked have persecuted, maligned, and with
injury afflicted. Draw my soul to thee.'

     "After this he said as ensueth, thrice: 

     "'I commend my spirit into thy hands, thou hast redeemed me, O
God of truth! God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that
all those that believe in him should have life everlasting,' John
iii.

     "Having repeated oftentimes his prayers, he was called to God,
unto whom so faithfully he commended his spirit; to enjoy, no doubt,
the blessed society of the patriarchs, prophets, and apostles in the
kingdom of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Let us now
love the memory of this man, and the doctrine that he hath taught;
let us learn to be modest and meek; let us consider the wretched
calamities and marvellous changes, that shall follow this mishap and
doleful chance. I beseech thee, O Son of God! crucified for us, and
resuscitate Emmanuel, govern, conserve, and defend thy church."

A prayer after the manner of Luther.

     "Let us render thanks unto God, the eternal Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who hath pleased, by the ministry of this godly Luther,
to purify the evangelical fountains from papistical infection, and
restore sincere doctrine to the church:  which thing we remembering,
ought to join our lamentable petitions, with zealous affection
beseeching God to confirm what he hath begun in us, for his holy
name's sake. This is thy voice and promise, O living and just God,
eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Creator of all things, and
of the church! I will have compassion on you, for my name's sake. I
will do it for myself, yea, even for myself, that I be not
blasphemed. I beseech thee with ardent affection, that for thy glory,
and the glory of thy Son Jesus Christ, thou wilt collect unto thyself
in the voice of thy gospel, among us, one perpetual church, and that,
for the dear love of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, our Mediator and
Intercessor, thou wilt govern us by thy Holy Ghost; that we
unfeignedly may call upon thee, and serve thee justly. Rule also the
studies of thy doctrine, govern and conserve the policies and
discipline of the same, which be the nurses of thy church and 
schools. And since thou hast created mankind to acknowledge and to
invocate thee, and that for this respect thou hast revealed thyself
by many clear testimonies, permit not this small number and selected
flock (that profess thy sacred word) to be defaced and overcome. And
the rather, for that thy Son Jesus Christ, ready to fight against
death, hath prayed in this manner for us; Father, sanctify them in
verity, thy word is verity. Our prayers we join with the prayer of
this our holy Priest, making our petition with Him, that thy doctrine
may shine among men, and that we may be directed by the same."

     We heard Luther evermore pray in this wise, and so praying, his
innocent ghost peaceably was separated from the earthly corpse when
he had lived almost sixty-three years.

     Such as succeeded, have divers monuments of his doctrine and
godliness. He wrote certain learned works, wherein he comprised a
wholesome and necessary doctrine for men, informing the sincere minds
to repentance, and to declare the fruits of the same, the use of the
sacraments, the difference betwixt the gospel and philosophy, the
dignity of politic order; and, finally, the principal articles of
doctrine profitable to the church. He composed certain works to
reprove, wherein he refuteth divers pernicious errors. He also
devised books of interpretation, in which he wrote many narrations
and expositions of the prophets and apostles, and in this kind, his
very enemies confess, he excelleth all others whose works are
imprinted and published abroad. Then, all Christians and godly minds!
conceive what praise he deserved; but certainly his exposition of the
Old and New Testament, in utility and labour, is equivalent to all
his works; for in the same is so much perspicuity, that it may serve
instead of a commentary, though it be read in the German tongue. And
yet this is not a naked exposition, but it containeth very learned
annotations and arguments on every part; which both set forth the sum
of heavenly doctrine, and instruct the reader in the sacred phrase
and manner of speaking in the Scriptures, that the godly minds may
receive firm testimonies of the doctrine, out of the very fountains.
His mind was not to keep us occupied in his works; but to guide our
spirits to the very springs. His will was, we should hear God speak,
and that by his word true faith and invocation might be kindled in
our minds, that God might be sincerely honoured and adored, and that
many might be made inheritors of everlasting life.

     It behoveth us thankfully to accept his good will and great
labours, and to imitate the same as our patron, and by him to learn
to adorn the church, according to our power. For we must refer all
our life, enterprises, and deliberations, to two principal ends: 
First, to illustrate the glory of God; Secondly, to profit the
church. As touching the first, St. Paul saith, Do all things to the
glory of God. And of the second, it is said in Psalm xxii., Pray that
Jerusalem may prosper. And there followeth a singular promise added
in this versicle:  Such as love the church, shall prosper and have
good success. Let these heavenly commandments and divine instructions
allure all men to learn the true doctrine of the church, to love the
faithful ministers of the gospel and the true teachers; and to employ
their whole study and diligence to augment the true doctrine, and
maintain concord and unity in the true church.

     Frederic, prince elector, died long before Luther, A.D. 1525,
leaving no issue behind him, for that he lived a single life, and was
never married:  wherefore after him succeeded John Frederic, duke of
Saxony.



150. CARDINAL CAMPEIUS' MISSION

     Mention was made a little before of the ministers of Strasburg,
who, because of their marriage, were in trouble, and cited by the
bishop to appear before him, and there to be judged, without the
precinct of the city of Strasburg; whereas there had been a contrary
order taken before between the bishop and the city, that the bishop
should execute no judgment upon any, but under some of the
magistrates of the said city of Strasburg. Whereupon the senate and
the citizens, taking into their hands the cause of these married
ministers, in defence of their own right and liberties, wrote, as is
said, to their bishop of Strasburg, and caused the judgment thereof a
while to be stayed; by reason whereof the matter was brought at
length before Cardinal Campeius,legate, sent by Pope Clement to the
assembly of Nuremberg, A.D. 1524.

     The chief doer in this matter was one Thomas Murner, a
Franciscan friar, who had commenced a grievous complaint against the
senate and city of Strasburg, before the aforesaid Cardinal Campeius.
Wherefore the senate, to purge themselves, sent their ambassadors,
thus clearing their cause, and answering to their accusation, that
they neither had been nor would be any let to the bishop, but had
signified to him before, by their letters, that whatsoever he could
lay against those married priests, consonant to the law of God, they
would be no stay, but rather a furtherance unto him to proceed in his
action. But the senate herein was not a little grieved that the
bishop, contrary to the order and compact which was taken between him
and them, did call the said ministers out of the liberties of their
city; for so it was between them agreed, that no ecclesiastical
person should be adjudged but under some judge of their own city. But
now, contrary to their said agreement, the bishop called those
ministers out of their liberties; and so the ministers, claiming the
right and privilege of the city, were condemned, their cause being
neither heard nor known. And now if the senate should show themselves
any thing more sharp or rigorous unto those ministers, claiming the
right of the city, the people, no doubt, would not take it well, but
haply would rise up in some commotion against them in the quarrel and
defence of their franchises and liberties.

     And where it is objected, that they receive priests and men of
the clergy into the freedom and protection of their city:  to this
they answered, that they did nothing herein, but that which was
correspondent to the ancient usage and manner of the city before; and
moreover, that it was the bishop's own request and desire made unto
them so to do.

     To this the cardinal again, advising well the letters of the
bishop, and the whole order of the matter which was sent unto him,
declared, that he right well understood by the letters sent, that the
ministers indeed (as the ambassadors said) were called out from the
freedom and liberties of the city, and yet no order of law was broken
therein; forasmuch as the bishop (said he) had there no less power 
and authority, than if he were his own vicar delegate; and therefore
he desired them, that they would assist the bishop in punishing the
aforesaid ministers, &c.

     After much other talk and reasoning on both parts, wherein the
ambassadors argued in defence of their freedom, that the judgment
should not be transferred out of the city:  among other communication,
they inferred moreover, and declared, how in the city of Strasburg
were many, yea, the most part of the clergy, who lived viciously and
wickedly with their women, whom they kept in their houses, to the
great offence of the people, shame to Christ's church, and pernicious
example of others; and yet the bishop would never once stir to see
any punishing or correction thereof. Wherefore, if the senate (said
the ambassadors) should permit the bishop to extend his cruelty and
extremity against these married ministers, for not observing the
bishop of Rome's law, and leave the other notorious offenders, who
break the law of God, to escape unpunished, doubtless it would
redound to their great danger and peril, not only before God, but
also among the commons of their city, ready to rise upon them.

     To this Campeius answered, What composition or bargain was
betwixt the bishop and them, he knew not, but surely the act of the
one was manifest, and needed no great trial in law of proving and
confessing; and therefore they were sequestered and abandoned from
the communion of the church, ipso facto. As for the other sort of
them, who keep women, although, said he, it be not well done, yet
doth it not excuse the enormity of their marriage. Neither was he
ignorant, but that it was the manner of the bishops of Germany, for
money, to wink at priests' lemans; and the same also was evil done
indeed. And further, that the time should come when they shall be
called to an account for the same; but yet, nevertheless, it is not
sufferable that priests therefore should have wives. And if
comparison should be made, said he, much greater offence it were, a
priest to have a wife, than to have and keep at home many paramours.
His reason was this; For they that keep them, said he, as it is
naughty which they do, so do they acknowledge their sin:  the others
persuade themselves that they do well, and so continue still without
repentance, or conscience of their fact. All men, said he, cannot be
chaste, as John the Baptist was; yet can it not be proved by any
example, to be lawful for priests, professing chastity, to leave 
their single life, and to marry:  no, not the Greeks themselves, who
in rites be differing from us, do give this liberty to their own
priests to marry:  wherefore he prayed them to give their aid to the
bishop in this behalf.

     Whereunto the ambassadors replied again, saying, that if he
would first punish the one class of offenders, then might the senate
assist him the better in correcting the other; but the cardinal was
still instant upon them, that first they should assist their bishop,
and then if the bishop would not punish the other crime, he would
come thither himself and see it punished accordingly.

     This Cardinal Campeius, how he was sent by Pope Clement the
Sixth, to the second assembly or diet of Nuremberg, A.D. 1524, and
what was there done by the said cardinal, is before signified. After
this council of Nuremberg, immediately followed another sitting at
Ratisbon, where were present Ferdinand, Campeius, the cardinal of
Saltsburg, the two dukes of Bavaria, the bishops of Trent and
Ratisbon; also the legates of the bishops, Bamberg, Spires,
Strasburg, Augsburg, Constance, Basil, Friburg, Passau, and Brixen.
By whom in the said assembly it was thus concluded: 

Summary of popish decrees made at the council of Ratisbon.

     That forasmuch as the emperor, at the request of Pope Leo, had
condemned, by his public edict set forth at Worms, the doctrine of
Luther for erroneous and wicked; and also it was agreed upon in both
the assemblies at Nuremberg, that the said edict should be obeyed by
all men; they likewise, at the request of Cardinal Campeius, do will
and command the aforesaid edict to be observed through all their
confines and precincts:  that the gospel, and all other Holy
Scriptures, should be taught in churches according to the
interpretation of the ancient forefathers:  that all they who revive
any old heresies before condemned, or teach any new thing
contumelious, either against Christ, his blessed mother, and holy
saints, or which may breed any occasion of sedition, are to be
punished according to the tenor of the edict aforesaid:  That none be
admitted to preach without the licence of his ordinary:  That they who
be already admitted, shall be examined how and what they preach:  That
the laws which Campeius is about to set forth for reformation of
manners, shall be observed:  That in the sacraments, in the mass, and
all other things, there shall be no innovation, but all things to
stand as in fore-time they did:  That all they who approach to the
Lord's supper without confession and absolution, or do eat flesh on
days forbidden, or who do run out of their order; also priests,
deacons, and sub-deacons, that be married, shall be punished:  That
nothing shall be printed without consent of the magistrate:  That no
book of Luther or of any Lutheran shall be printed or sold:  That they
of their jurisdiction, who study in the university of Wittenberg,
shall every one repair home within three months after the publishing
hereof, or else turn to some other place free from the infection of
Luther, under pain of confiscating all their goods, and losing their
inheritance:  That no benefice, nor other office of teaching, be given
to any student of that university. Item, That certain inquisitors,
fit for the same, be appointed to inquire and examine the premises.
Item, Lest it may be said that this faction of Luther taketh its
origin from the corrupt life of priests, the said Campeius, with
other his assistants in the said convocation of Ratisbon, chargeth
and commandeth, that priests live honestly, go in decent apparel,
play not the merchants, haunt not the taverns, be not covetous, nor
take money for their ministration; such as keep concubines to be
removed; the number also of holy days to be diminished,

     These things would Campeius have enacted in a full council, and
with the consents of all the empire:  but when he could not bring that
to pass, by reason that the minds of divers were gone from the pope,
he was fain to get the same ratified in this particular conventicle,
with the assents of these bishops above rehearsed.



151. THE REFORMATION IN SWITZERLAND.

     These things thus hitherto discoursed, which fully may be seen
in the Commentaries of John Sleiden, it remaineth next after the
story of Martin Luther, somewhat to adjoin likewise touching the
history of Zuinglius, and of the Helvetians. But before I come to the
explication of this story, it shall not be inconvenient, first to
give some little touch of the towns, called pages, of these
Helvetians, and of their league and confederation first begun amongst
them.

The history of the Helvetians, or Switzers, how they first recovered
their liberty, and afterwards were joined in league together.

     The Helvetians, whom otherwise we call Switzers, are divided
principally into thirteen pages. The names of whom are Tigurini,
Bernates, Lucernates, Urani, Suicenses, Untervaldii, Tugiani,
Glareanti, Basilienses, Solodurii, Friburgii, Scafusiani,
Apecelenses. Furthermore, to these be added seven other pages, albeit
not with such a full bond as the other be conjoined together; which
be these:  Rheti, Lepontii, Seduni, Veragri, Sangalli, Mullusiani,
Rotulenses. Of these thirteen confederate pages above recited, these
three were the first, to wit, Urania, Suicenses, and Sylvanii, or (as
some call them) Untervaldii, which joined themselves together.

     If credit should be given to old narrations, these three pages
or valleys first suffered great servitude and thraldom under cruel
rulers or governors; insomuch that the governor of Sylvania required
of one of the inhabitants a yoke of his oxen; which when the townsmen
denied to give him, the ruler sent his servant by force to take his
oxen from him. This when the servant was about to do, cometh thepoor
man's son, and cutting off one of his fingers, and upon the same
avoided. The governor, hearing this, taketh the poor man and putteth
out his eyes.

     At another time in the said Sylvania, as the good man of the
house was absent abroad, the governor who had then the rule of the
town, entering into the house, commanded the wife to prepare for him
a bath, and made other proposals to her; whereunto she being
unwilling, deferred the bath as long as she might, till the return of
her husband. To whom then she, making her complaint, so moved his
mind, that he, with his axe or hatchet which he had in his hand, flew
upon the adulterous ruler and slew him.

     Another example of like violence is reported of the ruler of
Suicia and Sylvania, who, surprised with the like pride and disdain
against the poor underlings, caused his cap to be hung up upon a
pole, charging and commanding by his servant, all that passed by to
do obeisance to the cap; which when one named William Tell refused to
do, the tyrant caused his son to be tied, with an apple set upon his
head, and the father with a cross-bow, or a like instrument, to shoot
at the apple. After long refusing, when the woeful father could not
otherwise choose, by force constrained, but must level at the apple;
as God would, he missed the child, and struck the mark. Thus Tell,
being thus compelled by the tyrant to shoot at his son, had brought
with him two shafts; thinking that if he had struck the child with
one, the other he would have let drive at the tyrant:  which being
understood, he was apprehended and led to the ruler's house; but by
the way escaping out of the boat between Urania and Brun, and passing
through the mountains with as much speed as he might, he lay in the
way secretly as the ruler should pass, where he discharged his arrow
at the tyrant and slew him, A.D. 1307.
Illustration:  William Tell

     And thus were these cruel governors utterly expelled out of
these three valleys or pages aforesaid; and after that, such order
was taken by the emperor Henry the Seventh, and also by the emperor
Ludovicus, duke of Bavaria, that henceforth no judge should be set
over them, but only of their own company, and town dwellers.

     It followed after this, A.D. 1315, that great contention and
war fell between Frederic, duke of Austria, and Ludovic, duke of
Bavaria, striving and fighting the space of eight years together
about the empire. With Ludovic held the three pages aforesaid; who
had divers conflicts with Leopold, brother to the aforenamed
Frederic, duke of Austria, fighting in his brother's quarrel. As
Leopold had reared a mighty army of twenty thousand footmen and
horsemen, and was come to Egree, so to pass over the mountains to
subdue the pages; he began to take advice of his council, by what way
or passage best he might direct his journey towards the Switzers.
Whereupon as they were busy in consulting, there stood a fool by,
named Kune de Stocken, who hearing their advice, thought also to
shoot his bolt withal, and told them, that their counsel did not like
him:  "For all you," quoth he, "consult how we should enter into
yonder country; but none of you giveth any counsel how to come out
again after we be entered." And in conclusion, as the fool said, so
they found it true. For when Leopold with his host had entered into
the straits and valleys between the rocks and mountains, the
Switzers, with their neighbours of Urania and Sylvania, lying in
privy wait, had them at such advantage; and with tumbling down stones
from the rocks, and sudden coming upon their backs in blind lanes,
did so encumber them, that neither they had convenient standing to
fight, nor room almost to fly away; by reason whereof a great part of
Leopold's army there, being enclosed about the place called
Morgayten, lost their lives, and many in the flight were slain.
Leopold, with them that remained, retired and escaped to Turgoia.
This battle was fought A.D. 1315, the sixteenth of November.

     After this, the burghers of these three villages, being
continually vexed by Frederic, duke of Austria, for that they would
not knowledge him for emperor, assembled themselves in the town of
Urania, A.D. 1316; and there entered a mutual league and bond of
perpetual society and conjunction, joining and swearing themselves,
as in one body of a commonwealth and public administration together.
After that came to them the Lucernates; then the Tugiani; after them
the Tigurines; next to them followed the Bernates; the last almost of
all were the Basilians:  then followed after, the other seven pages
above recited.

     And thus have ye the names, the freedom, and confederation of
these Switzers, or cantons, or pages of Helvetia, with the occasions
and circumstances thereof, briefly expressed. Now to the purpose of
our story intended, which is to declare the success of Christ's
gospel and true religion received among the Helvetians; also touching
the life and doctrine of Zuinglius, and order of his death, as here
ensueth.

The acts and life of Uldricus Zuinglius; and of receiving the gospel
in Switzerland.
Illustration:  Zurich

     In the tractation of Luther's story, mention was made before of
Uldricus Zuinglius, who first abiding at Glarus, in a place called
then our Lord's Hermitage, from thence removed to Zurich about A.D.
1519, and there began to teach, dwelling in the minster, among the
canons or priests of that close; using with them the same rites and
ceremonies during the space of two or three years, where he continued
reading and explaining the Scriptures unto the people with great
travail, and no less dexterity. And because Pope Leo the same year
had renewed his pardons again through all countries, (as is above
declared,) Zuinglius zealously withstood the same, detecting the
abuses thereof by the Scriptures, and of other corruptions reigning
then in the church; and so continued by the space of two years and
more, till at length Hugo bishop of Constance (to whose jurisdiction
Zurich then also did belong) hearing thereof, wrote his letter to the
senate of the said city of Zurich, complaining grievously of
Zuinglius; who also wrote another letter to the college of canons,
where Zuinglius was the same time dwelling, complaining likewise of
such new teachers who troubled the church; and exhorted them
earnestly to beware, and to take diligent heed to themselves. And
forasmuch as both the pope and the emperor's Majesty had condemned
all such new doctrine by their decrees and edicts, he willed them
therefore to admit no such new innovations of doctrine, without the
common consent of them to whom the same did appertain. Zuinglius
hearing thereof, referreth his cause to the judgment and hearing of
the senate, not refusing to render to them an account of his faith.
And forasmuch as the bishop's letter was read openly in the college,
Zuinglius directeth another letter to the bishop again, declaring the
said letter proceeded not from the bishop, not that he was ignorant
who were the authors thereof; desiring him not to follow their
sinister counsels, for that truth, said he, is a thing invincible,
and cannot be resisted. After the same tenor certain others of the
city likewise wrote unto the bishop, desiring him that he would
attempt nothing that should be prejudicial to the liberty and free
course of the gospel; requiring moreover, that he would bear no
longer the filthy and infamous lives of priests, but that he would
permit them to have their lawful wives, &c. This was A.D. 1522.

     Besides this, Zuinglius wrote also another letter to the whole
nation of the Helvetians, monishing them in no case to hinder the
passage of sincere doctrine, nor to infer any molestation to priests
that were married:  for as for the vow and coaction of their single
life, it came, saith he, of the devil, and a devilish thing it is.
And therefore whereas the said Helvetians had such a right and custom
in their towns and pages, that when they received any new priest into
their churches, they used to premonish him before to take his
concubine, lest he should attempt any misuse with their wives and
daughters; he exhorted them that they would no less grant unto them
to take their wives in honest matrimony, than to live with unmarried
women against the precept of God.

     Thus as Zuinglius continued certain years labouring in the word
of the Lord, offence began to rise at this new doctrine, and divers
stepped up, namely, the Dominic Friars, on the contrary side, to
preach and inveigh against him. But he, keeping himself ever within
the Scriptures, protested that he would make good by the word of God
that which he had taught. Upon this, the magistrates and senate of
Zurich sent forth their commandment to all priests and ministers
within their dominion, to repair to the city of Zurich, against the
twenty-ninth of January next ensuing, (this was A.D. 1523,) there
every one to speak freely, and to be heard quietly, touching these
controversies of religion, what could be said; directing also their
letters to the bishop of Constance, that he would either make his
repair thither himself, or else to send his deputy. When the day
appointed came, the bishop's vicegerent, which was John Faber, was
also present. The council first declaring the cause of this their
frequency and assembly, (which was for the dissension newly risen
about matters of religion,) required that if any there had to object
or infer against the doctrine of Zuinglius, he should freely and
quietly utter and declare his mind.

     Zuinglius had disposed his matter before, and contrived all his
doctrine in a certain order of places, to the number of sixty-seven
articles; which articles he had published also abroad before, to the
end that they which were disposed, might resort thither the better
prepared to the disputation. When the consul had finished that which
he would say, and had exhorted others to begin, Faber, first entering
the matter, began to declare the cause of his sending thither, and
afterwards would persuade, that this was no place convenient, nor
time fit, for discussing of such matters by disputation, but rather
that the cognition and tractation thereof belonged to a general
council, which, he said, was already appointed, and now near at hand.
Notwithstanding Zuinglius still continued urging and requiring him,
that if he had there any thing to say or to dispute, he would openly
and freely utter his mind. To this he answered again, that he would
confute his doctrine by writing. This done, with a few other words on
both sides had to and fro, when no man would appear there to offer
any disputation, the assembly brake, and was discharged; whereupon
the senate of Zurich incontinent caused to be proclaimed through all
their dominion and territory, that the traditions of men should be
displaced and abandoned, and the gospel of Christ purely taught out
of the Old and New Testament. A.D. 1523.

     When the gospel thus began to take place, and to flourish in
Zurich and certain other places of Helvetia, in the following year,
(A.D. 1524,) another assembly of the Helvetians was convented at
Lucerne, where this decree was made on the contrary part: 

Constitutions decreed in the assembly of Lucerne.

     "That no man should deride or contemn the word of God, which
had been taught now above a thousand and four hundred years
heretofore:  nor the mass to be scorned, wherein the body of Christ is
consecrated, to the honour of God, and to the comfort both of the
quick and the dead.

     "That they which are able to receive the Lord's body at Easter,
shall confess their sins in Lent to the priests, and do all other
things, as the use and manner of the church requireth.

     "That the rites and customs of holy church be kept.

     "That every one obey his own proper pastor and curate, and
receive the sacraments of him, after the manner of holy church, and
pay him his yearly duties.

     "That honour be given to priests.

     "Item, to abstain from flesh-eating on fasting-days, and in
Lent to abstain from eggs and cheese.

     "That no opinion of Luther be taught privily or apertly,
contrary to the received determination of holy church; and that in
taverns and at table no mention be made of Luther, or any new
doctrine.

     "That images and pictures of saints in every place be kept
inviolate.

     "That priests and ministers of the church be not compelled to
render account of their doctrine, but only to the magistrate.

     "That due aid and supportation be provided for them, if any
commotion do happen.

     "That no person deride the relics of the Holy Spirit, or of our
Lady, or of St. Anthony.

     "Finally, That all the laws and decrees set forth by the bishop
of Constance, be observed.

     "These constitutions whosoever shall transgress, let them be
presented to the magistrate, and overseers to be set over them that
shall so transgress."

     After these things concluded thus at Lucerne, the cantons of
Helvetia together directed their public letter to the Tigurines, or
men of Zurich, to this effect: -

     "Wherein they do much lament and complain of this new-broached
doctrine which had set all mentogether by the ears, through the
occasion of certain rash and newfangled heads, which had greatly
disturbed both the state of the church and of the commonwealth, and
have scattered the seeds of discord, where beforetime all things were
well in quiet. And although this sore (said they) ought to have been
looked to betimes, so that they should not have suffered the glory of
Almighty God, and of the blessed Virgin, and other saints, so to be
dishonoured, but rather should have bestowed their goods and lives to
maintain the same; yet, notwithstanding, they required them now to
look upon the matter, which otherwise would bring to them destruction
both of body and soul:  as for example, they might see the doctrine of
Luther, what fruit it brought. The rude and vulgar people now (said
they) could not be holden in, but would burst forth to all licence
and rebellion, as hath appeared by sufficient proofs of late; the
like is to be feared also among themselves, and all by the occasion
of Zuinglius, and of Leo Juda, which so took upon them to expound the
word of God after their own interpretation, opening thereby whole
doors and windows to discord and dissension. Albeit of their doctrine
they were not certain what they did teach; yet what inconvenience
followed upon their doctrine, they had too much experience. For now
all fasting was laid down, and all days were alike to eat both flesh
and eggs, as well one as another. Priests and religious persons, both
men and women, brake their vows, ran out of their order, and fell to
marrying; God's service was decayed, singing in the church left, and
prayer ceased; priests grew in contempt, religious men were thrust
out of their cloisters; confession and penance were neglected, so
that men would not stick to presume to receive at the holy altar,
without any confession made to the priest before. The holy mass was
derided and scorned; our blessed Lady and other saints blasphemed;
images plucked down and broken in pieces, neither was there any
honour given to the sacraments. To make short, men now were grown
unto such a licence and liberty, that scarcely the holy host could be
safe within the priest's hands, &c.

     "The disorder of all which things, as it is of no small
importance, so it was to them so grievous and lamentable, that they
thought it their part to suffer the same no longer. Neither was this
the first time (they said) of this their complaining, when in their
former assembly they sent unto them before the like admonition,
writing to them by certain of the clergy, and craving their aid in
the same; which seeing it is so, they did now again earnestly call
upon them touching the premises, desiring them to surcease from such
doings, and to take a better way, continuing in the religion of their
old ancestors, which were before them. And if there were any such
thing, wherein they were grieved and offended against the bishop of
Rome, the cardinals, bishops, or other prelates, either for their
ambition in heaping, exchanging, and selling the dignities of the
church, or for their oppression in pilling men's purses with their
indulgences, or else for their usurped jurisdiction and power, which
they extend too far, and corruptly apply to matters external and
political, which only ought to serve in such cases as be spiritual;
if these and such other abuses were the causes, wherewith they were
so grievously offended, they promised that, for the correction and
reformation thereof, they would also themselves join their diligence
and good will thereto; forasmuch as themselves also did not a little
mislike therewith, and therefore would confer their counsels together
with them, how and by what way such grievances might best be
removed."

     To this effect were the letters of the Helvetians, written to
the senate and citizens of Zurich. Whereunto the Tigurines made their
answer again on the 21st of March, the same year, in manner as
followeth

     "First, declaring how their ministers had laboured and
travailed among them, teaching and preaching the word of God unto
them the space now of five years; whose doctrine at the first seemed
to them very strange and novel, because they never heard the same
before. But. after that they understood and perceived the scope of
that doctrine only to tend to this; to set forth Christ Jesus unto
us, to be the pillar and refuge of all our salvation, which gave his
life and blood for our redemption, and which only delivereth us also,
sinful misers, from eternal death, and is the only Advocate of
mankind before God; they could no otherwise do, but with ardent
affection receive so wholesome and joyful a message.

     "The holy apostles and faithful Christians, after they had
received the gospel of Christ, did not fall out by and by in debate
and variance, but lovingly agreed and consented together:  and so they
trusted (said they) that they should do, if they would likewise
receive the word of God, setting aside men's doctrines and traditions
dissonant from the same. Whatsoever Luther or any other man doth
teach, whether it be right or wrong, it is not for the names of the
persons, why the doctrine which they teach should be either evil or
well judged upon, but only for that it agreeth or disagreeth from the
rule of God's word:  for that were but to go by affection, and were
prejudicial to the authority of the word of God, which ought to rule
man, and not to be measured by man. And if Christ only be worshipped,
and men taught solely to repose their confidence in him, yet neither
doth the blessed Virgin, nor any saint else, receive any injury
thereby; who, being here on earth, received their salvation only by
the name of him.

     "And whereas they charge their ministers with wresting the
Scripture after their own interpretation, God had stirred up such
light now in the hearts of men, that the most part of their city have
the Bible in their hand, and diligently peruse the same; so that
their preachers cannot so wind the Scriptures awry, but they shall
quickly be perceived. Wherefore there is no danger why they should
fear any sects or factions in them; but rather such sects are to be
objected to those, who, for their gain and dignity, wrest the word of
God after their own affections and appetites. And whereas they, and
others, have accused them of error, yet was there never man that
could prove any error in them, although divers bishops of Constance,
of Basil, of Coire, with divers universities besides; also they
themselves have been sundry times desired so to do; yet to this
present day neither they nor ever any others so did; neither were
they, nor any of all the aforesaid bishops, at their last assembly,
being requested to come, so gentle to repair unto them, save only the
Schashusians and Sangallians. In which aforesaid assembly of theirs,
all such as were then present, considering thoroughly the whole case
of the matter, condescended together with them. And if the bishops
haply will object again, and say, that the word of God ought not so
to be handled of the vulgar people; they answered the same not to
stand with equity and reason. For albeit it did belong to the
bishops' office, to provide that the sheep should not go astray, and
most convenient it were, that by them they should be reduced into the
way again; yet because they will not see to their charge, but leave
it undone, referring all things to the fathers and to councils;
therefore right and reason it is, that they themselves should hear
and learn, not what man doth determine, but what Christ himself doth
command in his Scripture. Neither have their ministers given any
occasion of this division; but rather it is to be imputed to such,
which for their own private lucre and preferments, contrary to the
word of the Lord, do seduce the people into error; and grievously
offending God, do provoke him to plague them with manifold
calamities; who, if they would renounce the greediness of their own
gain, and would follow the pure doctrine of his word, seeking not the
will of man, but what is the will of God, no doubt but they should
soon fall to agreement.

     "As for the eating of flesh and eggs, although it be free to
all men, and forbidden to none by Christ; yet they have set forth a
law to restrain rash intemperance, and uncharitable offension of
other.

     "And as touching matrimony, God is himself the author thereof,
who hath left it free for all men. Also Paul willeth a minister of
the church to be the husband of one wife. And seeing that bishops for
money permit their priests to have concubines, which is contrary both
to God's law and to good example; why then might not they as well
obey God in permitting lawful matrimony which he hath ordained, as
they to resist God in forbidding the same? The like is to be said
also of women vowing chastity; of whom this they judge and suppose,
that such kind of vows and coacted chastity, are not available nor
allowed before God:  and seeing that chastity is not all men's gift,
better it were to marry, (after their judgments,) than filthily to
live in single life.

     "As for monasteries, and other houses of canons, they were
first given for relief only of the poor and needy; whereas now they
which inhabit them are wealthy, and able to live of their own
patrimony, in such sort as many times some one of them hath so much,
as might well suffice a great number; wherefore it seemeth to them
not inconvenient, that those goods should be converted again to the
use of the poor. Yet, nevertheless, they have used herein such
moderation, that they have permitted the inhabitants of those
monasteries to enjoy the possession of their goods, during the term
of their natural life, lest any should have cause of just complaint.

     "Ornaments of churches serve nothing to God's service; but this
is well agreeing to the will and service of God, that the poor should
be succoured. So Christ commanded the young man in the gospel, that
was rich, not to hang up his riches in the temple, but to sell them,
and distribute them to the needy.

     "The order of priesthood they do not contemn. Such priests as
will truly discharge their duty, and teach soundly, they do magnify.
As for the other rabble, which serve to no public commodity, but
rather damnify the commonwealth, if the number of them were
diminished by little and little, and their livings put to better use,
they doubted not but it were a service well done to God. Now whether
the singing and prayers of such priests be available before God, it
may be doubted, forasmuch as many of them understand not what they
say, or sing, but only for hire of wages do the same.

     "As for secret confession, wherein men do detect their sins in
the priest's ear, of what virtue this confession is to be esteemed,
they leave it in suspense. But that confession whereby repenting
sinners do fly to Christ our only Intercessor, they account notonly
to be profitable, but also necessary to all troubled consciences. As
for satisfaction, which priests do use, they reckon it but a practice
to get money, and the same to be not only erroneous, but also full of
impiety. True penance and satisfaction is, for a man to amend his
life.

     "The orders of monkery came only by the invention of man, and
not by the institution of God.

     "And as touching the sacraments, such as be of the Lord's
institution, them they do not despise, but receive with all
reverence; neither do suffer the same to be despised of any person,
nor to be abused otherwise than becometh, but to be used rightly,
according to the prescript rule of God's word. And so with the like
reverence they use the sacrament of the Lord's supper, according as
the word prescribeth, not (as many do use it) to make of it an
oblation and a sacrifice.

     "And if the messengers sent to them of the clergy, in their
letters mentioned, can justly charge them with any hinderance, or any
error, they will be ready either to purge themselves, or to satisfy
the offence. And if they cannot, then reason would, that those
messengers of the clergy should hereafter look better to their own
doings, and to their doctrine, and to cease from such untrue slanders
and contumelies.

     "Finally, Whereas they understand by their letters how desirous
they are to have the pope's oppressions, and exactions, and usurped
power abolished, they are right glad thereof and joyful, supposing
that the same can by no means be brought to pass, except the word of
God only and simply be received:  for otherwise, so long as men's laws
and constitutions shall stand in force, there will be no place nor
hope of reformation. For, by the preaching of God's word, their
estimation and dignity must needs decay, and that they well perceive;
and therefore, by all means do provide how to stop the course of the
word:  and because they see themselves too weak to bring their purpose
about, they fly to the aid of kings and princes. For the necessary
remedy whereof, if they shall think good to join their consent, there
shall nothing be lacking in their behalf, what they are able either
in counsel or goods to do in the matter:  declaring moreover, that
this should have been seen to long before. Which being so, they
prayed and desired them to accept in good part, and diligently to
expound, that which they did write. As for their own part, they
required nothing else more than peace, both between them and all men;
neither was it ever their intent to stir any thing that should be
prejudicial against their league and band agreed upon between them.
But in this cause, which concerneth their eternal salvation, they can
do no otherwise but as they have done, unless their error by learning
might be proved and declared unto them. Wherefore, as they did
before, so now they desire again, that if they think this their
doctrine to be repugnant to the Holy Scripture, they will gently show
and teach them their error; and that, before the end of the month of
May next ensuing:  for so long they will abide waiting for an answer,
as well from them, as from the bishop of Constance, and also from the
university of Basil."

     And thus much containeth the answer of the Tigurines unto the
letter of their other colleagues of Helvetia.

     In the mean time, as this passed on, and the month of May,
above-mentioned, was now come, the bishop of Constance, with the
advice of his council about him, did answer the Tigurines, as he was
requested of them to do, in a certain book, first written, and
afterward printed; wherein he declareth what images and pictures
those were, which the profane Jews and Gentiles in the old time did
adore, and what images these be which the church hath from time to
time received and admitted; and what difference there is between
those idols of the Jews and Gentiles, and these images of the
Christians. The conclusion hereof was this; that whereas the
Scripture speaketh against images, and willeth them not to be
suffered, that is to be understood of such images and idols, as the
Jews and idolatrous Gentiles did use; yet nevertheless such images
and pictures which the church had received, are to be used and
retained.

     From this he entereth next into the discourse of the mass,
where he proveth, by divers and sundry testimonies, both of the
pope's canons and councils, the mass to be a sacrifice and oblation.

     This book being thus compiled and written, he sent it unto the
senate of Zurich, about the beginning of June, willing and exhorting
them by no manner of means to suffer their images, or the mass, to be
abrogated; and shortly after he published the said book in print, and
sent it to the priests and canons of the minster of Zurich, requiring
them to follow the custom of the church received, and not to suffer 
themselves to be persuaded otherwise by any man.

     The senate again, answering to the bishop's book, about the
middle of August, did write unto him, first, declaring that they had
read over and over again his book with all diligence:  the which book, 
forasmuch as the bishop had divulged abroad in print, they were
therefore right glad, because the whole world thereby might judge
between them the better. After this, they explained unto him the
judgment and doctrine of their ministers and preachers:  and finally,
by the authority and testimonies of the Scripture, convinced his
opinion, and proved the doctrine of his book to be false. But before
they sent their answer to him, about the thirteenth of June, they
commanded all the images, as well within the city as through their
dominion, to be taken down and burned quietly, and without any
tumult. A few months after, an order was taken in the said city of
Zurich, between the canons of the church and city, for disposing the
lands and possessions of the college.

     It would grow to a long discourse, to comprehend all things by
order of circumstance, that happened among the Helvetians upon this
new alteration of religion; but, briefly to contract, and to run over
the chief specialties of the matter, here is first to be noted, that
of the Helvetians which were confederate together in the thirteen
pages, chiefly, six there were, which most disdained and maligned
this religion of the Tigurines:  to wit, the Lucernates, the Urani,
the Suitenses, the Untervaldii, the Tugiani, and the Friburgenses;
these in no case could be reconciled. The rest showed themselves more
favourable. But the other, which were their enemies, conceived great
grudge, and raised many slanderous reports and false rumours against
them, and laid divers things to their charge:  as, first, for refusing
to join their consent to the public league of the other pages with
Francis the French king; then for dissenting from them in religion;
and thirdly, for refusing to stand to the popish decree made the year
before at Ratisbon, by Ferdinand, and other bishops above-mentioned.

     They laid moreover to their accusation, for aiding the
Vualsutenses their neighbours, against Ferdinand their prince; which
was false. Also for joining league secretly with other cities,
without their knowledge; which was likewise false. Item, That they
should intend some secret conspiracy against them, and invade them
with war; which was as untrue as the rest. Many other quarrels
besides they pretended against the Tigurines, which were all false
and cavilling slanders:  as that they should teach and preach, that
Mary the mother of Christ had more sons; and that James the younger,
the apostle, did die for us, and not Christ himself. Against these
and such other untruths being mere matters of cavillation and
slander, the Tigurines did fully and amply purge and acquit
themselves by writing, and did expostulate vehemently with them, not
only for these false and wrongful suspicions, of their parts
undeserved, but also for other manifold injuries received and borne
at their hands, among which other wrongs and injuries, this was one: 
that the burghermaster of Zurich had apprehended a certain preacher,
named John Oxline, and led him home as prisoner unto his house; being
taken within the precinct and limits of the city of Zurich, contrary
to law and order.

     Finally, after much discoursing, wherein they in a long letter
declared their diligence and fidelity at all times, in keeping their
league, and maintaining the liberty and dignity of their country; as
touching the cause of religion, if that were all the matter of their
offence, they offered themselves willing to hear, and more glad to
amend, if any could prove any error in them by the Scripture.
Otherwise, if none so could or would prove wherein they did err by
the word of God, they could not, they said, alter any thing in the
state of that religion wherein their consciences where already staid
by the word of God and settled, whatsoever peril or danger should
happen to them for the same.

     Although here was no cause why these pages or cantons, which
were so confederate together in the league of peace, should disagree
amongst themselves; yet herein may we see the course and trade of the
world, that when difference of religion beginneth a little to break
the knot of amity, by and by how friends be turned to foes; what
suspicions do rise; what quarrels and grudges do follow; how nothing
there liketh men, but every thing is taken to the worst part:  small
motes are made mountains; virtues made vices, and one vice made a
thousand; and all for lack only of a little good will betwixt party
and party. For as love and charity commonly among men, either
covereth or seeth not the faults of their friends, so hatred and
disdain, taking all things to blame, can find nothing in their foes
that they can like. And thus did it happen between these good men of
Zurich, and these other Switzers above-named.

     These letters of the Tigurines to the other cantons, were
written upon the occasion of their apprehending the preacher, John
Oxline, above-named, on the fourth of January, 1525; and in the month
of April next following, the magistrates and senate of the said city
of Zurich commanded the mass, with all his ceremonies and
apurtenances thereto belonging, to be put down, as well within the
city, as without, throughout all their jurisdiction; and instead
thereof was placed the Lord's supper, the reading of the prophets,
prayer, and preaching. Also a law was made against whoredom and
adultery, and judges ordained to hear the causes of matrimony, A.D.
1525.

     All this while the gospel was not as yet received in any other
page of Helvetia, but only in Zurich. Wherefore the other twelve
pages, or towns, appointed among themselves concerning a meeting or a
disputation to be had at Baden:  where were present, among other
divines, John Faber, Eckius, and Murner, above-mentioned. The bishops
also of Lucerne, Basil, Coire, and Lausanne, sent thither their
legates. The conclusions there propounded were these:  That the true
body and blood of Christ is in the sacrament:  that the mass is a
sacrifice for the quick and dead:  that the blessed Virgin, and other
saints, are to be invocated as mediators and intercessors:  that
images ought not to be abolished:  that there is a purgatory.

     Which conclusions or assertions Eckius took upon him stoutly to
defend. Against him reasoned Œcolampadius, (who was then chief
preacher at Basil,) with certain other more. Zuinglius at that time
was not there present, but by writing confuted the doctrine of
Eckius:  declaring withal the causes of his absence; which were for
that he durst not, for fear of his life, commit himself unto the
hands of the Lucernates, the Urani, the Suitenses, the Untervaldii,
and the Tugiani, his enemies:  and that he refused not to dispute, but
the place only of the disputation; excusing moreover that he was not
permitted of the senate to come:  nevertheless, if they would assign
the place of disputation either at Zurich, or at Berne, or at
Sangallum, thither he would not refuse to come. Briefly, the
conclusion of the disputation was this, that all should remain in
that religion which hitherto they had kept, and should follow the
authority of the council, neither should admit any other new doctrine
within their dominions, &c. This was in the month of June, the said
year above-mentioned.
Illustration:  Berne

     As the time proceeded, and dissension about religion increased,
it followed the next year, A.D. 1527, in the month of December, that
the senate and people of Berne, (whose power among all the Switzers
chiefly excelleth,) considering how neither they could have the acts
of the disputation of Baden communicated unto them, and that the
variance about religion still more and more increased, assigned
another disputation within their own city, and sending forth writings
thereof, called unto the same all the bishops bordering near about
them, as the bishops of Constance, Basil, Sion, Lausanne; warning
them both to come themselves, and to bring their divines with them;
or else to lose all such possessions which they had lying within the
bounds of their precinct. After this they appointed out certain
ecclesiastical persons of their jurisdiction to dispute; prescribing
and determining the whole disputation to be decided only by the
authority of the Old and New Testament. To all that would come
thither, they granted safe-conduct. Also they appointed, that all
things there should be done modestly, without injury and brawling
words; and that every one should have leave to speak his mind freely,
and with such deliberation, that every man's saying might be received
by the notary, and penned:  with this proviso made before, that
whatsoever there should be agreed upon, the same should be ratified,
and observed through all their dominions. And to the intent men might
come thither better prepared before, they propounded in public
writing ten conclusions in the said disputation to be defended of
their ministers by the Scriptures; which ministers were, Franciscus
Colbus and Bertholdus Hallerus. The themes or conclusions were these: 

     "I. That the true church, whereof Christ is the head, riseth
out of God's word, and persisteth in the same, and heareth the voice
of no other.

     "II. That the same church maketh no laws without the word of
God.

     "III. That traditions, ordained in the name of the church, do
not bind but so far forth as they be consonant to God's word.

     "IV. That Christ only hath made satisfaction for the sins of
the world:  and therefore if any man say, that there is any other way
of salvation, or mean to put away sin, the same denieth Christ.

     "V. That the body and blood of Christ cannot be received really
and corporally, by the testimony of the Scripture.

     "VI. That the use of the mass, wherein Christ is present and
offered up to his heavenly Father for the quick and the dead, is
against the Scripture, and contumelious to the sacrifice which Christ
made for us.

     "VII. That Christ only is to be invocated, as the Mediator and
Advocate of mankind to God the Father.

     "VIII. That there is no place to be found by the Holy
Scripture, wherein souls are purged after this life:  and therefore
all those prayers and ceremonies, yearly dirges and obits, which are
bestowed upon the dead, also lamps, tapers, and such other things,
profit nothing at all.

     "IX. That to set up any picture or image to be worshipped, is
repugnant to the Holy Scripture; and therefore, if any such be
erected in churches for that intent, the same ought to be taken down.

     "X. That matrimony is prohibited to no state or order of men,
but, for eschewing of fornication, generally is commanded, and
permitted to all men by the word of God. And forasmuch as all
fornicators are excluded, by the testimony of Scripture, from the
communion of the church, therefore this unchaste and filthy single
life of priests, is most of all inconvenient for the order of
priesthood."

     When the senate and people of Berne had sent abroad their
letters with these themes and conclusions to all the Helvetians,
exhorting them both to send their learned men, and to suffer all
others to pass safely through their countries; the Lucernates,
Uranites, Switzers, Untervaldians, Tugians, Glareans, Soloturnians,
and they of Friburg, answered again by contrary letters, exhorting
and requiring them in any case to desist from their purposed
enterprise; putting them in remembrance of their league and
composition made, and also of the disputation of Baden above-
mentioned, of which disputation they were themselves (they said) the
first beginners and authors. Saying moreover, that it was not lawful
for any nation or province to alter the state of religion, but the
same to belong to a general council:  wherefore they desired them that
they would not attempt any such wicked act, but continue in the
religion which their parents and elders had observed. And in fine,
thus in the end of their letters they concluded, that they would
neither send, nor suffer any of their learned men to come, nor yet
grant safe-conduct to any others to pass through their country. To
this and such-like effect tended the letters of these Switzers above-
named.

     All which notwithstanding, the lords of Berne, proceeding in
their intended purpose, upon the day prescribed, (which was the
seventh of January,) began their disputation. Of all the bishops
before signified, which were assigned to come, there was not one
present. Nevertheless the cities of Basil, Zurich, and Schaffhausen,
and Appenzel, St. Gallen, Mulhausen, with the neighbours of Rhetia;
also they of Strasburg, Ulm, Augsburg, Lindau, Constance, and Isny,
sent thither their ambassadors.

     The doctors above-mentioned of the city of Berne, began the
disputation; whereat the same time were present Zuinglius,
Œcolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Blaurer, with others more, all which
defended the affirmative of the conclusions propounded. On the
contrary side, of them which were the opponents, the chieftain was
Conrad Treger, a friar Augustine; who, to prove his assertion, when
he was driven to shift out of the Scripture to seek help of other
doctors, and the moderators of the disputation would not permit the
same, (being contrary to the order before appointed,) he departed out
of the place, and would dispute no more.

     The disputation endured nineteen days; in the end whereof it
was agreed, by the assent of the most part, that the conclusions
there disputed, were consonant to the truth of God's word, and should
be ratified not only in the city of Berne, but also proclaimed by the
magistrates in sundry other cities near adjoining:  furthermore, that
masses, altars, and images, in all places, should be abolished.

     At the city of Constance, certain things began to be altered a
little before; where also, among other things, laws were made against
fornication and adultery, and all suspect or unhonest company;
whereat the canons (as they are called) of the church, taking great
grief and displeasure, departed the city. In the said city was then
teacher, Ambrose Blaurer, a learned man, and born of a noble stock,
who had been a monk a little before, professed in the monastery of
Alperspake, in the duchy of Wittenberg, belonging to the dominion of
Ferdinand. Which Blaurer, by reading of Luther's works, and having a
good wit, had changed, a little before, his religion, and also his
coat, returning again home to his friends; and when his abbot would
have had him again, and wrote earnestly to the senate of Constance
for him, he declared the whole case of the matter in writing;
propounding withal certain conditions, whereupon he was content (as
he said) to return. But the conditions were such, that the abbot was
rather willing and contented that he should remain still at
Constance; and so he did.

     After this disputation thus concluded at Berne, (as hath been
said,) the images and altars, with ceremonies and masses, were
abolished at Constance.

     They of Geneva also, for their parts, were not behind,
following likewise the example of the city of Berne, in extirpating
images and ceremonies; by reason whereof the bishop and clergy there
left, and departed the city in no small anger.

     The Bernates, after they had redressed with them the state of
religion, they renounced the league made before with the French king;
refusing and forsaking his war stipend, whereby they were bound at
his call to feed his wars; following therein the example of the
Tigurines, which before had done the like, and were contented only
with their yearly pension that the king payeth to every page of the
Helvetians, to keep peace.

     The day and year when this reformation from popery to true
Christianity with them began, they caused on a pillar to be engraven
with golden letters, for a perpetual memory to all posterity to come.
This was A.D. 1528.

     After that the rumour of this disputation and alteration of
Berne was noised in other cities and places abroad, first the
ministers of Strasburg, encouraged by this occasion, began likewise
to affirm and teach, that the mass was wicked, and a great blasphemy
against God's holy name, and therefore was to be abrogated; and
instead thereof the right use of the Lord's supper to be restored
again; which unless they could prove by the manifest testimonies of
the Scriptures to be true, they would refuse no manner of punishment.
On the contrary part, the bishop of Rome's clergy did hold and
maintain, that the mass was good and holy; whereupon kindled great
contention on both sides:  which when the senate and magistrates of
the city would have brought to a disputation, and could not because
the priests would not condescend to any reasoning; therefore, seeing
they so accused the other, and yet would come to no trial of their
cause, the said magistrates commanded them to silence.

     The bishop, in the mean while, ceased not with his letters and
messengers daily to call upon the senate, desiring the senate to
persevere in the ancient religion of their elders, and to give no ear
to those new teachers; declaring what danger and peril it would bring
upon them. The senate again desired him, as they had done oftentimes
before, that such things as appertained to the true honour and
worship of God might be set forward, and all other things which
tended to the contrary might be removed and taken away; for that
properly belonged to his office to see to. But the bishop, still
driving them off with delays, pretended to call an assembly for the
same, appointing also day and place for the hearing and discussing of
those controversies; where, indeed, nothing was performed at all; but
with his letters he did often solicit them to surcease their
enterprise, sometimes by way of entreating, sometimes with menacing
words terrifying them:  and at last, seeing he could nothing by that
way prevail, he turned his suit to the assembly of the empire, which
was then at Spires collected, entreating them to set in a foot, and
to help what they could with their authority.

     They, ready to satisfy the bishop's request, sent a solemn
embassy to the senate and citizens of Strasburg, about December in
the year above-said, with this request: 

     "Requiring them not to put down the mass; for neither it was
(said they) in the power of the emperor, nor of any other estate; to
alter the ancient religion received from their forefathers, but
either by a general, or by a provincial, council; which council if
they be supposed to be far off, at least that they would take a pause
till the next sitting of the empire, which should be with speed;
where their requests being propounded and heard, they should have
such reasonable answer, as should not miscontent them. For it was
(said they) against all law and reason, for a private magistrate to
infringe and dissolve those things, which by general consent of the
whole world have been agreed upon; and therefore good reason
required, that they should obtain so much at their hands; for else if
they should obstinately proceed in this their attempt, so with force
and violence to work as they began, it might fortune the emperor,
their supreme magistrate under God, and also Ferdinand his deputy,
would not take it well, and so should be compelled to seek such
remedy therein, as they would be sorry to use. Wherefore their
request was, and advice also, that they should weigh the matter
diligently with themselves and follow good counsel; who, in so doing,
should not only glad the emperor, but also work that which should
redound chiefly to their own commendation and safety."
 Besides the messengers thus sent from the council
of Spires, the bishop also of Hildesheim had been with them a little
before, exhorting them in the emperor's name, after like manner.
Neither did the bishop of Strasburg also cease with his messengers
and letters daily to labour his friends there, and especially such of
the senators as he had to him bound by any fealty, or otherwise by
any gifts of friendship; that, so much as in them did lie, they
should uphold the mass, and gainstand the contrary proceeding of the
others.

     The senate of Strasburg, in the mean time, seeing the matter
did so long hang in controversy, the space now of two years, and the
preachers daily and instantly calling upon them for a reformation,
and suit also being made to them of the citizens, assembled their
great and full council, to the number of three hundred, (as in great
matters of importance they are accustomed to do,) and there with
themselves debated the case; declaring on the one side, if they
abolished the mass, what danger they should incur by the emperor; on
the other side, if they did not, how much they should offend God:  and
therefore, giving them respite to consult, at the next meeting
required them to declare their advice and sentence in the matter.
When the day came that every man should say his mind, it so fell out,
that the voices and judgments of them which went against the mass,
prevailed:  whereupon immediately a decree was made, on the twentieth
of February, A.D. 1529, that the mass should be suspended and laid
down, till the time that the adversary part could prove by good
Scripture, the mass to be a service available and acceptable before
God.

     This decree being established by the consent of the whole city,
the senate eftsoons commanded the same to be proclaimed, and to take
full place and effect, as well within the city, as also without, so
far as their limits and dominion did extend; andafterwards, by
letters, certified their bishop touching the doing thereof. Who
bearing these news, as heavy to his heart as lead, did signify to
them again, how he received their letters, and how he understood by
them the effect and sum of their doings:  all which he was enforced to
digest with such patience as he could, though they went sore against
his stomach, seeing for the present time he could no otherwise
choose:  hereafter would serve (he said); he would see thereunto,
according as his charge and office should require.

     Thus how the mass was overthrown in Zurich, in Berne, in
Geneva, and in Strasburg, you have heard. Now what followed in Basil
remaineth likewise to understand. In this city of Basil was
Œcolampadius, a preacher, (as is above signified,) by whose diligent
labour and travail the gospel began there to take such root, that
great dissension there also arose among the citizens about religion,
and especially about the mass:  whereupon the senate of Basil
appointed, that after an open disputation it should be determined by
voices, what was to be done therein. This notwithstanding, the
papists, still continuing in their former purpose, began more stoutly
to inveigh against the other part; and because they were so suffered
by the magistrate without punishment, it was therefore doubted by the
commons, that they had some privy maintainers among the senators: 
whereupon certain of the citizens were appointed, in the name of the
whole commons, to sue to the senators, and to put them in remembrance
of their promise. Whose suit and request was this:  that those
senators which were the aiders and supporters of the papists, might
be displaced, for that it did as well tend to the contempt of their
former decree made, as also to the public disturbance of the city.
But when this could not be obtained of the senate, the commons, on
the eighth day of February, in the year abovesaid, assembled
themselves in the Grey Friars' church, and there, considering with
themselves upon the matter, repaired again with their suit unto the
senate, but not in such humble wise as before; and therewithal
gathered themselves in the public places of the city, to fortify the
same; albeit as yet without armour. The same evening, the senate sent
them word, that, at their request they granted, that those senators,
although remaining still in office, yet should not sit in the council
at what time any matter of religion should come in talk.

     By this answer the commons, gathering that the whole state was
ruled by a few, took thereat grief and displeasure, protesting
openly, that they would take counsel by themselves hereafter, what
they had to do, not only in cases of religion, but also in other
matters of civil government; and forthwith took them to armour,
keeping the towers and gates, and other convenient places of the
city, with watch and ward, in as forcible wise as if the enemy had
been at hand.

     The next day the senate, requiring respite to deliberate, was
contented to commit the matter to them, whom the commons before had
sent as suitors unto them; which offer the citizens did not refuse,
but with this condition, that those senators who were guilty, should
in the mean season follow their plea as private persons, upon their
own private costs and charges; and that the others, who defended the
public cause for the behoof of their posterity, should be maintained
by the public charges of the city. This the senate was glad to grant,
with some other like matters of lighter weight, to appease their
rage.

     It happened the very same day, that certain of the citizens,
(such as were appointed to go about the city for the viewing of
things,) came into the high church, where one of them thrusting at a
certain image with his staff, eftsoons it fell down and brake; by the
occasion whereof, other images also, in like sort, were served after
the same devotion. But when the priests came running to them, which
seemed to be greatly offended therewith, they, because they would not
pass their commission, staid their hands and departed.

     It followed upon this, that when word hereof was brought to the
citizens which stood in the marketplace, and the matter being made
worse unto them than it was, they incontinently discharged out three
hundred armed men, to rescue their fellows in the church, supposing
them to be in danger:  who, coming to the church, and not finding
their fellows there, and all things quiet, save only a few images
broken down, they likewise, lest they should have lost all their
labour, threw down all the other idols and images which they found
there standing; and so passing through all churches in the city, did
there also the like. And when certain of the senate came forth to
appease the tumult, the citizens said, "That which you have stood
about these three years, consulting and advising whether it were best
to be done or not, that shall we despatch in one hour, that from
henceforth never more contention shall grow between us for images."
And so the senate permitted them free leave, without any more
resistance; and twelve senators were displaced from their order,
albeit without note of reproach or dishonesty. Also a decree the same
time was made, that as well within the city of Basil, as without,
throughout all their jurisdiction, the mass, with all idols, should
be abandoned:  and further, that in all such matters and cases as
concerned the glory of God, and the affairs of the public wealth,
besides the number of the other senators, two hundred of the burghers
or citizens should be appointed out of every ward in the city to sit
with them in council. These decrees being established, after they had
kept watch and ward about the city three days and three nights, every
one returned again to his house quiet and joyful, without any blood
or stroke given, or anger wreaked, but only upon the images.

     On the third day, which was Ash Wednesday, (as the pope's
ceremonial church doth call it,) all the wooden images were
distributed among the poor of the city, to serve them for firewood.
But when they could not well agree in dividing the prey, but fell to
brawling among themselves, it was agreed that the said images should
be burnt altogether; so that in nine great heaps all the stocks and
idols there the same day were burnt to ashes before the great church
door. And thus by God's ordinance it came to pass, that the same day
wherein the pope's priests are wont to show forth all their mourning,
and do mark men's foreheads with ashes, in remembrance that they be
but ashes, was to the whole city festival and joyful, for turning
their images to ashes; and so is observed and celebrated every year
still, unto this present day, with all mirth, plays, and pastimes, in
remembrance of the same ashes; which day may there be called a right
Ash Wednesday of God's own making. The men of Zurich, of Berne, of
Soleure, hearing what business was at Basil, sent their ambassadors
to be a mean between them; but before the ambassadors came, all was
ceased and at quiet.

     All this mean space the emperor and the French king were
together occupied in wars and strife; which as it turned to the great
damage and detriment of the French king, who, in the said wars, was
taken prisoner by the emperor, so it happened commodious and
opportune for the success of the gospel:  for else it is to be thought
that these Helvetians and other Germans should not have had that
leisure and rest to reform religion, and to link themselves in league
together, as they did. But thus Almighty God, of his secret wisdom,
disposeth times and occasions to serve his will and purpose in all
things; albeit Ferdinand the emperor's brother, and deputy in
Germany, remitted no time nor diligence to do what he could in
resisting the proceedings of the protestants, as appeared both by the
decree set forth at Ratisbon, and also at Spires; in the which
council of Spires, Ferdinand, at the same time, which was A.D. 1529,
had decreed against the protestants in effect as followeth: 

     "First, That the edict of the emperor made at Worms, should
stand in force through all Germany till the time of the general
council which should shortly follow. Also, that they which already
had altered their religion, and now could not revoke the same again
for fear of sedition, should stay themselves, and attempt no more
innovations hereafter, till the time of the general council.

     "Item, That the doctrine of them which hold the Lord's supper
otherwise than the church doth teach, should not be received, nor the
mass should be altered:  and there, where the doctrine of religion was
altered, there should be no impediment to the contrary, but that they
which were disposed to come to mass, might safely therein use their
devotion. Against Anabaptists likewise; and that all ministers of the
church should be enjoined to use no other intepretation of the Holy
Scripture, but according to the exposition of the church doctors: 
other matters that were disputable not be touched. Moreover, that all
persons and states should keep peace, so that for religion, neither
the one part should infer molestation to the other, nor receive any
confederates under their protection and safeguard; all which decrees
they which should transgress, to be outlawed and exiled."

     Unto this sitting at Spires, first, the ambassadors of
Strasburg were not admitted, but repelled by Ferdinand, because they
had rejected the mass; and therefore the said city of Strasburg
denied to pay any contribution against the Turk, except they, with
other Germans, might be likewise admitted into their councils. The
other princes which were received and not repelled, as the duke of
Saxony, and George of Brandenburg, Ernest and Francis, earls of
Lunenburg, and the landgrave Anhaldius, did utterly gainstand the
decree, and showed their cause, in a large protestation written, why
they so did:  which done, all such cities as subscribed and consented
to the said protestation of the princes, eftsoons conjoined
themselves in a common league with them, whereupon they had their
name called therefore protestants. The names of the cities were
these:  Argentina or Strasburg, Nuremberg, Ulm, Constance, Reutlingen,
Windsheim, Memmingen, Lindau, Kempton, Hailbrun, Isny, Weisseburg,
Nordlingen, St. Gallen.

     Furthermore, as touching the Helvetians, (from whence we hare
somewhat digressed,) how the cities of Berne and Zurich had consented
and joined together in reformation of the true religion, ye heard
before. Wherefore the other pages in Helvetia, which were of the
contrary profession, in like manner confederated themselves in league
with Ferdinand:  the number and names of which pages especially were
five; to wit, the Lucernates, the Urani, the Suitcases, the
Untervaldii, and the Tugiani, which was in the year abovesaid; to the
intent, that they, conjoining their power together, might overrun the
religion of Christ, and the professors of the same:  who also, for
hatred and despite, hanged up the arms of the aforesaid cities of
Zurich and Berne upon the gallows, besides many other injuries and
grievances which they wrought against them; for the which cause the
said cities of Berne and Zurich raised their power, intending to set
upon the aforesaid Switzers, as upon their capital enemies. But as
they were in the field, ready to encounter one army against the
other, through the means of the city of Strasburg, and other
intercessors, they were parted for that time, and so returned.

     As touching the council of Augsburg, which followed the next
year after the assembly of Spires, A.D. 1530, how the princes and
protestants of Germany in the same council exhibited their
confession, and what labour was sought to confute it, and how
constantly Duke Frederic persisted in defence of his conscience
against the threatening words and replications of the emperor; also
in what danger the said princes had been in, had not the landgrave
privily by night slipped out of the city; pertaineth not to this
place presently to discourse.

     To return therefore unto Zuinglius and the Helvetians, of whom
we have here presently to treat, you heard before how the tumult and
commotion between the two cities of Zurich and Berne, and the other
five cities of the cantons, was pacified by the means of
intercession; which peace so continued the space of two years. After
that, the old wound waxing raw again, began to burst out and gather
to a head; which was by reason of certain injuries, and opprobrious
words and contumelies, which the reformed cities had received of the
other; wherefore the Tigurines and the Bernates, stopping all
passages and straits, would permit no corn nor victual to pass unto
them. This was A.D. 1531. And when great trouble was like to be
thereby, the French king, with certain other townships of
Switzerland, as the Glarians, Friburgians, Soloturnians, and other
coming between them, laboured to set them at agreement, drawing out
certain conditions of peace between them; which conditions were
these:  That all contumelies and injuries past should be forgotten: 
that hereafter neither part should molest the other:  that they which
were banished for religion, should again be restored:  that the five
pages might remain without disturbance in their religion, so that
none should be restrained amongst them from the reading of the Old
and New Testament:  that no kind of disquietness should be procured
against them of Berne and Zurich:  and that either part should confer
mutual helps together, one to succour the other as in times past. But
the five pagemen would not observe these covenants made, neither
would their malicious hearts be brought to any conformity. Wherefore
the Bernates and Tigurines, showing and declaring first their cause
in public writing, to purge and excuse the necessity of their war,
being pressed with so many wrongs, and in manner constrained to take
the sword in hand, did, as before, beset the highways and passages,
that no furniture, or victual, or other forage, could come to the
other pages; by reason whereof, when they of the five towns began to
be pinched with want and penury, they armed themselves secretly, and
set forward in warlike array towards the borders of Zurich, where
then was lying a garrison of the Zurich men, to the number of a
thousand and more; whereupon word was sent incontinent to the city of
Zurich, to succour their men with speed. But their enemies approached
so fast, that they could hardly come to rescue them; for when they
were come to the top of the hill, whereby they must needs pass, they
saw their fellows being in great distress in the valley under them.
Whereupon they, encouraging themselves, made down the hill with more
haste than order, who might go fastest; but the nature of the hill
was such, that there could but one go down at once:  by reason
whereof, forasmuch as they could not keep their ranks to join
altogether, it followed that they, being but few in number, were
discomfited and overmatched of the multitude; which was on the
eleventh of October in the year aforesaid. Among the number of them
that were slain, was also Uldricus Zuinglius, the blessed servant and
saint of God. Also the abbot of Capella, and Commendator Kunacensis,
with thirteen other learned and worthy men, were slain; being, as is
thought, falsely betrayed, and brought into the hands of their
enemies.

     As touching the cause which moved Zuinglius to go out with his
citizens to the war, it is sufficiently declared and excused, both by
John Sleidan and especially by Œcolampadius, in his epistle, where
first is to be understood, that it is an old received manner among
the Zurich men, that when they go forth in warfare, the chief
minister of the church goeth with them. Zuinglius also of himself,
being (saith Sleidan) a man of a stout and bold courage, considering
if he should remain at home when war should be attempted against his
citizens, and if he, who in his sermons did so encourage others,
should now faint so cowardly, and tarry behind at home when time of
danger came, what shame and disdain might worthily rise to him
thereby, thought not to refuse to take such part as his brethren did.

     Œcolampadius moreover addeth, that he wentnot out as a captain
of the field, but as a good citizen with his citizens, and a good
shepherd ready to die with his flock. "And which of them all," saith
he, "that most cry out against Zuinglius, can show any such noble
heart in him, to do the like?" Again, neither did he go out of his
own accord, but rather desired not to go; foreseeing belike what
danger thereof would ensue. But the senate, being importune upon him,
would have no nay, urging and enforcing him most instantly to go: 
among whom were thought to have been some false betrayers, saying and
objecting to him, that be was a dastard if he refused to accompany
his brethren as well in time of danger as in peace. Moreover the said
Zuinglius, among other secular arts, had also some skill in such
matters of warfare. When he was slain, great cruelty was shown upon
his dead corpse; such was their hatred toward him, that their malice
could not be satisfied, unless also they should burn his body being
dead.

     The report goeth, that after his body was cut first in four
pieces, and then consumed with fire, three days after his death his
friends came to see whether any part of him was remaining, where they
found his heart in the ashes whole and unburned; in much like manner
as was the heart of Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, which in the
ashes also was found and taken up unconsumed, as by credible
information is testified.

     Furthermore, such was then the rage of these five pages against
the aforesaid abbot of Capella, that they took him, being slain, and
putting out both his eyes, clothed him in a monk's cowl, and so set
him in the pulpit to preach, railing and jesting upon him in a most
despiteful manner. Uldricus Zuinglius was, when he died, of the age
of forty-four years; younger than Martin Luther by four years.

     The Bernates, who were purposed the same time to achieve war
against the Untervaldians, bordering near unto them, when they heard
of this discomfiture of the Tigurines, to comfort them again, desired
them to be of good cheer and courage, promising that they would not
fail, but come and revenge their quarrel. Again, when the Tigurines
had assembled their power together, which was the eighth day after
the battle, and had received aid from the Schaffhausen, Mulhausen,
St. Gallen, and from Basil, (the Bernates at this time were nothing
hasty,) out of the whole number they chose out certain ensigns, which
setting forth in the night, lay in the hill beside Menzig, intending
when the moon was up, to take the town of Zug, lying near at hand,
upon the sudden:  which when their enemies had perceived, which were
encamped not far from them, with all speed and most secret manner
came upon them being at rest, the twenty-fourth of October, and to
put them in more fear, made a wonderful clamorous outcry. So it fell
out in conclusion, that many on both parties were slain; and albeit
the five pagemen had the upper hand, yet would they of Zurich nothing
relent in their religion. At the last, through mediation, a peace was
concluded, and thus the matter agreed, that the Tigurines, Bernates,
and Basilians, should forsake the league which they had lately made
with the city of Strasburg and the landgrave:  likewise that the five
pagemen should give over their league and composition made with
Ferdinand:  and hereof obligations were made and sealed in the latter
end of November.

     Œcolampadius, the preacher of the city of Strasburg above
recorded, hearing of the death of Zuinglius his dear friend, took
thereat inward grief and sorrow, insomuch that it is thought to have
increased his disease; and so he also departed this life, the same
year and month of November above-mentioned, being of the age of
forty-nine years, older than Martin Luther by one year. Although this
Œcolampadius then died, yet his learned and famous Commentaries upon
the Prophets, with other worthy works which he left behind him, still
live and shall never die.

     The next year following, which was A.D. 1532, in the month of
August, died also the worthy and memorable prince, John Frederic,
duke of Saxony, who, for testimony of Christ and his gospel,
sustained such trials, so many brunts, and so vehement conflicts with
the emperor, and that especially at the council assembled at
Augsburg; that unless the almighty hand of the Lord had sustained
him, it had not been possible for him or any prince to have endured
so constant and unmovable against so many persuasions and assaults,
as he did to the end. After him succeeded John Frederic his son, &c.

     And thus have ye the history of Zuinglius, and of the church of
Switzerland, with their proceedings and troubles, from the first
beginning of their reformation of religion, set forth and described.
Whereunto we will add one certain epistle of the said Zuinglius,
taken out of his other epistles, and so therewith close up his story;
which epistle I thought here to record, especially for that in the
same, among other matters, profitably is expounded the true meaning
of the apostle, writing to the Corinthians concerning how to judge
the Lord's body, to the intent that the simple thereby may the better
be informed. The words of his letter be these, as follow: 

     "Unto your questions propounded to me in your former letters,
well-beloved brother! I have sent you here mine answer. First, I am
also in the same mind with you, that the Lord's supper is a very
thanksgiving; for so the apostle himself meaneth, saying, Ye shall
show forth the Lord's death:  where the word of showing forth,
signifieth as much as praising or thanksgiving. Wherefore seeing it
is a Eucharist, or a thanksgiving, in my judgment no other thing
ought to be obtruded on men's consciences, but only with due
reverence to give thanks. Nevertheless, this is not to be neglected,
that every man do prove and examine himself; for so we ought to
search and ask our own consciences, what faith we have in Christ
Jesus? which if it be sound and sincere, we may approach without stay
to this thanksgiving. For he that hath no faith, and yet feigneth or
pretendeth to have, eateth his own judgment; for he lieth to the Holy
Ghost. And whereas you suppose, that Paul in this place doth not
reprove them which sit at the table eating of meats offered to idols,
I dissent from you therein. For Paul, a little before, writeth
vehemently against those arrogant persons, which bragging upon their
knowledge, thought they might lawfully eat of such meats offered to
idols, sitting and eating at the Lord's table:  You cannot, saith he,
be partakers both of the Lord's table, and the table of devils, &c.
Wherefore St. Paul's meaning is, that every one should try and
examine himself what faith he hath. Whereupon it followeth, that he
which hath a right faith, must have no part nor fellowship with those
things which be given to idols:  for he is now a member of another
body, that is, of Christ; so that he cannot join himself now to be
one body with idolaters. And therefore those be they which do not
judge or discern the Lord's body, that make no difference between the
church of Christ and the church of idolaters. For they which sit at
the Lord's table, eating of idol meats, do make no difference at all
between the Lord's supper and the supper of the devils:  which be they
whom Paul saith not to judge the body of our Lord, that is, which
make no discrepance, nor give any more regard to Christ's church,
than to the church of devils. Whereas if we would judge ourselves;
that is, if we would thoroughly search and examine our ownconsciences
as we should, in coming to the table of the Lord, we, finding any
faith in us, would:  never go the table, or make thereof the feast, of
devils:  wherefore your judgment 'herein is not amiss in expounding
the word of judging in St. Paul, to signify as much a considering,
perpending, and inquiring.

     "To your second question I answer, that Jesus took bread, and
brake, &c. Also he took the cup, &c. These words declare the action
of one which properly doth a thing; and not the hospitality of one
which inviteth another to eat.

     "Touching your third question, out of the 6th chapter of John,
Doth this offend you? herein I do fully agree with you.

     "As for this word 'Ostren,' which is your fourth question, I
understand thereby the time of the great feast or solemnity, which we
keep in remembrance of the great deliverance of God's people from the
thraldom of Satan; before, from the thraldom of Pharaoh:  neither is
it greatly material with what word we express the thing, so the thing
itself be one, and the analogy and constancy of the Scripture be
kept; for both the Scripture calleth Christ the Lamb, and St. Paul
calleth him our Easter or Passover. Now your word, 'Wanderfest,' well
pleaseth me, for the Passover, or Pæsah.

     "To your fifth interrogation, of Christ's descending into hell;
I suppose this particle was inserted into the Creed by the sentence
of the fathers, to declare how the fathers were redeemed by the death
of Christ, which died in the faith. For Christ led away captivity,
wherewith they were holden, with him up into heaven:  so that his
going down into hell be not so understood as circumscriptively, which
is, when a thing is present by circumscription of any one place; but
by power, which is by the operation of his Spirit, which is not
comprehended in any certainty of place, but without prescription of
certain place is diffused every where:  so that the article of
Christ's descending into hell importeth as much as that his death
redeemed them which were in hell. Whereunto St. Peter also seemeth to
have respect, where he saith, The gospel also was preached to them
which were dead; that is, that they also did feel the good tidings of
the gospel, their redemption by the Son of God:  and that they which
rose again with Christ in the Spirit, be now with him in heaven, who
nevertheless in flesh shall be judged, what time the Son of God and
of man shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. Return to the
places of Peter, the one in his First Epistle, the other in the
latter; and so be you contented with this present answer rashed up in
haste. Fare ye heartily well; and comfort my William, the good aged
father, by the grace of God which is in you. Commend me to John
Eggenberge.

     "From Zurich, September 1, A.D. 1527."

     From the first beginning of this whole book and history
hitherto, good reader! thou hast heard of many, and sundry troubles,
and much business in the church of Christ, concerning the reformation
of divers abuses and great errors crept into the same, namely in the
Church of Rome; as appeareth by the doings of them, in divers and
sundry places,whereof mention hath been made heretofore in this said
history. For what godly man hath there been, within the space of
these five hundred years, either virtuously disposed, or excellently
learned, which hath not disproved the misordered doings and corrupt
examples of the see and bishop of Rome from time to time, unto the
coming of this Luther? wherein this appeareth to me, and may also
appear no less to all godly disposed men to be noted, not without
great admiration, that seeing this aforesaid Romish bishop hath had
great enemies and gainsayers continually from time to time, both
speaking and working, preaching and writing against him, yet,
notwithstanding, never any could prevail before the coming of this
man. The cause whereof, although it be secretly known unto God, and
unknown unto men, yet so far as men by conjectures may suppose, it
may thus not unlikely be thought, that whereas other men before him,
speaking against the pomp, pride, whoredom, and avarice of the bishop
of Rome, charged him only, or most specially, with examples and
manners of life; Luther went further with him, charging him not with
life, but with his learning; not with his doings, but with his
doctrine; not picking at the rind, but plucking up the root; not
seeking the man, but shaking his seat; yea, and charging him with
plain heresy, as prejudicial and resisting plainly against the blood
of Christ, contrary to the true sense and direct understanding of the
sacred testament of God's holy word. For whereas the foundation of
our faith, grounded upon the Holy Scripture, teacheth and leadeth us
to be justified only by the worthiness of Christ, and the only price
of his. blood; the pope, proceeding with a contrary doctrine,
teacheth us otherwise to seek our salvation, not by Christ alone, but
by the way of men's meriting and deserving by works:  whereupon rose
divers sorts of orders and religious sects among men, some professing
one thing, and some another, and every man seeking his own
righteousness, but few seeking the righteousness of him, which is set
up of God to be our righteousness, redemption, and justification.

     Martin Luther therefore, urging and reducing things to the
foundation and touchstone of the Scripture, opened the eyes of many
who before were drowned in darkness:  whereupon it cannot be expressed
what joy, comfort, and consolation came to the hearts of men, some
lying in darkness and ignorance, some wallowing in sin, some being in
despair, some macerating themselves by works, and some presuming upon
their own righteousness, to behold that glorious benefit of the great
liberty and free justification set up in Christ Jesus. And briefly to
speak, the more glorious the benefit of this doctrine appeared to the
world after long ignorance, the greater persecution followed upon the
same. And where the elect of God took most occasion of comfort and of
salvation, thereof the adversaries took most matter of vexation and
disturbance, as commonly we see the true word of God to bring with it
ever dissension and perturbation; and therefore truly it was said of
Christ, that he came not to send peace on earth, but the sword. And
this was the cause why that after the doctrine and preaching of
Luther, so great troubles and persecutions followed in all quarters
of the world; whereby rose great disquietness amongst the prelates,
and many laws and decrees were made to overthrow the same, by cruel
handling of many good and Christian men. Thus, while authority, armed
with laws and rigour, did strive against simple verity, lamentable it
was to hear how many poor men were troubled, and went to wrack:  some
tossed from place to place, some exiled out of the land for fear,
some caused to abjure, some driven to caves in woods, some racked
with torment, and some pursued to death with faggot and fire. Of whom
we have now (Christ willing) in this history following to treat;
first beginning with certain that suffered in Germany, and then to
return to our own stories and martyrs here in England.



152. HENRY VOES AND JOHN ESCH
Friars Augustine, burnt at Brussels, A.D. 1523.
  IN the year of our Lord 1523, two young men were
burnt at Brussels, the one named Henry Voes, being of the age of
twenty-four years, and the other John Esch; who before had been of
the order of the Augustine Friars. They were degraded the first day
of July, and spoiled of their friars' weed, at the suit of Egmondanus
the pope's inquisitor, and the divines of Louvain; for that they
would not retract and deny their doctrine of the gospel, which the
papists call Lutheranism. Their examiners were Hochestratus and
other, who demanded of them, what they did believe? They said, the
books of the Old Testament and the New, wherein were contained the
articles of the Creed. Then were they asked, whether they believed
the decrees of the councils, and of the fathers? They said, such as
were agreeing to the Scripture they believed. After this they
proceeded further, asking, whether they thought it any deadly sin to
transgress the decrees of the fathers, and of the bishop of Rome?
That (said they) is to be attributed only to the precepts, of God, to
bind the conscience of man, or to loose it. Wherein when they
constantly persisted and would not turn, they were condemned and
judged to be burned. Then they began to give thanks to God their
heavenly Father, which had delivered them through his great goodness
from the false and abominable priesthood, and made them priests of
his holy order, receiving them unto him as a sacrifice of sweet
odour. Then there was a bill written, which was delivered unto them
to read openly before the people, to declare what faith and doctrine
they held. The greatest error that they were accused of was, that men
ought to trust only in God, forasmuch as men are liars, and deceitful
in all their words and deeds, and therefore there ought no trust or
affiance to be put in them.

     As they were led unto the place of execution, which was the
first of July, they went joyfully and merrily, making continual
protestation that they died for the glory of God, and the doctrine of
the gospel, as true Christians, believing and following the holy
church of the Son of God; saying also, that it was the day which they
had long desired. After they were come to the place where they should
be burned, and were despoiled of their garments, they tarried a great
space in their shirts; and joyfully embraced the stake that they
should be bound to, patiently and joyfully enduring whatsoever was
done unto them; praising God with Te Deum laudamus, and singing
psalms, and rehearsing the Creed, in testimony of their faith. A
certain doctor, beholding their jollity and mirth, said unto Henry,
that he should take heed so foolishly to glorify himself. To whom he
answered, "God forbid that I should glory in any thing, but only in
the cross of my Lord Jesus Christ." Another counselled him to have
God before his eyes:  unto whom he answered, "I trust that I carry him
truly in my heart." One of them, seeing that fire was kindled at his
feet, said, "Methinks ye do strew roses under my feet." Finally the
smoke and the flame, mounting up to their faces, choked them.

     Henry being demanded, amongst other things, whether Luther had
seduced him or no:  "Yea," said he, "even as Christ seduced his
apostles." He said also, that it was contrary to God's law, that the
clergy should be exempted from the power and jurisdiction of the
magistrate ordained of God; for such as were ordained in office by
the bishops, have no power but only to preach the word of God, and to
feed their flock therewithal. After their death, their monastery was
dissolved at Antwerp; the president whereof, by the papists called
Jacob the Lutheran, after divers and sundry troubles and afflictions,
was forced to recant at Brussels; but afterwards, his mind being
renewed by the Holy Ghost, embracing that again which before he had
renounced, he fled unto Luther.



153. HENRY SUTPHEN, MONK, A MARTYR, AT DITHMARSCH.

     The next year after the burning of those two Christian martyrs
at Brussels, above-mentioned, with like tyranny also was martyred and
burned without all order of judgment or just condemnation, about the
city of Dithmarsch, on the borders of Germany, one Henry Sutphen,
monk, A.D. 1524, of whom mention is partly touched in the
commentaries of John Sleiden, lib. iv.; but his history is more amply
described by Luther, by Paulus Eberus in his calendar, by Ludovicus,
by Rabus Crispinus, and others. This Sutphen had been before with
Martin Luther, and afterward coming to Antwerp, was from thence
excluded for the gospel, and so came to Bremen, not to the intent
there to preach, but for that he was minded to go to Wittenberg,
being driven from Antwerp, as is above said; who, being at Bremen,
was there required, by certain godly citizens of Bremen, to make one
or two brief exhortations upon the gospel; whereunto, through the
earnest love and zeal that was in him, he was easily allured and
persuaded. He made his first sermon unto the people the Sunday before
St. Martin's day. When the people heard him preach the word of God so
sincerely, they desired him again the second time, and were so in
love with his doctrine, that the whole parish required him to tarry
amongst them to preach the gospel; which thing, for fear of danger,
for a time he refused. When the religious rout had understanding
hereof, specially the canons, monks, and priests, they went about
with all endeavour to oppress him, and thrust both him, and also the
gospel of Christ, out of the city; for that was their chief seeking: 
whereupon they went unto the senate, desiring that such a heretic
might be banished the town, which, in his doctrine, preached against
the catholic church. Upon the complaint of the canons, the senate
sent for the wardens and head men of the parish where Henry had
preached, who being come together, the senate declared unto them the
complaint of the canons and all the other religious men. Whereunto
the citizens of Bremen, taking their preacher's part, answered, that
they knew none other, but that they had hired a learned and honest
man to preach unto them, which should teach them sincerely and truly
the word of God. Notwithstanding, if the chapter-house or any other
man could bring testimonial or witness, that the preacher had taught
any thing which either savoured of heresy, or were repugnant to the
word of God, they were ready (they said) with the chapterhouse to
persecute him,:  for God forbid that they should maintain a heretic.
But if, contrariwise, the canons of the chapter-house, and the other
religious men, will not declare and show that the preacher, whom they
had hired, had taught any error or heresy, but were set only of
malice, by violence to drive him away, they might not (said they) by
any means suffer the same. Whereupon they desired the senate, with
all humble obedience, that they would not require it of them, but
grant them equity and justice, saying, that they were minded to
assist their preacher always, and to plead his cause.

     This answer the senate commanded to be declared to the chapter-
house. When the religious sort understood that they could prevail
little or nothing with their words, bursting out in a fury, they
began to threaten, and therewithal went straight unto the archbishop
to certify him how that the citizens of Bremen were become heretics,
and would no longer obey their religious sort, with many other like
things in their complaint, so that it was to be feared, lest the
whole city shortly should be seduced.

     When the bishop heard tell of these things, straightways he
sent two which were of his council, unto Bremen, requiring that Henry
should be sent unto him without delay. When they were demanded why
they would have him sent, they answered, because he preached against
the holy church. Being again demanded in what points or articles,
they had nothing to say. One of these counsellors was the bishop's
suffragan, a naughty, pernicious hypocrite, which sought all means
possible to carry away the said Henry captive. Finally, they received
this answer of the senators; That forasmuch as the preacher, being
hired by the churchwardens, had not hitherto been convicted for a
heretic, and that no man had declared any erroneous or heretical
article that he had taught, they said they could by no means obtain
of the citizens that he should be carried away:  wherefore they
earnestly desired the bishop, that he would speedily send his learned
men unto Bremen to dispute with him; and if he were convinced, they
promised that without any delay he should be justly punished and sent
away:  if not, they would in no wise let him depart. Whereunto the
suffragan answered with a great protestation, requiring that he might
be delivered into his hands, for the quietness of the whole country;
taking God to his witness, that in this behalf he sought for nothing
else, but only the commodity of his country. But for all this they
could prevail nothing; for the senate continued still in their former
mind. Whereupon the suffragan, being moved with anger, departed from
Bremen, and would not confirm their children.

     When he came unto the bishop, he declared the answer of, the
senate, and what he had heard and learned of the priests and monks
there. Afterwards, when daily news came that the preacher did still
more and more preach, and teach more heinous matter against the
religious rout, they attempted another way, suborning great men to
admonish the citizens of Bremen into what jeopardy their commonwealth
might fall by means of their preacher, preaching contrary to the
decree of the pope and emperor. Besides that, they said that he was
the prisoner of the Lady Margaret; for which cause they had gotten
letters of the Lady Margaret, requiring to have her prisoner sent
unto her again.

     All these crafts and subtleties did nothing at all prevail, for
the senate of Bremen answered all things without blame. When the
bishop saw this his enterprise also frustrated, he attempted another
way, whereby he had certain hope, that both Sutphen, and also the
word of God with him, should be wholly oppressed; whereupon they
decreed a provincial council, not to be holden at Bremen, as it was
accustomed, but at Buxtehade, which place they thought most meet for
their purpose. To this council were called all the prelates and
learned men of the diocese, to determine what was to be believed, and
whereto to trust. Also to the said council was Henry called,
notwithstanding that they had already decreed to proceed against him,
as against a manifest heretic, albeit he was not yet convicted, nor
had pleaded his cause before them. Wherefore the rulers of the city,
together with the commonalty, detained him at home, foreseeing and
suspecting the malice of the council.

     Then the said Henry gathered a sum of his doctrine into a few
articles, and sent it with his letters unto the archbishop; excusing
his innocency, offering himself to be ready, if he were convicted of
any error by the testimony of the Holy Scripture, to recant the same;
notwithstanding, earnestly requiring that his errors might be
convicted by the Holy Scriptures, by the testimony whereof he had
hitherto approved his doctrine, and doubted not hereafter to confirm
the same:  but this took no place amongst those anointed prelates.

     What the determination of their judgment was, it may hereupon
well be gathered, in that shortly after they set up upon the church
porch the bull of Pope Leo the Tenth, and the decree of the emperor,
made at Worms:  whereupon Henry contemning their madness, proceeded
daily in preaching the gospel, adding always this protestation, that
he was ready willingly to give account touching his faith and
doctrine to every man that would require the same. In the mean time
the holy catholics could not be idle, but sent their chaplains unto
every sermon, to trap him in his words:  but God, whose footpaths are
in the midst of the floods, would have his marvellous power to be
seen in them, for he converted many of them; insomuch that the
greater part of those that were sent to hearken, did openly witness
his doctrine to be God's truth, against which no man could contend,
and such as in all their lives before they had not heard:  persuading
them likewise, that they, forsaking all impiety, should follow the
word of God, and believe the same, if they would be saved. But the
chief priests, canons, and monks, were so obdurate and blinded with
Pharaoh, that they became the worse for these admonitions. When God
saw the time convenient that Henry should confirm the verity that he
had preached, he sent him among the cruel murderers appointed for
that slaughter, by this occasion as followeth: 

     It happened A.D. 1524, that this Henry was sent for by letters,
by Nicholas Boyes, parish priest, and other faithful Christians of
the parish of Meldorf, which is a town in Dithmarsch, to preach the
gospel unto them, and deliver them out of the bondage of antichrist,
which in that place had full dominion. These letters being received
upon St. Katharine's even, calling together six brethren, honest
citizens, he opened the matter unto them, how that he was sent for by
them of Dithmarsch, to preach the gospel; adding moreover, that he
was not only a debtor unto them, but to all others who required his
aid:  wherefore he thought good to go unto Dithmarsch, to see what God
would work by him. Requiring also that they would help him with their
advice, by what means he might best take his journey, that no man
should know of it, that thereby he might not be letted or stopped;
which thing without doubt had come to pass, if his purpose had been
known to the people. Unto whom the citizens answered, desiring him
that he would not depart for a time, forasmuch as the gospel had not
yet taken so deep root in the people, but was as yet weak, and
especially in the villages thereabout; and that the persecution was
very great:  willing him also to have respect unto this, that he was
by them called to the office of preaching; and if they of Dithmarsch
desired a preacher, he should send some other in his place, for the
had before perceived the disposition and untrustiness of them of
Dithmarsch:  besides that, it was not in their power to give him free
liberty to depart, without the consent of the whole commonalty.
Whereunto Henry made answer in this manner:  That albeit he could not
deny but that he was sent for by them, yet now there. were many godly
and learned men at Bremen, whose labour they might use in his
absence, in preaching of the gospel. Besides that the papists were
for the most part vanquished and overthrown, and their folly known,
even unto women and children:  adding thereunto that he had now
preached the gospel by the space of two years at Bremen, and that
they of Dithmarsch lived without a pastor even in the midst of the
wolves; wherefore he could not with a safe conscience deny their
request. And whereas they alleged that they could not license him
without the consent of the whole congregation, that (said he) was but
of small effect; forasmuch as he would not utterly forsake them, but
determined only to remain with them of Dithmarsch for a month or two,
to lay a foundation, and then to return again; desiring them that
after his departure they would declare unto the congregation how he
was sent for by them of Dithmarsch, to whom he could not say nay: 
willing them also to excuse his sudden departure, for that he was
forced to depart secretly, because of his adversaries privily lying
in wait in every place for him; thinking that he should scarcely
avoid them that had always gone about to bring him to his death.
Finally, they should promise to the congregation in his name, that
when he had performed his enterprise, he would straight return again.
They, being persuaded with these words, consented onto him,
stedfastly hoping that they of Dithmarsch should be converted unto
the true faith; which people above all others have always been most
given to idolatry.

     Having prepared all things toward his setting forth, on the
twenty-second of October he took his journey, and came to Meldorf,
whither he was sent for; where he was joyfully received by the parish
priest and others, as soon as he was come thither. Albeit he had not
yet preached, the devil with his members by and by began to fret and
fume for anger. Above all others, one Augustine Tornborch, prior of
the Black Friars, began to fume, who went out of hand unto Master
John Swicken his companion, and commissary to the official of
Hamburgh, to take counsel what was to be done, lest they should lose
their kingdom. Finally, it was decreed by them above all things to
withstand the beginnings, that he should not have licence to preach;
for if by any means it happened that he preached, and the people
should hear him, it was to he feared that the wickedness and craft of
the priests and monks should be opened; which being made manifest,
they knew plainly that it would be but a folly to resist, remembering
what had happened lately before in Bremen. This determination had,
the prior, the next day early in the morning, (for he had not slept
well all night for cares,) went with great speed unto Heyde, to speak
with the eight and forty presidents of the country; unto whom with
great complaints he showed how that a seditious fellow, a monk, was
come from Bremen, which would seduce all the people of Dithmarsch, as
he had done the Bremers. There were, moreover, that did assist this
prior, Master Gunter, chancellor of that country, and Peter Hanne,
both enemies unto the gospel. These stoutly assisted the prior,
persuading the other forty-six, being simple and unlearned men, that
they should obtain great favour and good will of the bishop of
Bremen, if they would put this heretic monk to death. When these poor
and unlearned men heard these words, they decreed that this monk
should be put to death, neither heard nor seen, much less convicted.

     Furthermore, this prior obtained letters from the forty-eight
presidents unto the parish priest, commanding him under great penalty
that he should put the monk out of his house, and command him to
depart without preaching. With these letters he came speedily unto
Meldorf, and delivered the letters over night unto the parish priest;
trusting that by their threatenings and commandment, the said Henry
should be feared from preaching, diligently watching whether he did
preach or not.

     Wen Nicholas Boyes, the parish priest, had read over the
letters, he marvelled not a little at that proud commandment, for
that it had not been heard of before, that the forty-eight presidents
should meddle with ecclesiastical matters, and that it had been of
long time used, that the ruling thereof should be in the hands of the
parish priest; and long time before, it was decreed by the whole
province, and customably used, that in every church the parish priest
should have free liberty to receive or put out the preacher. These
letters the parish priest delivered unto Henry; which when he had
diligently looked over, he answered, that forasmuch as he was come,
being sent for by the whole congregation, to preach the gospel of
Christ, he would satisfy that vocation, because he saw it would be
acceptable unto the whole congregation, and that he ought rather to
obey the word of God, than man. Also, that if it pleased God that he
should lose his life in Dithmarsch, there was as near a way to
heaven, as in any other place; for that he doubted nothing at all,
that once he must suffer for the gospel's sake. Upon this courage and
boldness, the next day Henry went up into the pulpit, and made a
sermon, expounding the place of Paul, which is in Romans i., God is
my witness; and the gospel of the day. After the sermon was done, the
whole congregation being called together, the prior delivered the
letters that were sent by the forty-eight presidents, the tenor
whereof was this:  That they of Meldorf should be fined with a fine of
a thousand guilders if they suffered the monk to preach; and
commanded moreover, that they should send ambassadors unto Heyde with
full power and authority. When they heard these letters read, they
were much moved, because they were so charged contrary to the custom
of the country; forasmuch as every parish priest hath always had
authority, according to his discretion, to choose or put away the
preacher. Briefly, they all determined with one voice, to keep Henry
for their preacher, and to defend him; for when they had heard the
sermon, they were greatly offended with the prior.

     After dinner Henry preached again, expounding the place of St.
Paul, Rom. xv., We ought which are strong, &c. The next day the
citizens of Meldorf sent their messengers unto Heyde, offering to
answer in all causes before all men, for their preacher, whom they
had received. Besides that, the messengers declared what Christian
and godly sermons they heard him preach. The parish priest also wrote
letters by the said legates unto the forty-eight rulers, wherein he
excused himself, that it was never his mind, nor the intent of the
said Henry, to move sedition, but only sincerely to preach the word
of God; and offered himself ready to answer for the said Henry to all
men, whensoever he should be called; most earnestly desiring them not
to give credit unto the monks, which being blinded with hatred and
avarice, had fully determined to oppress the truth:  saying, moreover,
that it was against all reason, that a man should be condemned before
the truth be tried out and his cause declared; and if, after due
inquisition had, he should be convicted, then he should suffer
condign punishment. This submission, with the public testimonial, was
nothing esteemed or regarded, neither was there any answer given
thereunto, but every man repined and murmured thereat. Last of all,
one Peter Dethleves, one of the seigniors, answered, that albeit
there were divers dissensions in every place about the Christian
faith, and that they, as men ignorant, could not redress the same,
yet this their sentence should be holden and ratified; which was,
that the judgment of determining this dissension should be reserved
to the next council, which, by the report of master chancellor, was
now in hand to be called and gathered. Also, until all discord and
dissension should be appeased, whatsoever was received and believed
by their neighbours, he promised in the name of the rest, that they
would willingly receive and believe the same. So that if the word of
God hath not hitherto been clearly and sincerely preached (as they
said) unto the people, and that there be now some which can teach and
preach the same more sincerely; it is not their mind or intent to
withstand, or resist their good doings, but that the presidents would
wish this one thing diligently to be taken heed of, that there be no
occasion given by any man to move sedition:  and in the mean time he
commanded all men quietly to give over all matters until Easter next,
and by that time it should be made evident, what should be received,
and what left undone. With this answer they were all very well
contented; and the messengers returned again to Meldorf with great
joy and gladness, declaring to the whole congregation what answer was
made, conceiving a sure hope that the matter would shortly come to
pass.

     Upon St. Nicholas' day, this Henry preached twice; first, upon
the Gospel, A certain nobleman, &c., Luke xix.; secondly, upon this
text, There are many made priests, &c., Heb. vii., with such a spirit
and grace, that all men had him in admiration, praying God most
earnestly, that they might long have such a preacher. Upon the day of
the conception of our Lady, he also made two sermons upon Matthew i.,
expounding the book of the generation; wherein he rehearsed the
promises made by God unto our forefathers, and under what faith our
fathers that then were had lived; adding also, that all respect of
works being set apart, we must be justified by the same faith. All
these things were spoken with such boldness of spirit, that all men
greatly marvelled at him, giving thanks to God for his great mercy,
that had sent them such a preacher:  desiring him, moreover, that he
would tarry with them all Christmas to preach; for they feared lest
he should be sent for to some other place.

     In the mean space, the prior and Master John Schink were not
idle; for when the prior perceived that his malicious enterprise took
no good success, he joined unto him a companion, William, a doctor of
the Jacobins, and so went up to Laudanum to the monks Franciscan, and
Minors, for help and counsel. For those kinds of friars above all
others are best instructed by their hypocrisy, to deceive the poor
and simple people. These friars straightway sent for certain of the
rulers, which had all the rule and authority, and especially Peter
Hanne, Peter Swine, and Nicholas Roden; unto whom they declared,
after their accustomed manner, with great complaints, what a heretic
monk had preached, and how he had obtained the favour almost of all
the simple people; which if they did not so speedily provide for, and
withstand the beginnings, and put the heretic to death, it would come
to pass, that shortly the honour of our Lady, and all saints,
together with the two abbeys, should utterly come to ruin and decay.

     When these simple and ignorant men heard these words, they were
greatly moved:  whereunto Peter Swine answered thus, That they had
before written unto the parish priest and to Henry what was best to
be done; notwithstanding, if they thought good, they would write
again. "No," said the prior, "this matter must be attempted another
way:  for if you write unto the heretic, he will by and by answer you
again. And it is to be feared, lest the contagion of his heresy do
also infect you, being unlearned men; for if you give him leave to
speak, and to answer, there is no hope that you shall overcome him."
Wherefore they finally determined to take this Henry by night, and
burn him before the people should know it, or he come to his defence
to answer. This device pleased all men, but especially the Franciscan
friars. Peter Hanne, the prior's chief friend, willing to get the
chief praise and thanks of this matter, by the help of Master Gunter,
did associate unto him certain other rulers of the towns near
adjoining, whose names are here not to be hidden, because they so
much affected praise and glory. The names of the presidents were
these, Peter Hanne, Peter Swine's son, Hennicke Lundane, John
Holneus, Laurence Hanneman, Nicholas Wollingbourg, Ambrose and John
Brenthusius, Marquadus Kremmerus, Henstedanus Ludecus, John Wislinge,
and Peter Grosse, president of Hemingsted. All these presidents, and
all others that were of counsel to this pretence, assembled together
in the parish of the new church, in the house of Master Gunter, where
also the chancellor was consulting together with them how they might
burn the said Henry, secretly coming upon him without any judgment or
sentence. They concluded the next day after the conception of our
Lady, to meet at Henning, which is five miles from Meldorf, with a
great band of husbandmen. This determination thus made, they laid
scouts in every place, that there should no news of their pretended
mischiefs come unto Meldorf; commanding that as soon as it began to
wax dark, they should all gather together. There assembled above five
hundred men of the country, unto whom was declared the cause of their
assembly, and also they were instructed what was to be done; for
before, no man knew the cause of the assembly, but only the
presidents. When the husbandmen understood it, they would have
returned back again, refusing to do such a detestable and horrible
deed. The presidents, with most bitter threats, kept them in
obedience; and to the intent they should be the more courageous, they
gave them three barrels of Hamburgh beer to drink.

     About midnight they came in armour to Meldorf. The Jacobins and
monks prepared torches for them, that Henry should not slip away
suddenly in the dark. They had also with them a false betrayer, named
Hennegus, by whose treason they had perfect knowledge of all things.
With great violence they burst into the house of the parish priest,
breaking and spoiling all things, as the manner of that drunken
people is. If they found either gold or silver, they took it away.
When they had spoiled all things, they violently fell upon the parish
priest, and with great noise cried out, "Kill the thief," "Kill the
thief." Some of them took him by the hair of the head, and pulled him
out into the dirt, forcing him to go with them as prisoner:  other
some cried out, saying, That the parish priest was not to be meddled
withal, for they had no commission to take him. After they had
satisfied their lust upon the parish priest, with great rage and fury
they ran upon Henry, and drawing him naked out of his bed, bound his
hands hard behind him:  whom being so bound, they drew to and fro so
long, that Peter Hanne, which otherwise was unmerciful and a cruel
persecutor of the word of God, willed them that they should let him
alone; for that without doubt he would follow of his own mind. Then
they committed the guiding of him to John Balco, who rather drew him
by violence than led him. When he was brought to Hemingsted, they
asked of him how and for what intent he came to Dithmarsch? unto whom
he gently declared the whole cause of his coming:  but they all in a
rage cried, "Away with him, away with him! for if we hear him talk
any longer, it is to be feared that he will make us also heretics."
Then he, being marvellously weary and faint, required to be set on
horseback, for his feet were all cut and hurt with the ice, because
he was led all night barefoot. When they heard him say so, they
mocked and laughed at him, saying, "Must we hire a horse for a
heretic? he shall go afoot whether he will or no." Because it was
night they carried him naked to Heyde. Afterwards they brought him to
a certain man's house named Calden, and bound him there with chains
in the stocks. The master of the house, seeing the cruel deed, taking
compassion upon Henry, would not suffer it to be done:  wherefore he
was carried away to a priest's house, the official's servant of
Hamburgh, and shut up in a cupboard, and was kept by the rude people,
which all the night mocked and scorned him. Amongst all other, there
came unto him Simon Altennan, and Christian, parish priest of the new
church, both alike ignorant and wicked persecutors of the word of
God, demanding of him why he had forsaken his holy habit? unto whom
he friendly answered by the Scriptures; but those ignorant persons
understood nothing that he said. Master Gunter also came unto him,
inquiring whether he had rather to be sent to the bishop of Bremen,
or receive his punishment in Dithmarsch? unto whom Henry answered,
"If I have preached any thing contrary to God's word, or done any
wicked act, it is in their hands to punish me therefor." Gunter
answered, "Hark! I pray you, good friends, hark! he desireth to
suffer in Dithmarsch." The common people all the night continued in
immoderate drinking and swilling.

     In the morning, about eight o'clock, they gathered together in
the market-place to consult what they should do; where the rustical
people, boiling with drink, cried out, "Burn him, burn him! to the
fire with the heretic! Without doubt, if we do it, we shall this day
obtain great glory and praise, both of God and man; for the longer he
liveth, the more he will seduce with his heresy." What need many
words? sure he was to die; for they had condemned this good Henry
without any judgment, (his cause not being heard,) to be burned. At
last they commanded the crier to proclaim, that every man that was at
the taking of him, should be ready in armour to bring him forth to
the fire. Amongst all other the friars Franciscan were present,
encouraging the drunken, rude people, saying, "Now you go the right
way to work." Then they bound the said Henry, hands, feet, and neck,
and with great noise brought him forth to the fire. As he passed by,
a certain woman, standing in her door, beholding that pitiful sight,
wept abundantly; unto whom Henry turning himself, said, "I pray you
weep not for me." When he came to the fire, for very weakness he sat
down upon the ground. By and by there was present one of the
presidents named May, which was evidently known to be corrupted and
bribed with money to this purpose:  he condemned the said Henry to be
burned, pronouncing this sentence upon him: 

     "Forasmuch as this thief hath wickedly preached against the
worship of our blessed Lady, by the commandment and sufferance of our
reverend father in Christ, the bishop of Bremen, and my lord, I
condemn him here to be burned and consumed with fire." Unto whom
Henry answered, "I have done no such thing: " and, lifting up his eyes
towards the heaven, he said, "O Lord! forgive them, for they offend
ignorantly, not knowing what they do:  thy name, O Almighty God! is
holy."

     In the mean time, a certain woman, the wife of one Junger,
sister of Peter Hanne, offered herself to suffer a thousand stripes,
and to give them much money, so that they would pacify the matter,
and keep him in prison, until he might plead his matter before the
whole convocation of the country. When they heard these words, they
waxed more mad, and threw the woman down under foot, and trod upon
her, and beat the said Henry unmercifully. One of the rustical sort
struck him behind on the head with a sharp dagger. John Holmes of the
new church struck him with a mace. Others thrust him in the back, and
in the arms. And this was not done once or twice, but as often as he
began to speak. Master Gunter cried out, encouraging them, saying,
"Go to boldly, good fellows! truly God is present with us."

     After this, he brought a Franciscan friar unto Henry, that he
should be confessed; whom Henry demanded in this manner:  "Brother!
when have I done you injury, either by word or deed, or when did I
ever provoke you to anger?" "Never," said the friar. "What should I
then confess unto you," said he, "that you think you might forgive
me?" The friar, being moved at these words, departed. The fire, as
often as it was kindled, would not burn. Notwithstanding they
satisfied their minds upon him, striking and pricking him with all
kind of weapons. The said Henry standing in the mean time in his
shirt before all this rude people, at the last, they, having gotten a
great ladder, bound him hard thereunto, and cast him into the fire.
And when he began to pray, and to repeat his Creed, one struck him
upon the face with his fist, saying, "Thou shalt first be burnt, and
afterward pray and prate as much as thou wilt." Then another,
treading upon his breast, bound his neck so hard to a step of the
ladder, that the blood gushed out of his mouth and nose. This was
done to strangle him withal, for they saw that for all his sore
wounds he would not die.

     After he was bound to the ladder, he was set upright. Then one,
running unto him, set his halbert for the ladder to lean against (for
those countrymen use no common hangman, but every man exerciseth the
office without difference); but the ladder slipping away from the
point of the halbert, caused that the halbert struck him through the
body. Then they cast this good man, ladder and all, upon the wood,
which, tumbling down, lighted upon one side. Then John Holmes ran
unto him, and struck him with a mace upon the breast, till he was
dead and stirred no more. Afterwards they roasted him upon the coals;
for the wood, as often as it was set on fire, would not burn out. And
thus this godly preacher finished his martyrdom; which was A.D. 1524.

     About the same time many other godly persons, and such as
feared God, for the testimony of the gospel, were thrown into the
river Rhine, and into other rivers, where their bodies afterwards
were found and taken up. Also in the said town of Dithmarsch another
faithful saint of God, named John, suffered the like martyrdom. Thus
these two blessed and constant martyrs, as two shining lights set up
of God, in testimony of his truth, offered up the sacrifice of their
confession sealed with their blood, in a sweet odour unto God.

     At the town of Halle likewise, another preacher, named Master
George, for ministering in both kinds, was martyred and slain of a
like sort of cut-throats, set up by monks and friars to murder him,
near to the town called Haschenburg.

     At Prague also, in Bohemia, another, for changing his monkery
into matrimony, did suffer in the like manner.

     Furthermore, in the same year 1524, and the twenty-second of
October, the town of Miltenberg in Germany was taken and ransacked,
and divers of the inhabitants there slain, and many imprisoned, for
maintaining and keeping with them Carolostadt to be their preacher.

     In the same catalogue of holy martyrs likewise is to be placed
Gasper Tamber. Also another called George, a scrivener, which both
were burned at Vienna in Austria.



154. THE LAMENTABLE MARTYRDOM OF JOHN CLERK, OF MELDEN, IN FRANCE.

     [Note:  in Seeley's Edition this martyr is called John Clerk of
Meaux]
[Transcriber's Note:  Melden is the current name of the diocese which
includes the town of Meaux]

     Melden is .a city in France, ten miles distant from Paris,
where John Clerk first was apprehended and taken, A.D. 1523, for
setting up upon the church door a certain bill against the pope's
pardons lately sent thither from Rome, in which bill he named the
pope to be antichrist; for the which his punishment was this, that
three several days he should be whipped, and afterwards have a mark
imprinted on his forehead, as a note of infamy. His mother, being a
Christian woman, although her husband was an adversary, when she
beheld her son thus piteously scourged, and ignominiously deformed in
the face, constantly and boldly did encourage her son, crying with a
loud voice, "Blessed be Christ! and welcome be his prints and marks!"

     After this execution and punishment sustained, the said John
departed that town, and went to Rosia in Bray, and from thence
removed to Metz in Lorraine, where he remained a certain space,
applying his vocation, being a wool-carder by his occupation; where
he, the day before that the people of that city should go out to the
suburbs, to worship certain blind idols near by, (after an old use
and custom amongst them received,) being inflamed with the zeal of
God, went out of the city to the place where the images were, and
brake them all down in pieces. The next morrow after, when the
canons, priests, and monks, keeping their old custom, had brought
with them the people out of the city to the place of idolatry, to
worship as they were wont, they found all their blocks and stocks
almighty, lie broken upon the ground; at the sight whereof they,
being mightily offended in their minds, set all the city on agog, to
search out the author thereof, who was not hard to be found;
forasmuch as this aforesaid Clerk, besides that he was noted of them
to be a man much addicted that way, he was also seen somewhat late in
the evening before to come from the same place into the city.
Wherefore he, being suspected and examined upon the same, at first
confessed the fact, rendering also the cause which moved him so to
do. The people hearing this, and being not yet acquainted with that
kind of doctrine, were moved marvellously against him, crying out
upon him in a great rage. Thus his cause being informed to the
judges, wherein he defended the pure doctrine of the Son of God, he
was condemned, and led to the place of execution, where he sustained
extreme torments. For first his hand was cut off from his right arm,
then his nose with sharp pinchers was violently plucked from his
face; after that both his arms and his paps were likewise plucked and
drawn with the same instrument. To all them that stood looking upon,
it was a horror to behold, the grievous and doleful sight of his
pains:  again, to behold his patience, or rather the grace of God
giving him the gift so to suffer, it was a wonder. Thus quietly and
constantly he endured in his torments, pronouncing, or in a manner
singing, the verses of Psalm cxv.; Their images be silver and gold,
the work only of man's hand, &c. The residue of his life that
remained in his rent body, was committed to the fire, and therewith
consumed; which was about A.D. 1524.



155. JOHN CASTELLANE.

     The year next ensuing, which was 1525, Master John Castellane,
born at Tournay, a doctor of divinity, after that he was called unto
the knowledge of God, and became a true preacher of his word, and had
preached in France, in a place called Bar le Duc, also at Vittery in
Partoise, at Chalons in Champagne, and in the town of Vike, which is
the chamber and episcopal seat of the bishop of Metz in Lorraine,
after he had laid some foundation of the doctrine of the gospel in
the town of Metz, in returning from thence he was taken prisoner by
the cardinal of Lorraine's servants, by whom he was carried from
Gorze to the castle of Nommeni. Whereupon the citizens of Metz took
no little displeasure and grievance; who being grievously offended to
have their preacher so to be apprehended and imprisoned, within short
space after took certain of the cardinal's subjects, and kept them
prisoners so long, until the abbot of St. Anthony, in Viennois,
called Theodore de Chaumont, vicar-general, as well in causes
spiritual as temporal, (through the jurisdiction both of the cardinal
and bishopric of Metz, Toulouse, and Verdun,) being furnished with a
letter and commission from the see of Rome, came to the said town of
Metz; and after divers declarations made to the provost, and the
other justices and counsellors of the city, he so wrought and brought
to pass, that immediately the said subjects of the cardinal were set
at liberty. But John Castellane was kept still prisoner in the castle
of Nommeni, and was most cruelly handled from the fourth of May until
the twelfth of January; during all which time, he persevered constant
in the doctrine of the Son of God. Whereupon he was carried from
Nommeni to the town and castle of Vike, always persevering constantly
in the profession of the same doctrine, so that they did proceed unto
the sentence of his degradation, that he might be delivered over unto
the secular power, according to the custom and manner. And forasmuch
as the form and manner of the sentence and process of degrading is
notable, and hath been reported unto us word for word, we have
thought good here to annex the same, to declare the horrible
blasphemies joined with gross and brutish subtlety, in those high
mysteries which the enemies of the truth do use in their process
against the children of God; whereby every man, even the most
ignorant, may evidently perceive the horrible blindness that these
unshamefaced catholics are blinded withal.

The sentence of the degradation.

     "Concerning the process inquisitory, formed and given in form
of accusation against thee, John Castellane, priest, and religious
man of the friars Eremites, of the order of St. Austin; understanding
likewise thy confession, which thou hast made of thine own good will,
maintaining false and erroneous doctrine; and marking also, besides
this, the godly admonitions and charitable exhortations which we made
unto thee in the town of Metz, which thou, like unto the serpent
Aspis, hast refused, and given no ear unto:  also considering thine
answers made and reiterated unto interrogatories, by means of thine
oath, in the which devilishly thou hast hidden and kept back not only
the truth, but also, following the example of Cain, hast denied to
confess thy sins and mischievous offence:  and finally, hearing the
great number of witnesses sworn and examined against thee, their
persons and depositions diligently considered, and all other things
worthy of consideration being justly examined, the reverend Master
Nicholas Savin, doctor of divinity, and inquisitor of the faith,
assistant unto us, hath entered process against thee, and given full
information thereof; this our purpose and intent being also
communicated unto divers masters and doctors both of the civil and
canon laws, here present, which have subscribed and signed thereunto,
whereby it appeareth, that thou, John Castellane, hast oftentimes,
and in divers places, openly and manifestly spread abroad and taught
many erroneous propositions, full of the heresy of Luther, contrary
and against the catholic faith, and the verity of the gospel, and the
holy apostolic see; and so accursedly looked back and turned thy
face, that thou art found to be a liar before Almighty God:  It is
ordained by the sacred rules of the canon law, that such as through
the sharp darts of their venomous tongue do pervert the Scriptures,
and go about with all their power to corrupt and infect the souls of
the faithful, should be punished and corrected with most sharp
correction, to the end that others should be afraid to attempt the
like, and apply themselves the better to the study of Christian
concord, through the example set before their eyes, as well of
severity, as of clemency. For these causes, and others rising upon
the said process, by the apostolic authority, and also the authority
of our said reverend lord the cardinal, which we do use in this our
sentence definitive, which we, sitting in our judgment-seat, declare
in these writings, having God only before our eyes, and surely
considering, that what measure we do meet unto others, the same shall
be measured to us again:  we pronounce and declare sententially and
definitively, thee, John Castellane, being here present before us,
and judge thee, because of thy deserts, to be excommunicated, with
the most great excommunication, and therewithal to be culpable of
treason against the Divine Majesty, and a mortal enemy of the
catholic faith, and verity of the gospel; also to be a manifest
heretic, and a follower and partaker of the execrable cruelty of
Martin Luther, a stirrer up of old heresies already condemned. And
therefore, as thou oughtest to be deposed and deprived of all
priestly honour and dignity, of all thy orders, of thy shaving and
religious habit, also of thy ecclesiastical benefices, if thou hast
any, and from all privilege of clergy:  so we here presently do
depose, deprive, and separate thee, as a rotten member, from the
communion and company of all the faithful:  and being so deprived, we
judge that thou oughtest to be actually degraded. That done, we leave
thee unto the secular powers, committing the degradation and actual
execution of this our sentence unto the reverend lord and bishop here
present, with the authority and commandment aforesaid."

     This sentence being thus ended, with their catholic sermon
also, the said bishop of Nicopolis, sitting in his pontificalibus in
the judgment-seat, being suffragan of Metz, with the clergy, nobles,
and people about him, proceeded to the degrading (as they call it) of
the said Master John Castellane. Thus the said Master John
Castellane, being prepared and made ready to his degradation by the
officers of the said bishop, was apparelled in his priestly attire,
and afterwards brought forth of the chapel by the priests which were
thereunto appointed, with all his priestly ornaments upon him; and
holding his hands together, he kneeled down before the bishop. Then
the officers gave him the chalice in his hands, with wine and water,
the patine, and the host; all which things the said bishop which
degraded him, took from him, saying, "We take away from thee, or
command to be taken away from thee, all power to offer sacrifice unto
God, and to say mass, as well for the quick as the dead." Moreover,
the bishop scraped the nails of both his hands with a piece of glass,
saying, "By this scraping we take away from thee all power to
sacrifice, to consecrate, and to bless, which thou hast received by
the anointing of thy hands." Then he took from him the chesille,
saying," By good right we do despoil thee of this priestly ornament,
which signifieth charity; for certainly thou hast forsaken the same,
and all innocency." Then taking away the stole, he said, "Thou hast
villanously rejected and despised the sign of our Lord, which is
represented by this stole:  wherefore we take it away from thee, and
make thee unable to exercise and use the office of priesthood, and
all other things appertaining to priesthood."

     The degradation of the order of priesthood being thus ended,
they proceeded to the order of deacon. Then the ministers gave him
the book of the Gospels, which the bishop took away, saying, "We take
away from thee all power to read the Gospels in the church of God,
for it appertaineth only to such as are worthy." After this he
spoiled him of the dalmatick, which is the vesture that the deacons
use, saying, "We deprive thee of this Levitical order; forasmuch as
thou hast not fulfilled thy ministry and office." After this the
bishop took away the stole from behind his back, saying, "We justly
take away from thee the white stole which thou hadst received
undefiledly; which also thou oughtest to have borne in the presence
of our Lord:  and to the end that the people dedicated unto the name
of Christ may take by thee example, we prohibit thee any more to
exercise or use the office of deaconship." Then they proceeded to the
degrading of subdeaconship, and taking away from him the book of the
Epistles, and his subdeacon's vesture, deposed him from reading of
the Epistles in the church of God. And so orderly proceeding unto all
the other orders, degraded him from the order of Benet and Collet,
from the order of exorcist, from the lectorship, and last of all,
from the office of door-keeper, taking from him the keys, and
commanding him hereafter not to open or shut the revestry, nor to
ring any more bells in the church. That done, the bishop went forward
to degrade him from his first shaving, and taking away his surplice,
said unto him, "By the authority of God Almighty, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, and by our authority, we take from thee all
clerkly habit, and despoil thee of all ornament of religion:  also we
depose and degrade thee of all order, benefit, and privilege of the
clergy, and as one unworthy of that profession, we commit thee to the
servitude and ignominy of the secular state." Then the bishop took
the shears, and began to clip his head, saying in this manner:  "We
cast thee out as an unthankful child of the Lord's heritage,
whereunto thou wast called, and take away from thy head the crown,
which is the royal sign of priesthood, through thine own wickedness
and malice. The bishop also added these words:  "That which thou hast
sung with thy mouth, thou hast not believed with thy heart, nor
accomplished in work; wherefore we take from thee the office of
singing in the church of God."

     The degrading thus ended, the procurator fiscal of the court
and city of Metz, required of the notary an instrument or copy of the
degrading. Then the ministers of the bishop turned him out of his
clerkly habit, and put upon him the apparel of a secular man. That
done, forasmuch as he which is degraded, according to the institution
of Pope Innocent the Third, ought to he delivered unto the secular
court, the bishop that degraded him proceeded no further, but said in
this manner:  "We pronounce that the secular court shall receive thee
into their charge, being thus degraded of all clerkly honour and
privilege."

     This done, the bishop, after a certain manner, entreated the
secular judge for him, saying, "My lord judge! we pray you as
heartily as we can, for the love of God, and the contemplation of
tender pity and mercy, and for the respect of our prayers, that you
will not in any point do any thing that shall be hurtful to this
miserable man, or tending to his death, or maiming of his body."
These things thus done, the secular judge of the town of Vike,
confirming the aforesaid sentence, condemned the said Master John
Castellane to be burned quick; which death he suffered the twelfth of
January, A.D. 1525, with such a constancy, that not only a great
company of ignorant people were thereby drawn to the knowledge of the
verity, but also a great number which had already some taste thereof,
were greatly confirmed by that his constant and valiant death.



156. MARTYRS IN GERMANY.

     It would fill another volume to comprehend the acts and stories
of all them which in other countries, at the rising of the gospel,
suffered for the same. But praised be the Lord, every region almost
hath its own history-writer, which sufficiently hath discharged that
part of duty, as every one in matters of his own country is best
acquainted:  wherefore I shall the less need to overstrain my travail,
or to overcharge this volume therewith; only it shall suffice me to
collect three or four histories, recorded by Œcolampadius and the
rest, to bring it into a brief story, and so return to occupy myself
with our own domestical matters here done at home.

     "In the year of our Lord 1525, there was a certain good and
godly minister, who had committed something in the commotion there
raised by the rustical clowns of the country, which, they said that
knew him, was but of small importance. He, because he had offended
his prince before, not with any fact or crime, but with some word
something sharply spoken, was therefore condemned to be hanged.

     "After sentence was given, there was a gentleman of a cruel
heart sent with a certain troop of men to apprehend the said priest,
and to hang him; who, coming into his house, saluted him friendly,
pretending as though their coming had been to make good cheer:  for he
was a good housekeeper, and the gentlemen of the country thereabouts
used oftentimes to resort unto his house familiarly. This priest made
ready for them in a short space a very sumptuous banquet, whereof
they did eat and drink very cheerfully. After dinner was ended, and
that the priest was yet at the table, thinking no hurt, the gentleman
said to his servants, 'Take you this priest, our host, and hang him,
and that without delay; for he hath well deserved to be hanged for
the great offence he hath committed against his prince.' The servants
were marvellously astonished with his words, and abhorring to do the
deed, said unto their master, 'God forbid that we should commit
anysuch crime, to hang a man that hath treated us so gently; for the
meat, which he hath given us, is yet in our stomachs undigested. It
were a wicked act for a nobleman to render so great evil for a good
turn, but especially to murder an innocent.' Briefly, the servants
sought no other occasion, but only to give him way to flee, that they
might also avoid the execution of that wicked purpose.

     "As the gentleman and his servants were thus contending, the
priest said unto them, I beseech you show no such cruelty upon me;
rather lead me away captive unto my prince, where I may purge myself.
I am falsely accused, and I trust to pacify his anger which he hath
conceived against me. At least remember the hospitality which I have
ever showed to you, and all noblemen at all times resorting to my
house.' But principally speaking to the gentleman, he advertised him
of the perpetual sting which would follow upon an evil conscience;
protesting that he had faithfully and truly taught them the doctrine
of the gospel, and that it was the principal cause why he had such
evil will:  which long time before he had foreseen would come to pass,
forasmuch as he had oftentimes in the pulpit reproved sharply and
openly the horrible vices of the gentlemen, which maintained their
people in their vicious living; and they themselves were given unto
blasphemy and drunkenness, whereas they should show example of faith,
true religion, and soberness; but they had oftentimes resisted him,
saying, That it was not his part to reprove them, forasmuch as they
were his lords, and might put him to death if they would:  that all
things which they did were allowable, and that no man ought to
gainsay it:  also that be went about some things in his sermons, that
would come to an ill end.

     "This good man, whatsoever he could say, could not make his
matter seem good; for the gentleman continued in his wicked
enterprise, and pricked forth his servants still to accomplish their
purpose (for it was resolved by the prince, that he should be put to
death); and, turning himself unto the priest, he said, that he could
gain nothing by preaching in such sort, but that he should fully
determine himself to die, for the prince had given express
commandment to hang him, whose favour he would not lose for to save
his life. At the last, the servants, after great sorrow and
lamentation, bound their host, and hanged him upon a beam in his own
house, the gentleman standing by and looking on. This good man,
seeing no remedy, spake no other words but only, 'Jesus, have mercy
upon me; Jesus, save me.'

     "This is the truth of this most cruel act, which a Turk would
scarcely have committed against his mortal enemy. Now let every man
judge with himself, which of them have the greatest advantage, either
they which commit the cruelty against the good, or the good men which
do suffer the same unjustly. The first sort have a continual gnawing
in their conscience, and the others obtain an immortal crown."

The history of the death of a certain minister, named Master Peter
Spengler, which was drowned.

     "In a certain village named Schlat, in the country of Brisgois,
there was a vigilant minister, a man very well learned in the
Scriptures, of a good name, for that he lived a godly and a blameless
life, having long time faithfully done his office and duty; being
also courteous and gentle, and well-beloved of men, but specially of
the bishop of Constance, with whom he was in great authority;
peaceable and quiet with all men that he had to do withal. He quieted
discords and contentions with a marvellous prudency, exhorting all
men to mutual charity and love. In all assemblies wheresoever he
came, he greatly commended honest life and amendment of manners. When
the purity of the gospel began to shine abroad, he began to read with
great affection the Holy Scriptures, which long time before he had
read, but without any understanding. When he had recovered a little
judgment, and came to more understanding by continual reading, being
also further grown in age, be began to consider with himself, in how
great darkness and errors the whole order of priests had been a long
time drowned. 'O good God,' said he, 'who would have thought it, that
so many learned and holy men have wandered out of the right way, and
could have so long time been wrapped in so great errors, or that the
Holy Scripture could have been so deformed with such horrible
abuses.' For he never well understood before (he said) that the
gospel was the verity of God, in that order wherein it is written,
seeing it containeth so much touching the cross, persecution, and
ignominious death; and yet the priests lived in great prosperity, and
no man durst maintain any quarrel against them without great danger.
He also saw that the hour was come that the gospel should be
displayed, that persecution was at hand, that the enemies of the
truth began now to rage, that the wicked and proud lifted up their
heads on high, and feared not to enterprise and take in hand all kind
of mischief and wickedness against the faithful; that the bishops,
which ought by their virtue and power to defend the word, were more
barbarous and cruel than any tyrants had been before. He, thus
considering the present state ofthe world, put all doubt from his
heart, and saw presently before his eyes, that Jesus Christ had
taught the truth; seeing so many bodies of the faithful were daily so
tormented, beaten, exiled, banished, drowned, and burned. For who can
report the great torments which the innocent have endured these years
past, even by those who call themselves Christians; and for no other
cause, but only for the true confession of Jesus Christ? This good
pastor, (considering with himself the laws and doctrine of the Church
of Rome to swerve from the truth of Christ, especially in restraining
marriage,) to the end that he would not defile himself with
fornication, married a maid of his, such a one as feared God; by whom
afterwards he had many fair children.

     "About this time the people of the country had raised a great
commotion, who in their rage went to monasteries and priests' houses,
as if they had taken in hand some pilgrimage, and spared nothing that
they could find to eat. That which they could not eat, they either
cast under foot, or carried it away with them. One company of this
rustical sort lodged themselves in the house of this good priest; for
they made no difference between the good and the bad. These roisters
took from him all that they could find, leaving nothing behind them,
insomuch that they took away the very hose from his legs, for all
that he could do:  albeit that he gently entreated them, showing them
that it was theft and a hanging matter that they did, yet they
continued still in their madness like beasts.

     "As they were departing out of the house, the good priest could
not refrain himself from weeping, saying unto them, 'I tell you
before, these your inordinate doings will redound to some great
mischief to yourselves; for what madness is this? What meaneth this
rage and tumult, wherein you keep no order or equity, neither have
any respect between friend and foe? Who thus stirreth you up? What
counsel do you follow, or to what end do you this? Like thieves you
spoil whatsoever you can lay hands upon. And think you not but these
things which you now rob, ravin, and steal, you shall be compelled
hereafter to restore again to your great detriment? What sedition did
ever come to good end? You pretend the gospel, and have no peace of
the gospel either in your mouths or in your hearts. These excesses,'
saith he, 'ye never learned of me, which ever have taught you the
true word of God. This your gospel,' saith he, 'is rather the gospel
of the devil, than of God, which vexeth all the world with violence
and wrong, spoiling and robbing without regard. The true gospel of
Jesus Christ teacheth you to do good unto all men, to avoid
dissensions and perjury. This I say unto you, that in these your
doings you offend God, and provoke his just vengeance to plague you,
which will never suffer these evils to escape unpunished. You find
written in the gospel, That which thou wouldest not should be done to
thee, do not to others. You offend also all the nobility, and your
lawful magistrates, whom you are sworn and bound unto. It is no small
matter, I tell you, to raise up sedition, to stir up others, and to
disturb the state of the commonwealth:  and when this tumult shall be
ceased, what then shall your noblemen do? Shall they not rifle you as
fast, and of your goods make themselves rich? and then shall one of
you betray another.' These, with such other words, he stood preaching
unto them, almost naked; but all this would not prevail with those
men, who, after all these gentle admonitions and fair words, departed
out of his house, giving him foul language, and calling him old
dotard.' Amongst all others, one more wicked than the residue said
unto him in this manner:  'O master curate! we have been long deceived
by your selling of masses, by fearing us with purgatory, by your
dirges and trentals; and so have we been spoiled; wherefore we do
nothing, now, but require again the money which you robbed us of.'
And so mocking and scorning him they departed.

     "After that this sedition of the peasants was partly appeased,
their armour being laid away, and they taken unto grace; after that
also divers of the principals of that conspiracy were taken here and
there in the villages, and executed; this good pastor, fearing no
such thing, for the true and sincere preaching of the gospel, whereat
many took great indignation, was taken in the night by certain
soldiers, which bound him hand and foot with a great rope, before his
wife and children, and so set him upon a horse, and led him away to
Friburg. What grievous sighs, tears, sorrow, and lamentation were
there! it would have moved any heart, were it as hard as a flint, to
a doleful compassion; especially to see the barbarous and despiteful
rebukes, taunts, and extreme cruelty showed by these proud popish
soldiers against the innocent priest. Such beastly tyrants the world
is never without:  such godly ministers we have had but a few.

     "The people, hearing this pitiful noise and lamentation in the
night, came running out, not the men, but only the women, whom the
soldiers willed to go home again, and that their men should come
forth and keep the town; but their men durst not appear. Then from
Friburg shortly after they conveyed him to Ensisheim.

     "After they had long kept this man in prison, and that he had
endured most terrible torments in all parts of his body, they judged
him to death. If you will know the cause what they had to lay to his
charge, it was only this, that he had married a wife secretly in his
own house, with a few witnesses. Other crimes they had none to object
against him; neither that he was a seditious and wicked man, or that
he had committed any other offence, albeit they had gathered divers
wicked persons out of sundry places, to pick out of his sermons the
order and manner of his behaviour. When he was led unto the place of
execution, he answered gently and quietly unto all them that came to
comfort him. But there were divers monks and priests, which troubled
him very sorely with their foolish babbling, as he was striving in
his spirit against the horror of death, and making his prayer unto
Almighty God; seeking nothing else but to turn him away from his
hearty and earnest contemplation. But he desired them that they would
hold their peace, saying that he had already confessed his sins unto
the Lord Jesus, nothing at all doubting but that he had received
absolution and forgiveness of them all. 'And I,' said he, 'shall this
day be an acceptable sacrifice unto my Saviour Jesus Christ, for I
have done no such thing wherefore I am now condemned, which might
displease my Lord God, who, in this behalf, hath given me a good and
quiet conscience. Now therefore let them which thirst for innocent
blood, and shed the same, diligently advise themselves what they do,
and that they offend even Him, unto whom it pertaineth truly to judge
the hearts of men; for it is said, Vengeance is mine, and I will
punish.' And forasmuch as he was a very lean man, he added this
moreover, saying, 'It is all one; for shortly I must have forsaken
this skin, which already scarcely hangeth to my bones. I know well
that I am a mortal, and a corruptible worm, and have nothing in me
but corruption. I have long time desired my latter day, and have made
my request that I might be delivered out of this mortal body, to be
joined with my Saviour Christ. I have deserved, through my manifold
sins committed against my Saviour Christ, my cross; and my Saviour
Christ hath borne the cross, and hath died upon the cross; and for my
part I will not glory in any other thing but only in the cross of
Jesus Christ.'
Illustration:  Peter Spengler Executed by Drowning

     "There were present by certain naughty persons which could not
endure to hear this godly exhortation, but made a sign unto the
hangman to cast him down into the river. After he was thrown down, he
moved by a certain space in the water, in such sort that the river
whereinto he was cast was red with blood. This was a certain sign and
token that innocent blood was that day shed. They which were there
present, beholding that which had happened, were greatly amazed and
astonied, considering with themselves what the staining of the water
with the blood should signify. Every man returned home pensive and
sad, marvelling at the cruel deed that was done that day: 
notwithstanding, no man durst open his mouth to speak one word,
because that all things were exercised with such cruelty. This was
done in the town of Ensisheim, A.D. 1525.

     "These things I did understand by one which did behold them
with his eyes. The Lord of his great grace be merciful unto us, and
forgive us our sins!"

     Such was the wickedness then of those days, and yet is still,
that whosoever was perceived to favour the gospel, or any thing to
dislike the doctrine of the pope's church, he was hated and despised
of the rulers, lawyers, and all other papists through the whole
country about; but especially of priests, monks, and friars. And
though the life of the gospellers were never so sound and upright,
yet such was the hatred and malice of the pope's friendsagainst them,
that they never ceased to seek all occasions, and devise matters how
to bring them to death.

     It so happened a little before this present time, that there
was a commotion of the rude and rustical people of the country rising
in armour inordinately against their rulers, to the great disturbance
of the whole country of Germany, and no less to their own
destruction; of whom were slain above twenty thousand. At length,
when this rebellion was appeased, and all things quiet, such as were
the pope's friends, to work their malice against the gospel, took
occasion thereby not long after to accuse and entangle such as they
knew to be gospellers and protestants. And although the said
gospellers were never so inculpable and clear from all rebellion, yet
that sufficed not; for causes were made, false witnesses brought,
corrupt judges suborned, to condemn the innocent; and many were put
to death, their cause neither being heard nor known. By reason
whereof a great number of good and innocent Christians were miserably
brought to their end and martyrdom; in the number of whom was this
poor man also, whose story by Œcolampadius is thus described: 

     "There was," saith he, "a certain man of the country, which in
my judgment was a good man, and lover of justice, and a mortal enemy
of all the cruel exactions of the gentlemen which oppressed the poor
people. This man, after the tumult and commotion of the country was
appeased, was grievously vexed and tormented because he had cried
'alarm,' when a great number of horsemen ranged about the country to
seek out those which had been the authors of that sedition. This poor
man was taken by policy, and so upholden with fair promises, that
they made him confess whatsoever they required. He, thinking that
they would not have put him to death, was cast into prison, where he
was long time detained, and well cherished, to take away all
suspicion from him. But, after he had tarried a long time in prison,
they put him to the pinbank, laying divers and many grievous offences
to his charge, where they kept him hanging in the truss of the cord
the space of six hours, hanging a great stone fastened at his feet.

     "The sweat that dropped from his body for very pain and
anguish, was almost blood. In this distress he cried out pitifully,
but all that could not once move the tormentors' hearts. When all the
power and strength in his body began to fail him, with great violence
they let him fall down. There this poor man lay even as a stock, not
moving any part or member of his body, but a little drawing his
breath, which was a token that there was some life in him. Here the
tormentors were in great doubt what to do with the man, (whom they
sought by all means to destroy,) in what place they might put him,
that he should not die of that torment.

     "Amongst them there was one who brought vinegar and rose water;
and rubbing him therewithal, they did somewhat recover him. After
they had caused him to eat and drink such as they provided for him,
they let him down into a deep dungeon, where he could see neither sun
nor moon. All this was done to the intent to put him to more torment,
when he had somewhat recovered his strength again. There they let him
continue eighteen days, after which time they brought him again to
examination, propounding certain articles unto him, which he
constantly denied. They devised divers and sundry kinds of torments,
to the intent they might, even of force, extort something of this
poor man, which might seem worthy of death; yet for all that they
were fain to depart without their purpose. The twentieth day after,
these tyrants hired a hangman, (a man sure worthy of his office,)
which left no kind of cruelty unpractised; yet did he miss of his
purpose also, and was constrained to leave his cruelty, and to
pronounce even with his own mouth, that the man was innocent, in that
he had so constantly endured so many horrible and grievous torments.
Yet these tyrants came again the fourth time, and suborned two
witnesses against him; thus concluding, that he was worthy of death,
because he had cried 'alarm' after the truce was taken, and would
have moved a new sedition. The day was appointed when he should
suffer, and they brought unto him the hangman and a friar into the
prison.

     "In the mean time this poor man thought with himself, that they
would have showed him the like cruelty as they had done the night
before. They called him out of the dungeon where they had let him
down, certifying him that they had things to tell him for his profit.
This they did because he should not die in prison. Then they let down
a cord and a staff, but they could not persuade him to sit thereupon,
saying, that he would rather choose to die there, than he would
endure any more such cruel torments; notwithstanding, if they would
promise him not to put him any more to the truss of the cord, nor to
put him to death, but to bring him before just judges, on that
condition he would come out; although he had fully determined never
to have removed from thence, but to have ended his life in that
dungeon. There were present certain councillors which promised to
perform his request, and thereupon he was taken out of the dungeon.
As soon as he saw the friar, he cried out with a loud voice, saying,
'O miserable and wretched man that I am! now am I betrayed and
deceived; for my latter hour is at hand. I see well the dream which I
have dreamed this night will come to effect, for they do handle me
tyrannously, and condemn me not being heard.' The friar brake him off
from his purpose, and pulling a wooden cross out of his sleeve,
presented it unto him, declaring that he must be quiet, because that
they had already given sentence against him, and that he should gain
nothing by so much talk. 'Poor man,' said the friar, thou hast had
good and gentle judges; at the least thou shalt go to God; therefore
confess thy sins in my ear, and after thou hast received absolution
at my hands, doubt not but this day thou shalt go straight to the
kingdom of heaven.' The poor man answered, 'Thou wicked friar! get
thee away from me, for I have long since bewailed my sins and
offences, and that before the face of my Lord Jesus, who hath already
forgiven me all that which I have committed against his majesty;
wherefore I have no need of thy absolution, which thou thyself dost
not understand. This is most certain, that long time since thou
shouldst have amended thine own wicked and hypocritical life. I know
well enough what thou art; thou playest the ape with me, but thou
hast a subtle and a crafty heart, which hath deceived much simple
people. If thou hast any comfort or consolation out of the gospel to
comfort me withal, let me have it; if not, get thee away from me with
thy portues.'

     "The friar was so confused and amazed with these words, that he
knew not what to do or say. The hangman, being wiser than the friar,
bade him read unto the poor man something of the passion, wherein the
poor man would take great pleasure. This foolish friar had no other
consolation to comfort him withal, but to hold the crucifix of wood
before him, saying, 'Behold thy Saviour which died for thee; look
upon him, and thou shalt be comforted.' Then said the poor man, 'I
have another Saviour, this is none of my Saviour; get thee away from
me, thou naughty person! with thy marmoset of wood; my Saviour
dwelleth in heaven, in whom I trust that he will not deliver my soul
to eternal death.' The friar crossed himself, showing the semblance
of a man that was very sorry and aggrieved, thinking with himself
that this poor man was fallen into desperation. Then he was led forth
into the market-place, where, according to the custom, openly before
all the people, his confession was read with a loud voice; which
contained no other thing, but only that the man had been a seditious
person, and that in the time of truce he had cried, 'Alarm,' even in
the night, when all men were at rest.
Illustration:  A Good Man Beheaded

     "When he was come to the place where he should suffer, being
compassed in with glaves and halberts hired for the purpose, after he
had said the Lord's prayer, the hangman bade him kneel down; but he
refused so to do, declaring that he had yet something more to say
before the people, thinking that he should not be denied to speak in
that place, as he was before the wicked judges. 'Those,' said he,
'Which know me, shall be sufficient good witnesses on my behalf, that
from my youth upward I have always lived in good name, fame, and
honesty, being never before accused for any offence, sedition, or
perjury. In an evil time have I happened into these cursed days, when
all ways both of God and man are turned topsy turvy. I was adherent
to the tumult and sedition of the men of the country, as many others
were, which dwelt thereabout. But what then? are there not also many
gentlemen which followed the peasants' army, and many strong towns.
which went also with them? I was not the author of any sedition,
which always I have mortally hated. I never gave counsel unto any man
to move any broil or tumult in any place. We asked counsel of our
gentlemen what we should do, when the bands of the peasants were
assembled in the fields; but they gave us neither counsel nor
comfort. And to speak of myself, I did never understand or know what
the articles were that were published, neither was there ever any man
that told me wherefore they were published; neither did I know
wherefore the bands of the countrymen were risen, neither wherefore
every man moved his neighbour to put on armour. Wherefore then have
ye taken me as a seditious man, and made me to endure so great
torments?' He continued a long time declaring his innocency; but,
notwithstanding all his excuses and defences, the hangman drew his
sword, and, at the commandment of the judge, struck off his head, as
he had made an end of his prayers. His tongue moved a long time after
in his head, by means of the force of the words which he had before
spoken.

     Thus this good man of the country ended his days, against whom
the false judges could find no crime or offence to object, albeit
they had diligently sought by witnesses to have information of all
his life and living. The Lord grant his Spirit to all those which
suffer for his name.

Wolfgangus Schuch, a German, burned in Lorraine.
 WOLFGANGUS Schuch, coming to a certain town in
Lorraine, bearing the name of St.Hippolyte, and being received in the
said town to be their pastor, laboured by all means how to extirpate
out of the hearts of the people, idolatry and superstition. Which,
through the grace of Christ working with him, he in short time had
brought prosperously to pass according to his desire; insomuch that
the observation of Lent, images, and all idols, with the abomination
also of the mass, in the same town was utterly abolished:  so
reformable God made the hearts of the people there, and such
affection had they to their minister, It was not long but the rumour
thereof came to the hearing of Duke Anthony, prince of Lorraine,
(under whose dominion they were,) through the swift report of the
adversaries, falsely belying these Hippolytanes to the duke; as
though they, in relinquishing the doctrine and faction of the pope,
went about to reject and shake off all authority and power of
princes, and all superior governors. By the means of which sinister
report they incensed the prince to such displeasure and indignation,
that he threatened to subvert and utterly to destroy the town with
sword and fire. Wolfgangus, having word of this, wrote unto the duke
his epistle in most humble and obedient wise, in defence both of his
ministry, of his doctrine which he taught, and of the whole cause of
the gospel.

     In which epistle, first, he excused the people to be innocent
and blameless, and rather those slanderous reporters were worthy to
be blamed, and also punished, for their false rumours and forged
slanders raised up against them. After that, he opened and explained
the cause and state of the gospel, and of our salvation, consisting
only in the free grace of God, through faith in Christ his Son;
comparing also the same doctrine of the gospel with the confused
doctrine of the Church of Rome. That done, thirdly, he proceeded to 
our obedience, honour, and worship, which first we owe to God and to
Christ, next under him to princes here and potentates, whom God hath
placed in his room, and endued with authority here in earth; unto
whom they offered themselves now and at all times pressed and most
ready to obey, with all service and duty, &c.

     But with this epistle Wolfgangus did nothing prevail, either
for that it was intercepted by the way, or else for that the false
accusations and wicked tongues of the adversary part took more effect
to win credit with the duke, than could the simple defence of verity.
Whereupon Wolfgangus, when he saw no other remedy, rather than the
town should come into any danger for his cause, the good man, of his
own accord, came to the city of Nancy, (which is the head town of
Lorraine,) there to render a confession of his doctrine, and also to
deliver the town of St. Hippolyte out of peril, drawing all the
danger upon himself.

     As soon as he was come thither, incontinent hands were laid
upon him, and he laid fast in a strait and stinking prison, where he
was sharply and bitterly handled under the custody of the churlish
and cruel keepers. All this notwithstanding, Wolfgangus, continuing
in that prison the space of a whole year, yet would not be moved from
his constancy, neither with the straitness of the prison, nor with
the hardness of his keepers, nor yet with the compassion of his wife
and children, of which he had about six or seven. Then was he had to
the house of the Grey Friars, to profess there his faith; where he
both wittily and learnedly confuted all them that stood against him.

     There was a friar named Bonaventure, provincial of that order,
of face, body, and belly monstrous, but much more gross in blind
ignorance; and a man utterly rude, a contemner of all civility and
honesty; who, being long confessor to the duke, and of great
authority in Lorraine, as he was an enemy to virtue and learning, so
was he ever persuading the duke to banish out of the court and
country of Lorraine all learned men; neither could he abide any
person which seemed to know more than his elders knew before. The sum
of all his divinity was this, to be sufficient to salvation only to
know the Pater-noster and Ave Maria. And thus was the duke brought up
and trained, and in nothing else, as the duke himself oftentimes in
talk with his familiars would confess. This Bonaventure, being chief
judge and moderator where Wolfgangus disputed or was examined, had
nothing else in his mouth, but "Thou heretic! "" Judas! "Beelzebub!"
&c. Wolfgangus, bearing patiently those private injuries which
pertained to himself, proceeded mightily in his disputation by the
Scriptures, confuting, or rather confounding his adversaries; who
being not otherwise able to make their party good, yet for very
shame, because they would not seem to do nothing, took his Bible with
his notes in the margin into their monastery, and burned it. At the
last disputation Duke Anthony himself was said to be there, altering
his apparel because he would not be known; who, albeit he understood
not the speech of Wolfgangus speaking in Latin, yet perceiving him to
be bold and constant in his doctrine, departing from the disputation,
gave sentence that he should be burned, because he denied the church,
and sacrament of the mass. Whereupon it followed shortly after that
Wolfgangus was condemned to be burned, who, hearing the sentence of
his condemnation, began to sing the 122nd Psalm.

     As he was led to the place of execution, passing by the house
of the Grey Friars, Bonaventure the great Cyclops, sitting at the
door, cried out to him, "Thou heretic! do thy reverence here to God,
and to our Lady, and to his holy saints;" showing to him the idols
standing at the friar's gate:  to whom Wolfgangus answered again,
"Thou hypocrite! thou painted wall! the Lord shall destroy thee, and
bring all thy false dissimulation unto light." When they were come to
the place of his martyrdom, first his books before him were thrown
into the fire. Then they asked him, whether he would have his pain
minished or shortened? to whom he said, "No," bidding them to do
their will; "for," said he, "as God hath been with me hitherto, so
trust now he will not leave me when I shall have most need of him;"
concluding his words thus, that they should put the sentence in
execution:  and so beginning to sing the one and fiftieth Psalm, he
entered into the place heaped up with faggots and wood, continuing in
his Psalm, and singing till the smoke and the flame took from him
both voice and life.

     The singular virtue, constancy, and learning of this blessed
man, as it refreshed and greatly edified the hearts of many good men,
so it astonished as much the minds of his adversaries, and wrought to
their confusion. For shortly after his death, the commendator of St.
Anthony of Vienna, who sat as spiritual judge over him, and gave
sentence of his condemnation, fell suddenly down and died. Also his
fellow, who was abbot of Clarilocus, and suffragan to the bishop of
Metz, suddenly, at the coming of the duchess of Denmark into the city
of Nancy, stricken with sudden fear at the crack of guns, fell down
and died, as they which werepresent and saw it have made faithful
relation of the same. A.D. 1525.

John Huglein, martyr, burned at Merseburg.

     Of John Huglein, priest, mention is made in the Commentaries of
John Sleidan; in lib. vi., who ,the next year following, A.D. 1526,
was burned at Merseburg, by the bishop of Constance, for that he did
not hold with the bishop of Rome's doctrine in all points.

     Moreover, besides other matters in this year occurrent, here is
also a memorandum to be made to all posterity, that in this present
year 1526, unto John Frederic, son and heir to the prince and elector
of Saxony, was promised the Lady Katharine, the emperor's younger
sister, in marriage, and writings made of the same. But when the
alteration of religion was sent by God's providence into Saxony, they
swerved from their covenants; and Hawnart, which was then the
emperor's ambassador in Germany, said plainly that there was no
promise to be kept with heretics:  wherein they seemed to follow well
the footsteps of the council of Constance, as before you have partly
heard in the story of John Huss, and of the emperor Sigismund.

George Carpenter of Emerich, martyr, burned in the town of Munich, in
Bavaria.

     The eighth day of February, in the year of our salvation 1527,
there happened a rare and marvellous example and spectacle in the
town of Munich in Bavaria, which was this:  A certain man, named
George Carpenter, of Emerich, was there burnt. When he was taken out
of the prison called Falken-Tower, and led before the council, divers
friars and monks followed him, to instruct and teach him; whom he
willed to tarry at home, and not to follow him. When he came before
the council, his offences were read, contained in four articles.

     I. That he did not believe that a priest could forgive a man's
sins.

     II. That he did not believe that a man could call God out of
heaven.

     III. That he did not believe that God was in the bread which
the priest hangeth over the altar, but that it was the bread of the
Lord.

     IV. That he did not believe that the very element of the water
itself, in baptism, doth give grace.

     Which four articles he utterly refused to recant. Then came
unto him a certain schoolmaster of St. Peter, in the town of Munich,
saying, "My friend George! dost thou not fear the death and
punishment which thou must suffer? If thou wert let go, wouldst thou
return to thy wife and children?" Whereunto he answered, "If I were
set at liberty, whither should I rather go, than to my wife and well-
beloved children?" Then said the schoolmaster, "Revoke your former
sentence and opinion, and you shall be set at liberty." Whereunto
George answered:  "My wife and my children are so dearly beloved unto
me, that they cannot be bought from me for all the riches and
possessions of the duke of Bavaria; but, for the love of my Lord God,
I will willingly forsake them." When he was led to the place of
execution, the schoolmaster spake unto him again in the midst of the
market-place, saying, "Good George! believe in the sacrament of the
altar; do not affirm it to be only a sign." Whereunto he answered, "I
believe this sacrament to be a sign of the body of Jesus Christ
offered upon the cross for us." Then said the schoolmaster, moreover,
"What dost thou mean, that thou dost so little esteem baptism,
knowing that Jesus Christ suffered himself to be baptized in Jordan?"
Whereunto he answered, and showed what was the true use of baptism;
and what was the end why Christ was baptized in Jordan; and how
necessary it was that Christ should die and suffer upon the cross,
wherein only standeth our salvation. "The same Christ," said he, "I
will confess this day before thewhole world; for he is my Saviour,
and in him do I believe."

     After this came unto him one Master Conrad Scheter, the vicar
of the cathedral church of our Lady in Munich, a preacher, saying,
"George! if thou wilt not believe the sacrament, yet put all thy
trust in God, and say, I trust my cause to be good and true; but if I
should err, truly I would be sorry and repent: " whereunto George
Carpenter answered, "God suffer me not to err, I beseech him." Then
said the schoolmaster unto him, "Do not put the matter on that
hazard, but choose unto you some good Christian brother, Master
Conrad, or some other, unto whom thou mayest reveal thy heart; not to
confess thyself, but to take some godly counsel of him." Whereunto he
answered, "Nay, not so, for it would be too long." Then Master Conrad
began the Lord's prayer:  "Our Father which art in heaven;" whereunto
Carpenter answered, "Truly thou art our Father, and no other, this
day I trust to be with thee." Then Master Conrad went forward with
the prayer, saying, "Hallowed be thy name." Carpenter answered, "O my
God, how little is thy name hallowed in this world! "Then said Master
Conrad, "Thy kingdom come." Carpenter answered, "Let thy kingdom come
this day unto me, that I also may come unto thy kingdom." Then said
Conrad, "Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven." Carpenter
answered, "For this cause, O Father! am I now here, that thy will
might be fulfilled and not mine." Then said Conrad, "Give us this day
our daily bread." Carpenter answered, "The only living bread Jesus
Christ, shall be my food." Then said Conrad, "And forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us." Carpenter
answered, "With a willing mind do I forgive all men, both my friends
and adversaries." Then said Master Conrad," And lead us not into 
temptation, but deliver us from all evil." Whereunto Carpenter
answered, "O my Lord! without doubt thou shalt deliver me; for upon
thee only have I laid all my hope." Then he began to rehearse the
Belief, saying, "I believe in God the Father Almighty." Carpenter
answered, "O my God! in thee alone do I trust; in thee only is all my
confidence, and upon no other creature; albeit they have gone about
to force me otherwise." In this manner he answered to every word;
which his answers, if they should be described at length, would be
too long.

     This prayer ended, the schoolmaster said unto him, "Dost thou
believe so truly and constantly in thy Lord and God with thy heart,
as thou dost cheerfully seem to confess him with thy mouth?" Hereunto 
he answered; "It were a very hard matter for me, if that I, which am
here ready to suffer death, should not believe that with my heart,
which I openly profess with my mouth:  for I knew before that I must
suffer persecution, if I would cleave unto Christ, who saith, Where
thy heart is, there also is thy treasure, Luke xii.; and whatsoever
thing a man doth fix in his heart to love above God, that he maketh
his idol." Then said Master Conrad unto him, "George! dost thou think
it necessary after thy death, that any man should pray for thee, or
say mass for thee?" He answered, "So long as the soul is joined to
the body, pray God for me, that he will give me grace and patience,
with all humility, to suffer the pains of death with a true Christian
faith; but when the soul is separate from the body, then have I no
more need of your prayers."

     When the hangman should bind him to the ladder, he preached
much unto the people. Then he was desired by certain Christian
brethren, that as soon as he was cast into the fire, he should give
some sign or token what his faith or belief was. To whom he answered,
"This shall be my sign and token; that so long as I can open my
mouth, I will not cease to call upon the name of Jesus."

     Behold, good reader! what an incredible constancy was in this
godly man, such as lightly hath not been seen in any man before. His
face and countenance never changed colour, but cheerfully he went
unto the fire. "In the midst," saith he, "of the town this day will I
confess my God before the whole world." When he was laid upon the
ladder, and the hangman put a bag of gunpowder about his neck, he
said, "Let it so be, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost!" And when the two hangmen lifted him up upon the
ladder, smiling, he bade a certain Christian farewell, requiring
forgiveness of him. That done, the hangman thrust him into the fire.
He with a loud voice cried out, "Jesus! Jesus!" Then the hangman
turned him over; and he again for a certain space cried, "Jesus!
Jesus! "and so joyfully yielded up his spirit.

Leonard Keyser, martyr, burned at Schardingham.

     Here also is not to be passed over the marvellous constancy of
Master Leonard Keyser, of the country of Bavaria, who was burned for
the gospel. This Keyser was of the town of Rawbe, four miles from
Passau, of a famous house. This man, being at his study in
Wittenberg, was sent for by his brethren, which certified him, that
if ever he would see his father alive, he should come with speed;
which thing he did. He was scarcely come thither when, by the
commandment of the bishop of Passau, hewas taken by his mother and
his brethren. The articles which he was accused of, for which also he
was most cruelly put to death, and shed his blood for the testimony
of the truth, were these: 

     That faith only justifieth.

     That works are the fruits of faith.

     That the mass is no sacrifice or oblation.

     Item, For confession, satisfaction, the vow of chastity,
purgatory, difference of days, for affirming only two sacraments, and
invocation of saints.

     He also maintained three kinds of confession.

     The first to be of faith, which is always necessary.

     The second of charity, which serveth when any man hath offended
his neighbour, to whom he ought to reconcile himself again, as a man
may see by that which is written in Matt. xviii.

     The third, which is not to be despised, is to ask counsel of
the ancient ministers of the church.

     And forasmuch as all this was contrary to the bull of Pope Leo,
and the emperor's decree made at Worms, sentence was given against
him, that he should be degraded, and put into the hands of the
secular power. The persecutors who sat in judgment upon him, were the
bishop of Passau; the suffragans of Ratisbon and Passau; also Dr.
Eckius, being guarded about with armed men. His brethren and
kinsfolks made great intercession to have his judgment deferred and
put off, that the matter might be more exactly known. Also John
Frederic, duke of Saxony, and the earls of Schauenburg and
Shunartzen, wrote to the bishop for him, but could not prevail. After
the sentence was given, he was carried by a company of harnessed men
out of the city again, to Schardingham, the thirteenth of August;
where Christopher Frenkinger, the civil judge, receiving him, had
letters sent him from Duke William of Bavaria, that forthwith,
tarrying for no other judgment, he should be burned alive. Whereupon
the good and blessed martyr, early in the morning, being rounded and
shaven, and clothed in a short gown, and a black cap set upon his
head, all cut and jagged, so was delivered unto the officer. As he
was led out of the town to the place where he should suffer, he
boldly and hardily spake in the Almain tongue, turning his head first
on the one side, and then on the other, saying, "O Lord Jesus! remain
with me, sustain and help me, and give me force and power."

     Then the wood was made ready to be set on fire, and he began to
cry with a loud voice, "O Jesus! I am thine, have mercy upon me, and
save me; "and therewithal he felt the fire begin sharply under his
feet, his hands, and about his head. And because the fire was not
great enough, the hangman plucked the body, half burnt, with a long
hook, from underneath the wood. Then he made a great hole in the
body, through which he thrust a stake, and cast him again into the
fire, and so made an end of burning. This was the blessed end of that
good man, who suffered for the testimony of the truth, on the sixth
of August, A.D. 1527.

Wendelmuta, widow, martyr, at the Hague.

     In Holland also the same year, 1527, was martyred and burned a
good and virtuous widow, named Wendelmuta, a daughter of Nicholas of
Munchenstein. This widow, receiving to her heart the brightness of
God's grace by the appearing of the gospel, was therefore apprehended
and committed to custody in the castle of Werden; and shortly after
from thence was brought to Hague, the fifteenth day of November,
there to appear at the general sessions of that country; where was
present Hochstratus, lord president of the said country, who also sat
upon her the seventeenth day of the aforesaid month. Divers monks
were appointed there to talk with her, to the end they might convince
her, and win her to recant; but she, constantly persisting in that
truth wherein she was planted, would not be removed. Many also of her
kindred, and other honest women, were suffered to persuade with her;
among whom there was a certain noble matron, who loved and favoured
dearly the said widow being in prison. This matron coming and
communing with her, in her talk said, "My Wendelmuta! why dost thou
not keep silence, and think secretly in thine heart these things
which thou believest, that thou mayest prolong here thy days and
life? To whom she answered again:  "Ah," said she, "you know not what
you say. It is written, With the heart we believe to righteousness,
with the tongue we confess to salvation," &c., Rom. x. And thus she,
remaining firm and stedfast in her belief and confession, on the
twentieth day of November was condemned, by sentence given as against
a heretic, to be burned to ashes, and her goods to be confiscated;
she taking the sentence of her condemnation mildly and quietly.

     After she came to the place where she should be executed, and a
monk there had brought out a blind cross, willing her many times to
kiss and worship her God; "I worship," said she, "no wooden god, but
only that God which is in heaven: " and so, with a merry and joyful
countenance, she went to the stake, desiring the executioner to see
the stake to be fast, that it fall not. Then taking the powder, and
laying it to her breast, she gave her neck willingly to be bound,
with an ardent prayer commending herself into the hands of God. When
the time came that she should be strangled, modestly she closed her
eyes, and bowed down her head, as one that would take a sleep:  which
done, the fire then was put to the wood, and she, being strangled,
was burned afterwards to ashes; instead of this life, to get the
immortal crown in heaven. A.D. 1527.

Peter Flisteden and Adolphus Clarebach, put to death at Cologne.

     In the number of these German martyrs, are also to be
comprehended Peter Flisteden and Adolphus Clarebach; two men of
singular learning, and having ripe knowledge of God's holy word.
Which two, A.D. 1529, (for that they did dissent from the papists in
divers points, and especially touching the supper of the Lord, and
other the pope's traditions and ceremonies,) after they had endured
imprisonment a year and a half, by the commandment of the archbishop
and senate, were to put to death and burned in Cologne, not without
the great grief and lamentation of many good Christians; all the
fault being put upon certain divines, which at that time preached,
that the punishment and death of certain wicked persons should pacify
the wrath of God, which then plagued Germany grievously with a new
and strange kind of disease:  for at that season the sweating sickness
did mortally rage and reign throughout all Germany.

A preface to the table following.

     If thou well remember in reading this book of stories, loving
reader! it was before mentioned and declared how in the year of grace
1501, certain prodigious marks and prints of the Lord's passion, as
the crown, cross, nails, scourges, and spear, were seen in Germany
upon the garments of men and women. Which miraculous ostent, passing
the ordinary course of natural causes, as it was sent of God, no
doubt, to foreshow the great and terrible persecution, which
afterwards fell in the country of Germany, and other regions besides,
for the testimony of Christ; so, if the number and names of all those
good men and women, which suffered in the same persecution, with
their acts and doings, should be gathered and compiled together, it
would ask a long time, and a large volume. Notwithstanding, partly to
satisfy the history which we have in hand, partly also to avoid
tedious prolixity, I thought briefly to contract the discourse
thereof, drawing, as in a compendious table, the names of the
persecutors, and of the martyrs who suffered, and the causes thereof,
in as much shortness as I may; referring the full tractation of their
lives and doings to those writers of their own country, where they
are to be read more at large. And to keep an order in the same table,
as much as in such a confused heap of matters I may, according to the
order and distinction of the countries in which these blessed saints
of Christ did suffer; I have so divided the order of the table in
such sort, as first to begin with them that suffered in Germany, then
in France, also in Spain, with other foreign countries more; showing
only the names, with the principal matters of them; referring the
rest to the further explication of their own story-writers, from
whence they be collected:  the which table being finished, my purpose
is, Christ willing, to return to the full history of our own matters,
and of the martyrs who suffered here in England.

A table of the names and causes of such martyrs as gave their lives
for the testimony of the gospel, in Germany, France, Spain, Italy,
and other foreign countries, since Luther's time:  in which table are
contained the persecutors, the martyrs, and the causes of their
martyrdom.

The martyrs of Germany.
 OF divers who suffered in Germany for the witness
of the gospel, partly some rehearsal is made before, as of Voes and
Esch, of Sutphen, John Castellane, Peter Spengler, with a certain
godly minister, and another simple man of the country, mentioned in
Œcolampadius:  also of them in Dithmarsch and Prague, of M. George of
Halle, Gasper, Tambert, George of Vienna, Wolfgangus Schuch, John
Huglius, George Carpenter, Leonard Keyser, Wendelmuta, Peter
Flisteden, Adolphus Clarebach, and others. The residue follow in
order of this table here to be showed.

Persecutors:  Charles the emperor; also two servants of a butcher, who
did apprehend one Nicholas at Antwerp, A.D. 1524.
Nicholas of Antwerp, a martyr.

Persecutors:  Margaret, daughter of Maximilian, princess of Holland;
also M. Montane, M. Rosemund, and M. Anchusanus, inquisitors; also M.
Jodocus Lovering, vicar of Mechlen, A.D. 1524.
Johannes Pistorius, a learned man of Holland, and partly of kin to
Erasmus of Rotterdam, a martyr.

Persecutor:  Sebastian Braitestein, abbot. In Suevia, A.D. 1525.
Matthias Weibell, schoolmaster, a martyr.

Persecutors:  certain noblemen, after the commotion of the countrymen
in Germany, A.D. 1525.
A certain godly priest, a martyr.

Persecutor:  the name of the persecutor appears not in the story.
George Scherter, a martyr, at Radstadt, by Saltsburg, A.D. 1528.

Persecutor:  Balthasar, official.
Henry Fleming at Dornick, 1535, a martyr.

Persecutor:  a popish priest, and a wicked murderer.
A good priest dwelling not far from Basil, 1539, a martyr.

Persecutors:  Charles, the emperor's procurator; Dr. Enchusanus,
inquisitor; and Latomus.
Twenty-eight Christian men and women of Louvain, A.D. 1543, martyrs.

Persecutor:  the name of the persecutor appeareth not in the story.
Master Perseval, a martyr at Louvain, A.D. 1544.

Persecutor:  Dorsardus, a potentate in that country, and a great
persecutor.
Justus Imsberg, a martyr at Brussels, A.D. 1544.

Persecutor:  the parson of Brussels.
Giles Tilleman, a martyr at Brussels, A.D. 1544.

Great persecution in Gaunt, and other parts of Flanders, by the
friars and priests thereof.

     As Charles the emperor did lie in Gaunt, the friars and doctors
there obtained, that the edict made against the Lutherans, might be
read openly twice a year. This being obtained, great persecution
followed, so that there was no city nor town in all Flanders, wherein
some either were not expulsed, or beheaded, or condemned to perpetual
prison, or had not their goods confiscated:  neither was there any 
respect of age or sex. At Gaunt especially, many there were of the
head men, which for religion sake were burned.

     Afterwards, the emperor coming to Brussels, there was terrible
slaughter and persecution of God's people, namely, in Brabant,
Hennegow, and Artois; the horror and cruelty whereof is almost
incredible:  insomuch that at one time as good as two hundred men and
women together were brought out of the country about into the city,
of whom some were drowned, some buried quick, some privily made away,
others sent to perpetual prison:  whereby all the prisons and towers
thereabout were replenished with prisoners and captives, and the
hands of the hangman tired with slaying and killing; to the great
sorrow of all them which knew the gospel, being now compelled either
to deny the same, or to confirm it with their blood. The story hereof
is at large set forth by Francis Encenas, a notable learned man, who
also himself was prisoner the same time at Brussels:  whose book,
written in Latin, I myself have seen and read, remaining in the hands
of John Oporine at Basil.

Persecutors:  The Franciscan Friars of Gaunt.
Martin Hœurblock, fishmonger at Gaunt, a martyr, A.D. 1545.

     This Martin ever, almost to his later age, was a man much given
to all wickedness and fleshly life, so long as he continued a
follower of the pope's superstition and idolatry. Afterward, (as God
hath always his calling,) through the occasion of a sermon of his
parish priest, beginning to taste some workings of grace and
repentance of his former life, went out of Gaunt for the space of
three months, seeking the company of godly Christians, such as he
heard to use the reading of the Scriptures:  by whom he being more
groundedly instructed, returned again to the city of Gaunt, where all
his neighbours first began to marvel at the sudden change of this
man. The Franciscans, which knew him before so beneficial unto them,
now seeing him so altered from their ways and superstition, and
seeing him to visit the captives in prison, to comfort them in
persecution, and to confirm them in the word of God which went to the
fire, conspired against him:  whereby he was detected and laid in
bands.

     After that, with sharp and grievous torments they would have
constrained him to utter other of the same religion. To whom thus he
answered:  that if they could prove by the Scripture, that his
detecting and accusing of his brethren, whom they would afflict with
the like torments, were not against the second table of God's law,
then he would not refuse to prefer the honour of God before the
safeguard of his brethren. Then the friars examined him in the
sacrament, asking him why he was so earnest to have it in both kinds,
"seeing," said they, "it is but a naked sacrament, as you say?" To
whom he answered, that the elements thereof were naked, but the
sacrament was not naked, forasmuch as the said elements of bread and
wine, being received after the institution of Christ, do now make a
sacrament and a mystical representation of the Lord's body,
communicating himself with our souls. And as touching the receiving
in both kinds, because it is the institution of the Lord, "Who is
he," said Martin, "that dare alter the same?" Then was he brought
before the council of Flanders. The causes laid against him were the
sacrament, purgatory, and praying for the dead; for the which he was
condemned and burned at Gaunt, in Verle-place, all his goods being
confiscated. As he stood at the stake, a Franciscan friar said to
him, "Martin, unless thou dost turn, thou shalt go from this fire to
everlasting fire." "It is not in you," said Martin again, "to judge."
For this the friars afterwards were so hated, that many bills and
rhymes were set forth in divers places against them.

Persecutors:  The council of Flanders.
Nicholas Vanpole, and John de Bruck and his wife; martyrs at Gaunt,
A.D. 1545.

Persecutors:  The same council.
Ursula, and Maria, virgins of noble stock, martyrs at Delden, A.D.
1545.

     Delden is a town in Lower Germany, three miles from Deventer,
where these two virgins of noble parentage were burned; who, after
diligently frequenting of churches and sermons, being instructed in
the word of the Lord, defended, that seeing the benefit of our
salvation cometh only by our faith in Christ, all the other
merchandise of the pope, which he useth to sell to the people for
money, was needless. First, Maria, being the younger, was put to the
fire; where she prayed ardently for her enemies, commending her soul
to God; at whose constancy the judges did greatly marvel.

     Then they exhorted Ursula to turn, or if she would not, at
least that she should require to be beheaded. To whom she said, that
she was guilty of no error, nor defended any thing but which was
consonant to the Scripture, in which she trusted to persevere unto
the end. And as touching the kind of punishment, she said, she feared
not the fire, but rather would follow the. example of her dear sister
that went before. This was marvellous, that the executioners could in
no wise consume their bodies with fire, but left them whole, lying
upon the ground white; which certain good Christians privily took up
in the night, and buried. Thus God many times showeth his power in
the midst of tribulations.

Persecutors:  The parson of St. Katharine's; Dr. Tapert; and William
Clericken, ruler of Mechelen.
Andreas Thiessen, and Katharine his wife; also Nicholas Thiessen, and
Francis Thiessen, their sons, martyrs at Mechelen, A.D. 1545.

     Andrew Thiessen, citizen of Mechelen, of his wife Katharine had
three sons and a daughter, whom he instructed diligently in the
doctrine of the gospel, and despised the doings of popery:  wherefore
being hated and persecuted of the friars and priests there, he went
into England and there died. Francis and Nicholas, his two sons, went
to Germany to study; and returning again to their mother, and sister,
and younger brother, by diligent instruction brought them to the
right knowledge of God's gospel. Which being not unknown to the
parson there of St. Katharine's, he called to them Drs. Rupert and
Tapert, and other masters and friars, who taking counsel together
with William Clericken, the head magistrate of the town of Mechelen,
agreed that the mother, with her four children, should be sent to
prison, separated one from another; where great labour was employed
to reclaim them home unto their church, that is, from light to
darkness again. The two younger, to wit, the daughter with the
younger brother, being not yet settled either in years or doctrine,
something inclined to them, and were delivered. The mother, which
would not consent, was condemned to perpetual prison. The other two,
Francis and Nicholas, standing firmly to their confession, defended
that the catholic church was not the Church of Rome; that the
sacrament was to be administered in both kinds; that auricular
confession was to no purpose; that invocation of saints was to be
left; that there was no purgatory. The friars they called hypocrites,
and contemned their threatenings. The magistrates, after
disputations, fell to torments, to know of them who was their master,
and what fellows they had. Their Master, they said, was Christ, who
bare his cross before. Fellows, they said, they had innumerable,
dispersed in all places. At last they were brought to the judges: 
their articles were read, and they condemned to be burned. Coming to
the place of execution, as they began to exhort the people, gags, or
balls of wood, were thrust into their mouths, which they, through
vehemency in speaking, thrust out again, desiring for the Lord's sake
that they might have leave to speak. And so, singing with a loud
voice, Credo in unum Deum, &c., they went, and were fastened to the
stake, praying for their persecutors; and exhorting the one the
other, they did abide the fire patiently. The one feeling the flame
to come to his beard, "Ah!" said he, "what a small pain is this, to
be compared to the glory to come?" Thus the patient martyrs,
committing their spirits to the hands of God, to the great admiration
of the lookers on, through constancy achieved the crown of martyrdom.

Persecutors:  The names of their accusers appear not in the authors.
Marion, wife of Adrian Taylor, martyr at Dornick, A.D. 1545.

     In the same persecution against Bruley and his company in
Dornick, was apprehended also one Adrian, and Marion his wife. The
cause of their trouble, as also of the others, was the emperor's
decree made in the council of Worms against the Lutherans mentioned
before. Adrian, not so strong as a man, for fear gave back from the
truth, and was but only beheaded. The wife, stronger than a woman,
did withstand their threats, and abide the uttermost; and being
enclosed in an iron grate, formed in shape of a pasty, was laid in
the earth and buried quick, after the usual punishment of that
country for women. When the adversaries first told her that her
husband had relented, she believed them not; and therefore, as she
went to her death, passing by the tower where he was, she called to
him to take her leave; but he was gone before.

Persecutors:  The magistrates of Dornick or Tournay.
Master Peter Braley, preacher, a martyr, at Dornick, A.D. 1545.

     Master Peter Bruley was preacher in the French church at
Strasburg, who at the earnest request of faithful brethren came down
to visit the lower countries about Artois and Dornick, in Flanders;
where he most diligently preached the word of God unto the people in
houses, the doors standing open. Whereupon, when the magistrates of
Dornick had shut the gates of the town, and had made search for him
three days, he was privily let down the wall in the night by a
basket:  and as he was let down to the ditch ready to take his way,
one of them that let him down, leaning over the wall to bid him
farewell, caused unawares a stone to slip out of the wall, which
falling upon him, brake his leg, by reason whereof he was heard of
the watchman complaining of his wound, and so was taken, giving
thanks to God, by whose providence he was there staid to serve the
Lord in that place. So long as he remained in prison, he ceased not
to supply the part of a diligent preacher, teaching, and confirming
all them that came to him in the word of grace. Being in prison, he
wrote his own confession and examination, and sent it to the
brethren. He wrote also another epistle unto them that were in
persecution; another also to all the faithful; also another letter to
his wife, the same day that he was burned. He remained in prison four
months. His sentence was given by the emperor's commissioners at
Brussels, that he should be burned to ashes, and his ashes thrown
into the river. Although the priests and friars made the fire but
small, to multiply his pain, yet he the more cheerfully and
constantly took his martyrdom, and suffered it. The letters of Duke
Frederic, and of the landgrave, came to entreat for him; but he was
burned a little before the letters came.

Persecutor:  The senate of Dornick, and Doctor Hasarde, a Grey Friar.
Peter Miocius, a silk-weaver, and one Bergiban, martyrs, at Dornick,
A.D. 1545.

Persecutor:  A certain prince in Germany, about Hungary, or the parts
of Pannonia.
A priest of Germany, a martyr.

Persecutors:  Alphonsus Diazius, a Spaniard; Petrus Malvenda, the
pope's prolocutor at Ratisbon, a Spaniard; the emperor's confessor, a
Black Friar, a Spaniard; also Marquina.
John Diazius, Spaniard, a martyr, killed by his own brother at
Neoberg, in Germany, A.D. 1546.

Persecutor:  A bishop in Hungary.
A godly priest in Hungary, a martyr.

Persecutor:  Charles, the emperor.
John Frederic of Saxony, elector, A.D. 1547, martyr.

Persecutor:  Charles the emperor, and Mary his sister.
The landgrave of Hesse, A.D. 1547, martyr.

Persecutor:  Charles the emperor.
Herman, archbishop of Cologne, martyr, A.D. 1547.

     With these holy martyrs above recited may also be numbered
Herman, archbishop of Cologne, who, a little before the emperor had
war against the protestants, had reformed his church from certain
papistical superstitions, using therein the aid and advice of Martin
Bucer. Wherefore Charles the emperor sent word to Cologne, that he
should be deposed; which he patiently did suffer. In his room was set
Adolphus, earl of Scauvenburg.

Persecutor:  The president or mayor of Dornick.
Master Nicholas Frenchman; also Marion, wife of Augustine, a barber,
martyrs, A.D. 1549.

     Master Nicholas and Barbara his wife; also Augustine, a barber,
and Marion his wife, born about Hennegow, after they had been at
Geneva a space, came into Germany, thinking that way to pass over
into England. By the way, coming to Hennegow, Augustine desired
Master Nicholas, because he was learned, to come to Bergis to visit
and comfort certain brethren there:  which he willingly did. From
thence, passing by Dornick (or Tournay) they held on their journey
toward England. But in the way Augustine and his wife, being known,
were detected to the lieutenant of Dornick, who, in all speedy haste
following after them, overtook them four miles beyond Dornick.
Augustine (how I cannot tell) escaped that time out of their hands,
and could not be found. The soldiers then, laying hands upon Nicholas
and the two women, brought them back again unto Dornick. In returning
by the way, when Master Nicholas at the table gave thanks, as the
manner is of the faithful, the wicked ruler, scorning them, and
swearing like a tyrant, said, "Now let us see, thou lewd heretic,
whether thy God can deliver thee out of my hand." To whom Nicholas,
answering again modestly, asked, What had Christ ever offended him,
that he with his blasphemous swearing did so tear him in pieces?
desiring him, that if he had any thing against Christ, rather he
would wreak his anger upon his poor body, and let the Lord alone.
Thus they, being bound hands and feet, were brought to Bergis, and
there laid in the dungeon. Then Duke Ariscote, accompanied with a
great number of priests and Franciscan friars, and with a doctor,
which was their warden, came to talk with them. Nicholas, standing in
the midst of them, being asked what he was, and whither he would;
answered them perfectly to all their questions:  and moreover, so
confounded the friars, that they went away ashamed, saying, that he
had a devil, and crying, "To the fire with him, Lutheran!"

     As they continued looking still for the day of their execution,
it came to the rulers' minds to ask of Nicholas in what house be was
lodged, when he came to Bergis? Nicholas said, He had never been
there before; and therefore, being a stranger, he could not tell the
name of the house. When Nicholas would confess nothing, Duke
Ariscotus came to Barbara, the wife of Nicholas, to know where they
were lodged at Bergis, promising many fair words of delivery, if she
would tell. She being a weak and timorous woman, uttered all; by the
occasion whereof great persecution followed, and many were
apprehended. Where this is to be noted, that shortly even upon the
same, the son of the said Duke Ariscotus was slain, and buried the
same day when Augustine was burned. To be short, Nicholas shortly
after was brought before the judges, and there condemned to be burned
to ashes; at which sentence-giving, Nicholas blessed the Lord, who
had courted him worthy to be a witness in the cause of his dear and
well-beloved Son. Going to the place of execution he was commanded to
speak nothing unto the people, or else he should have a ball of wood
thrust into his mouth. Being at the stake, and seeing a great
multitude about him, forgetting his silence promised, he cried with a
loud voice:  "O Charles, Charles! how long shall thy, heart be
hardened?" And with that one of the soldiers gave him a blow. Then
said Nicholas again; "Ah miserable people! thou art not worthy, to
whom the word of God should be preached." And thus he spake as they
were binding him to the stake. The friars came out with their old
song, crying, that he had a devil; to whom Nicholas spake the verse
of the Psalm, Depart from me, all ye wicked! for the Lord hath heard
the voice of my weeping. And thus this holy martyr, patiently taking
his death, commended up his spirit unto God in the midst of the fire.

Marion, wife of Augustine, above mentioned, a martyr, at Bergis in
Hennegow, A.D. 1549.

     After the martyrdom of this Master Nicholas, Marion, the wife
of Augustine, was called for, with whom they had much talk about the
manner and state of Geneva, asking her how the sacraments were
administered there, and whether she had celebrated there the Lord's
supper? To whom she answered, that the sacraments there were
celebrated after the Lord's institution, of the which she was no
celebrator, but a partaker. The sentence of her condemnation was
this, that she should be interred quick. When she was let down to the
grave, kneeling upon her knees, she desired the Lord to help her; and
before she should be thrown down, she desired her face might be
covered with a napkin or some linen cloth; which being so covered,
and the earth thrown upon her face and body, the hangman stamped upon
her with his feet till her breath was past.

Persecutors:  The watchmen or soldiers of Bellimont.
Augustine, the husband of Marion, martyred at Bellimont, in Hennegow,
A.D. 1549.

     Ye heard before how Augustine escaped before, at the taking of
Nicholas and the two women. After this he gave himself to sell
spices, and other pedlary ware, from place to place; who, at length,
coming to the town of Bellimont in Hennegow, there was known and
detected to the magistrate; whereof he, having some intelligence
before, left his ware and ran away. And seeing, moreover, the house
beset about with harnessed men where he was hosted, he began to be
more afraid, and hid himself in a bush; for he was very timorous, and
a weak-spirited man. But the hour being come which the Lord had
appointed for him, it happened that certain standing upon the town
wall, which might well see him go into the thicket or bush, gave
knowledge thereof to the soldiers, which followed him to the bush,
and took him. Being taken, he was had to Bergis, the head town of
Hennegow, where being examined, valiantly standing to the defence of
his doctrine, answered his adversaries with great boldness.

     Wherein here is to be noted and marvelled to see the work of
the Lord, how this man, being before of nature so timorous, now was
so strengthened with God's grace, that he nothing feared the force of
all his enemies. Among others came to him the warden of the Grey
Friars, with a long oration, persuading him to relent, or else he
should be damned in hell-fire perpetually. To whom Augustine
answering again, said, "Prove that which you said by the authority of
God's word, that a man may believe you:  you say much, but you prove
nothing, rather like a doctor of lies than of truth," &c. At last, he
being there condemned to be burned at Bellimont, was brought to the
inn where he should take horse, where was a certain gentleman, a
stranger, who, drinking to him in a cup of wine, desired him to have
pity upon himself; and if he would not favour his life, yet that he
would favour his own soul. To whom said Augustine, after he had
thanked him for his good will, "What care I have," said he, "of my
soul, you may see by this, that I had rather give my body to be
burned, than to do that thing that were against my conscience." When
he was come to the town of Bellimont, where he should be burned, the
same day there was a great burial of the son of Duke Ariscotus, which
was slain a little before (as is before touched); by the occasion
whereof many nobles and gentlemen were there present, who, hearing of
this Augustine, came to him and talked with him. When the day came of
his martyrdom, the people, being offended at his constancy, cried out
to have him drawn at a horse's tail, to the place of burning; but the
Lord would not suffer that. In fine, being tied to the stake, and
fire set unto him, heartily he prayed unto the Lord, and so in the
fire patiently departed.

A certain woman of Augsburg who narrowly escaped martyrdom there;
A.D. 1550.
Two virgins, in the diocese of Bamberg, martyrs, A.D. 1551.

     In the diocese of Bamberg, two maids were led out to slaughter,
which they sustained with patient hearts and cheerful countenances.
They had garlands of straw put on their beads; whereupon the one
comforted the other, going to their martyrdom:  "Seeing Christ," said
she, "for us bare a crown of thorns, why should we stick to bear a
crown of straw? no doubt but the Lord will render to us again better
than crowns of gold." Some said that they were Anabaptists; and it
might be (saith Melancthon) that they had some fond opinion admired
withal; yet they did hold (saith he) the foundation of the articles
of our faith, and they died blessedly, in a good conscience, and
knowledge of the Son of God. Few do live without errors. Flatter not
yourselves, thinking yourselves so clear that you cannot err.

Persecutors:  James Hesselius, chamberlain of Gaunt, and the friars
there.
Hostius, otherwise called George, martyred at Gaunt, A.D. 1555.

     This Hostius, born at Gaunt, was cunning in graving in armour
and in steel. He first was in the French church here in England,
during the reign of King Edward. After the coming of Queen Mary, he
went to Norden, in Friesland, with his wife and children. From
thence, having business, he came to Gaunt, where (after a certain
space that he had there continued, instructing divers of his friends)
he heard that there was a Black Friar, who used to preach good
doctrine to the people:  wherefore he, being desirous to hear, came to
his sermon; where the friar, contrary to his expectation, preached in
defence of transubstantiation. At the hearing of which his heart was
so full, that he had much ado to refrain, while the sermon was
finished. As soon as the friar was come down, he burst out and
charged him with false doctrine, persuading the people, as well as he
could be heard, by the Scriptures, that the bread was but a sacrament
only of the Lord's body. The friar, not willing to hear him, made
signs unto him to depart; also the throng of the people was such,
that it carried him out of the doors. He had not gone far, but
Hesselius the chamberlain overtook him and carried him to prison.
Then were doctors and other friars, as Pistorius, and Bunderius,
brought to reason with him of the sacrament, of invocations of
saints, and purgatory. He ever stood to the trial only of the
Scripture, which they refused. Then was it agreed that he should
declare his mind in writing, which he did. He wrote also to his wife
at Emden, comforting her, and requiring her to take care of Samuel
and Sarah his children. When he was condemned, he was commanded not
to speak to the people. Hesselius the officer made great haste to
have him despatched; wherefore he, mildly like a lamb, praying for
his enemies, gave himself to be bound, patiently taking what they
would do against him:  whom first they strangled, and then consumed
his body, being dead, with fire. And thus was the martyrdom of
Hostius.

John Frisius, abbot in Bavaria, A.D. 1554.

Persecutors:  The bailiff of Hennegow; the governor of the town and
castle of Dornick; Peter Deventiere, lieutenant of the said bailiff;
Philip de Cordis, chief councillor in criminal causes; Nicholas
Chambree; Peter Rechelier; James de Clerke; Nicholas of Fernague;
Master Hermes, of Wingles, one of the council for the said bailiwick.
Bertrand le Blas, martyred at Dornick, A.D. 1555.

     The story of Bertrand is lamentable, his torments incredible,
the tyranny showed unto him horrible, the constancy of the martyr
admirable. This Bertrand, being a silk-weaver, went to Wesel, for the
cause of religion, who being desirous to draw his wife and children
from Dornick to Wesel, came thrice from thence to persuade with her
to go with him thither. When she in no wise could be entreated, he,
remaining a few days at home, set his house in order, and desired his
wife and his brother to pray that God would establish him in his
enterprise that he went about. That done, he went upon Christmas day
to the high church of Dornick, where he took the cake out of the
priest's hand, as he would have lifted it over his head at mass, and
stamped it under his feet, saying that he did it to show the glory of
that god, and what little power he hath:  with other words more to the
people, to persuade them that the cake or fragment of bread, was not
Jesus their Saviour. At the sight hereof the people, being struck
with a marvellous damp, stood all amazed. At length such a stir
thereupon followed, that Bertrand could hardly escape with life.

     It was not long but the noise of this was carried to the
bailiff of Hennegow, and governor of the castle of Dornick, who lay
sick the same time of the gout at Biesme; who, like a madman, cried
out, that ever God would or could be so patient, to suffer that
contumely, so to be trodden under the foot by such a miser:  adding,
moreover, that he would revenge his cause in such sort, as it should
be an example for ever to all posterity; and forthwith the furious
tyrant commanded himself to be carried to the castle of Dornick.
Bertrand being brought before him, was asked whether he repented of
his fact, or whether he would so do, if it were to be done again? Who
answered, that if it were a hundred times to be done, he would do it;
and if he had a hundred lives, he would give them in that quarrel.
Then was he thrice put to the pinbank, and tormented most miserably,
to utter his setters-on, which he would never do. Then proceeded they
to the sentence, more like tyrants than Christian men; by the tenor
of which sentence, this was his punishment: 

     First, he was drawn from the castle of Dornick to the market-
place, having a ball of iron put in his mouth. Then he was set upon a
stage, where his right hand, wherewith he took the host, was crushed
and pressed between two hot irons, with sharp iron edges fiery red,
till the form and fashion of his hand was misshapen. In like manner
they brought other like irons for his right foot, made fire-hot,
whereunto of his own accord he put his foot, to suffer as his hand
had done before, with marvellous constancy and firmness of mind. That
done, they took the ball of iron out of his mouth, and cut off his
tongue, who, notwithstanding, with continual crying, ceased not to
call upon God; whereby the hearts of the people were greatly moved: 
whereupon the tormentors thrust the iron ball into his mouth again.
From thence they brought him down to the lower stage, he going to the
same no less cheerfully and quietly, than if no part of his body had
been hurt. There his legs and his hands were bound behind him with an
iron chain going about his body, and so he was let down flat upon the
fire; whom the aforesaid governor, there standing by and looking on,
caused to be let up again, and so down and up again, till at last the
whole body was spent to ashes, which he commanded to be cast into the
river. When this was done, the chapel where this mass-god was so
treated was locked up, and the board whereupon the priest stood was
burnt; the marble stone whereupon the host did light, was broken in
pieces. And, finally, forasmuch as the said Bertrand had received his
doctrine at Wesel, commandment was there given, that no person out of
that country should go to Wesel, or there occupy, under incurring the
danger of the emperor's placard.

Two hundred ministers of Bohemia, A.D. 1555.

     The same year two hundred ministers and preachers of the gospel
were banished out of Bohemia, for preaching against the superstition
of the bishop of Rome, and extolling the glory of Christ.

The preachers of Locrane.

     Locrane is a place between the Alps, yet subject to the
Helvetians. When these also had received the gospel, and the five
pages of the Helvetians, above-mentioned, were not well-pleased
therewith, but would have them punished, and great contention was
among the Helvetians about the same, it was concluded at length, that
the ministers should be exiled; whom the Tigurines did receive.
Francis Warlut, and Alexander Dayken, martyred at Dornick, A.D. 1562.

Persecutor:  The earl of Lalaine.
Gillot Viver, James Faber his father-in-law, Michael Faber, son of
James; also Anna, wife of Gillot, and daughter of James Faber,
martyred at Valence.

     These, in the cause of the gospel, suffered at Valence.

     James Faber, being an old man, said, that although he could not
answer or satisfy them in reasoning, yet he would constantly abide in
the truth of the gospel.

     Anna his daughter, being with child, was respited. After she
was delivered, she followed her husband and father in the like
martyrdom!

Michella Caignoucle, martyred at Valence, A.D. 1550.

Godfride Hamelle, martyred at Dornick, A.D. 1552.

     Besides these Germans above specified, a great number there
was, both in the higher and lower countries of Germany, which were
secretly drowned, or buried, or otherwise in prison made away; whose
names, although they be not known to us, yet they are registered in
the book of life. Furthermore, in the Dutch book of Adrian, divers
other be numbered in the catalogue of these German martyrs, which
likewise suffered in divers places of the lower country. The names of
certain whereof be these.

     At Bergis, or Berg, in Hennegow, were burnt, A.D. 1555, John
Malo, Damian Witrock, Weldrew Calier; buried quick, John Porceau. At
Aste suffered also one Julian, A.D. 1541, and Adrian Lopphen, A.D.
1555:  at Brussels, A.D. 1559, one Bawdwine beheaded:  another called
Gilleken Tielman burnt, A.D. 1551.

     Add moreover to the same catalogue of Dutch martyrs, burnt and
consumed in the lower countries under the emperor's dominion, the
names of these following. W. Swolle, burnt at Mechelen, A.D. 1529;
Nicholas Paul, beheaded at Gaunt; Robert Orgvier, and Joan his wife,
with. Baudicon and Martin Orgvier, their children, who suffered at
Lisle, A.D. 1556; M. Nicholas, burnt at Mons; John Fosseau at Mons;
Cornelius Volcart at Bruges, A.D. 1553; Hubert the printer, and
Philip Joyner, at Bruges, A.D. 1553; a woman buried with thorns under
her; Peter le Roux at Bruges, A.D. 1552. At Mechlen suffered Francis
and Nicholas Thiis, two brethren, A.D. 1555. At Antwerp were burnt
Adrian a painter, and Henry a tailor, A.D. 1555; also Cornelius
Halewine, locksmith, and Herman Janson, the same year. Master John
Champ, schoolmaster, A.D. 1557; with a number of other besides, who
in the said book are to be seen and read.

     A.D. 1525, we read also in the French history, of a certain
monk, who, because he forsook his abominable order, and was married,
was burned at Prague.

     A preacher poisoned at Erfurt, by the priests of that place.



157. MARTYRS IN FRANCE – I.

     And here ceasing with these persecutions in Germany, we will
now, Christ willing, proceed further to the French martyrs,
comprehending in a like table the names and causes of such as in that
kingdom suffered for the word of God, and cause of righteousness, as
in this brief summary consequently hereunder ensueth.

Another table, of those who suffered in France, for the like witness
of the gospel.

The French martyrs.

James Pavane, schoolmaster, at Paris, A.D. 1525.
Persecuted by Dr. Martial of Paris.

     This James, first being taken by the bishop of Melden, or
Meaux, was compelled to recant by Dr. Martial. Afterwards returning
again to his confession, he was burned at Paris, A.D. 1525.

Denis de Rieux, at Melden, or Meaux, A.D. 1528.

     This Denis was one of them who were first burned at Melden, for
saying, that the mass is a plain denial of the death and passion of
Christ. He was always wont to have in his mouth the words of Christ;
He that denieth me before men, him will I deny before my Father; and
to muse upon the same earnestly. He was burnt with a slow fire, and
did abide much torment.

Johannes Cadurcus, bachelor of the civil law, A.D. 1533.

     This John, first for making a sermon or exhortation to his
countrymen of Limosin, in France, upon Allhallow's-day, and
afterwards, sitting at a feast where it was propounded that every one
should bring forth some sentence; for that he brought forth this,
Christ reign in our hearts; and did prosecute the same by the
Scriptures in much length of words; was thereupon accused, taken, and
degraded, and after burned. At his degradation, one of the Black
Friars of Paris preached, taking for his theme the words of St. Paul,
1 Tim. iv., The Spirit speaketh, that in the latter days, men shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to lying spirits and doctrine of
error, &c.; and in handling that place, either he could not or would
not proceed further in the text, Cadurcus cried out to him to
proceed, and read further. The friar stood dumb, and.could not speak
a word. Then Cadurcus, taking the text, did prosecute the same as
followeth:  Teaching false doctrine in hypocrisy, having their
conscience marked with a hot iron, forbidding to marry, and to eat
meats, created of God to be eaten with thanksgiving, &c.

Bartholomew Myler, a lame cripple; John Burges, merchant, the
receiver of Nantz; Henry Poille of Couberon; Cantella, a
schoolmistress; and Steven de la Forge, merchant, A.D. 1533.
Persecuted by the promoters of Paris.

     These five here specified, for certain bills cast abroad and
set up, sounding against the abomination of the mass, and other
superstitious absurdities of the pope, were, condemned and burned in 
the city of Paris. Henry of Couberon had his tongue bored through,
and with an iron wire tied fast to one of his cheeks; who likewise
with the others was burned as is aforesaid.

Alexander Canus, priest; otherwise called Laurence Cruces, at Paris, 
A.D. 1534.

     For the sincere doctrine and confession of Christ's true
religion, he was burned at Paris, having but a small fire, and did
abide much torment.

John Pointer, a surgeon, at Paris, A.D. 1533. Persecuted by the Grey
Friars in Paris, and by Dr. Clerke, a Sorbonist.

Peter Gaudet, knight sometime of Rhodes, A.D. 1533. Persecuted by a
certain knight of Rhodes, uncle to this Peter.

Quoquillard, martyr, A.D. 1534.

     At Bezancon, in the country of Burgundy, this Quoquillard was
burned for the confession and testimony of Christ's gospel.

Nicholas, a scrivener, John de Poix, and Stephen Burlet, martyrs,
A.D. 1534.

Mary Becandella, at Fontaine, A.D. 1534. Persecuted by a Grey Friar
in the city of Rochelle.

     This Mary, being virtuously instructed of her master, where she
lived; and being afterwards at a sermon where a friar preached, after
the sermon found fault with his doctrine, and refuted the same by the
Scriptures; whereat he disdaining, procured her to be burned at
Fontaine.

John Cornon, a martyr, A.D. 1535.

Martin Gonin, in Dauphine, A.D. 1536. Persecuted by George Borel, a
tailor; by the procurator of the city of Grenoble in France, and by
the inquisitor.

     This Martin, being taken for a spy, in the borders of France
towards the Alps, was committed to prison. In his going out, his
jailer espied about him letters of Farellus, and of Peter Viret: 
wherefore, being examined by the king's procurator, and by the
inquisitor, touching his faith, after he had rendered a sufficient
reason thereof, he was cast into the river and drowned.

Claudius Painter, a goldsmith, martyr, at Paris, 1540. Persecuted by
his kinsfolks and friends, and by Morinus, an officer.

     Claudius, going about to convert his friends and kinsfolks to
his doctrine, was by them committed to Morinus, a chief captain, who
condemned him to be burned:  but the high parliament of Paris,
correcting that sentence, added moreover, that he should have his
tongue cut out before, and so be burned.

Stephen Brune, a husbandman, at Rutiers, A.D. 1540. Persecuted by
Gasper Augerius, the bishop's renter; and by Domicellus, Franciscan
and inquisitor.

     Stephen Brune, after his confession given of his faith, was
adjudged to be burned; which punishment he took so constantly, that
it was to them a wonder. His adversaries commanded after his death to
be cried, that none should make any more mention of him, under pain
of heresy.

     Pantaleon addeth moreover, that at the place of his burning,
called Planuoll, the wind rose and blew the fire so from him, as he
stood exhorting the people, that he there continued the space of an
hour, in a manner not harmed, or scarcely touched with any flame; so
that, all the wood being wasted away, they were compelled to begin
the fire again with new faggots, and vessels of oil, and such other
matter; and yet neither could he with all this be burned, but stood
safe. Then the hangman took a staff, and let drive at his head:  to
whom the holy martyr, being yet alive, said, "When I am judged to the
fire, do ye beat me with staves like a dog?" With that the hangman
with his pike thrust him through the belly and the entrails, and so
threw him down into the fire, and burned his body to ashes, throwing
away his ashes afterward with the wind.

Constantinus, a citizen of Rouen, martyred with three others, A.D.
1542.

     These four, for defence of the gospel being condemned to be
burned, were put in a dung-cart; who, thereat rejoicing, said, that
they were reputed here as excrements of this world, but yet their
death was a sweet odour unto God.

John du Becke, priest, martyred, A.D. 1543.

Aymond de Lavoy, at Bourdeaux, A.D. 1543, persecuted by the parish
priest of the town of St. Faith in Anjou, and by other priests of the
same country; also by Master Riveracus and his servant.

     This Aymond preached the gospel at St. Faith's in Anjou, where
he was accused by the parish priest there, and by other priests more,
to have taught false doctrine, to the great decay of their gains.
Whereupon, when the magistrates of Bourdeaux had given commandment,
and had sent out their apparitor to apprehend him, he, having
intelligence thereof, was willed by his friends to fly and shift for
himself; but he would not, saying, that he had rather never have been
born, than so to do. It was the office of a good shepherd (he said)
not to fly in time of peril, but rather to abide the danger, lest the
flock be scattered:  or else lest peradventure, in so doing, he should
leave some scruple upon their minds, thus to think, that he had fed
them with dreams and fables, contrary to the word of God. Wherefore,
beseeching them to move him no more therein, he told them, that he
feared not to yield up both body and soul in the quarrel of that
truth which he had taught; saying, with St. Paul, that he was ready
not only to be bound for the testimony of Christ, in the city of
Bourdeaux, but also to die, Acts xxvi.

     To contract the long story hereof to a brief narration, the
sumner came, and was in the city three days, during which time Aymond
preached three sermons. The people, in defence of their preacher,
flew upon the sumner, to deliver him out of his hands; but Aymond
desired them not to stop his martyrdom:  seeing it was the will of God
that he should suffer for him, he would not (he said) resist. Then
the consuls suffered the sumner, and so Aymond was carried to
Bourdeaux, where many witnesses, the most part being priests, came in
against him, with M. Riverack also, and his servant; which Riverack
had said oftentime before, that it should cost him a thousand crowns,
but he would burn him. Many exceptions he made against his false
witnesses, but that would not be taken. All their accusation was only
for denying purgatory.

     About nine months he remained in prison with great misery,
bewailing exceedingly his former life, albeit there was no man that
could charge him outwardly with any crime. Then came down letters, 
whereupon the judges began to proceed to his condemnation, and he had
greater fetters put upon him; which he took for a token of his death
shortly to follow. After that, he was examined with torments. One of
the head presidents came to him, and shaking him by the beard, bade
him tell what fellows he had of his religion. To whom he answered,
saying, that he had no other fellows but such as knew and did the
will of God his Father, whether they were nobles, merchants, or
husbandmen, or of what degree soever they were. In these torments he
endured two or three hours, being but of a weak body, with these
words comforting himself:  "This body," said he, "once must die, but
the spirit shall live:  the kingdom of God abideth for ever." In the
time of his tormenting, he swooned. Afterwards, coming to himself
again, he said, "O Lord! Lord! why hast thou forsaken me?" To whom
the president, "Nay, wicked Lutheran," said he, "thou hast forsaken
God." Then said Aymond, "Alas, good masters! why do you thus
miserably torment me? O Lord! I beseech thee, forgive them; they know
not what they do." "See," said the president, "this caitiff, how he
prayeth for us." Nevertheless so constant was he in his pains, that
they could not force him to utter one man's name:  saying unto them,
that he thought to have found more mercy with men; wherefore he
prayed God that he might find mercy with him.

     On the next Saturday following, sentence of condemnation was
given against him. Then certain friars were appointed to hear his
confession, whom he refused, choosing to him one of his own order,
the parish priest of St. Christopher's, bidding the friars depart
from him, for he would confess his sins to the Lord. "Do you not
see," said he, "how I am troubled enough with men; will ye yet
trouble me more? Others have had my body, will ye also take from me
my soul? Away from me, I pray you!" At last, when he could not be
suffered to have the parish priest, he then took a certain Carmelite,
bidding the rest to depart; with whom he, having long talk, at last
did convert him to the truth. Shortly after that came unto him the
judges, Cassegnes and Longa, with other counsellors more; unto whom
the said Aymond began to preach and declare his mind touching the
Lord's supper. But Longa, interrupting him, demanded of him thus: 

     A judge. "First declare unto us your mind, what you think of
purgatory?"

     The martyr. "In Scripture all these are one:  to purge, to
cleanse, and to wash:  whereof we read in Isaiah, in the Epistles of
St. Paul, Heb. ix., and St. Peter, 1 Pet. i.; He hath washed you in
his blood. Ye are redeemed, not with gold, but with the blood of
Christ, &c. And how often do we read, in the Epistles of St. Paul,
that we are cleansed by the blood of Christ from our sins," &c.

     Judge. "These epistles are known to every child."

     The martyr. "To every child? Nay, I fear you have scarcely read
them yourself."

     A friar. "Master Aymond, with one word you may satisfy them, if
you will say that there is a place where the souls are purged after
this life."

     The martyr. "That I leave for you to say, if you please. What!
would ye have me damn mine own soul, and to say that which I know
not?"

     Judge. "Dost not thou think, that when thou art dead, thou
shalt go to purgatory? and he that dieth in venial sin, that he shall
pass straight into paradise?"

     The martyr. "Such trust I have in my God, that the same day
when I shall die, I shall enter into paradise."

     Another judge. "Where is paradise?"

     The martyr. "There, where the majesty and glory of God is."

     Judge. "The canons do make mention of purgatory; and you, in
your sermons, have used always much to pray for the poor."

     The martyr. "I have preached the word of God, and not the
canons."

     Judge. "Dost thou believe in the church?"

     The martyr. "I believe, as the church regenerated by the blood
of Christ, and founded in his word, hath appointed."

     Judge. "What church is that?"

     The martyr. "The church is a Greek word, signifying as much as
a congregation or assembly:  and so I say, that whensoever the
faithful do congregate together, to the honour of God, and the
amplifying of Christian religion, the Holy Ghost is verily with
them."

     Judge. "By this it should follow, that there be many churches;
and where any rustical clowns do assemble together, there must be a
church."

     The martyr. "It is no absurd thing to say that there be many
churches or congregations amongst the Christians:  and so speaketh St.
Paul, To all the churches which are in Galatia, &c. And yet all these
congregations make but one church."

     Judge. "The church wherein thou believest, is it not the same
church which our creed doth call the holy church?"

     The martyr. "I believe the same."

     Judge. "And who should be the head of that church?"

     The martyr. "Jesus Christ."

     Judge. "And not the pope?"

     The martyr. "No."

     Judge. "And what is he then?"

     The martyr. "A minister, if he be a good man, as other bishops
be of whom St. Paul thus writeth, 1 Cor. iv., Let a man so esteem of
us, as ministers and dispensers of the secrets of God," &c.

     Judge. "What then, dost thou not believe the pope?"

     The martyr. "I know not what he is."

     Judge. "Dost thou not believe that he is the successor of
Peter?"

     The martyr. "If he be like to Peter, and be grounded with Peter
upon the true rock of Christ Jesus, so I believe his works and
ordinances to be good."

     Then the judges, leaving him with the friars, departed from
him, counting him as a damned creature. Notwithstanding, Aymond,
putting his trust in God, was full of comfort, saying with St. Paul,
Who shall separate me from the love of God? shall the sword, hunger,
or nakedness? No, nothing shall pluck me from him:  but rather have I
pity of you, said he, and so they departed. Not long after he was
brought to the place of execution, singing by the way Psalm cxiv., In
exitu Israel de Ægypto, &c.; and as he passed by the place where he
before had been imprisoned, he called to his prison-fellows,
exhorting them to put their confidence in the Lord, and told them
that he had spoken for them, and declared their miseries unto the
president. He thanked moreover the keeper, and desired him to be good
to his poor prisoners. And so, taking his leave of them, and desiring
them to pray for him; also giving thanks to the mistress-keeper for
her gentleness showed to him, he proceeded forward toward his
execution. As he came against the church of St. Andrew, they willed
him to ask mercy of God, and of blessed St. Mary, and of St. Justice.
"I ask mercy," said he, "of God and his justice, but the Virgin,
blessed St. Mary, I never offended, nor did that thing for which I
should ask her mercy." From thence he passed forward to the church of
St. Legia, preaching still as he went. Then spake one of the soldiers
to the driver or carter, willing him to drive apace, "for here is
preaching," said he, "enough." To whom said Aymond, "He that is of
God, heareth the words of God," &c. In passing by a certain image of
our Lady, great offence was taken against him, because he always
called upon Christ Jesus only, and made no mention of her:  whereupon
he lifted up his voice to God, praying that he would never suffer him
to invocate any other, saving him alone. Coming to the place where he
should suffer, he was tumbled out of the cart upon the ground,
testifying to the magistrates and to the people standing by, that he
died for the gospel of Jesus Christ, and for his word. More he would
have spoken, but he could not be suffered, by the tumultuous vexing
of the officers, crying, "Despatch him, despatch him, let him not
speak." Then he, speaking a few words softly in the ear of a little
Carmelite whom he had converted, was bid to step up to the stage;
where the people beginning to give a little audience, thus he said,
"O Lord, make haste to help me! tarry not! do not despise the work of
thy hands! And you, my brethren! that be students and scholars, I
exhort you to study and learn the gospel:  for the word of God abideth
for ever. Labour to know the will of God; and fear not them that kill
the body, but have no power upon your souls." And after that, "My
flesh," said he, "repugneth marvellously against the Spirit; but
shortly I shall cast it away. My good masters! I beseech ye pray for
me. O Lord my God! into thy hands I commend my soul." As he was oft
repeating the same, the hangman took and haled him upon the steps in
such sort, that he strangled him. And thus that blessed saint gave up
his life; whose body afterward was with fire consumed.

Francis Bribard, martyred A.D. 1544.

     Francis Bribard was said to be the secretary of the cardinal of
Ballaie; who being also for the gospel condemned, after his tongue
was cut off, did with like constancy sustain the sharpness of
burning.

William Husson, an apothecary at Rouen, was persecuted by the high
court of Rouen, by a widow, keeping a victualling-house in the
suburbs of Rouen, and by a Carmelite Friar, A.D. 1544.
Illustration:  Rouen

     William Husson, apothecary, coming from Blois to Rouen, was
lodged with a certain widow in the suburbs of the city, who asking
her, at what time the council or parliament did rise; she said, at
ten o'clock. About which time and hour he went to the palace, and
there scattered certain hooks concerning Christian doctrine, and the
abuse of men's traditions; whereat the council was so moved, that
they commanded all the gates of the city to be locked, and diligent
search to be made in all inns and hostelries, to find out the author.
Then the widow told of the party who was there, and asked of the
rising of the council; and shortly upon the same he took his horse
and rode away. Then were posts set out through all quarters, so that
the said William was taken by the way riding to Dieppe, and brought
again to Rouen; who, being there examined, declared his faith boldly,
and how he came of purpose to disperse those books in Rouen, and went
to do the like at Dieppe.

     The week ensuing he was condemned to be burnt alive. After the
sentence given he was brought in a cart, accompanied with a doctor, a
Carmelite Friar, before the great church, who, putting a torch into
his hand, required him to do homage to the image of our Lady, which
because he refused to do, his tongue was cut out. The friar then
making a sermon, when he spake any thing of the mercies of God, the
said William hearkened to him; but when he spake of the merits of
saints, and other dreams, he turned away his head. The friar looking
upon the countenance of Husson, lift up his hand to heaven, saying
with great exclamation, that he was damned, and was possessed with a
devil. When the friar had ceased his sermon, this godly Husson had
his hands and feet bound behind his back, andwith a pulley was lifted
up into the air; and when the fire was kindled, he was let down into
the flame, where the blessed martyr with a smiling and cheerful
countenance looked up to heaven, never moving nor stirring till he
let down his head, and gave up his spirit. All the people there
present were not a little astonied thereat, and were in divers
opinions; some saying that he had a devil, others maintained the
contrary, saying, If he had a devil, he should have fallen into
despair.

     This Carmelite Friar aboveb said, was called Delanda, who
afterwards was converted, and preached the gospel.

James Cobard, a schoolmaster, and many others taken at the same time,
A.D. 1545. Their persecutors were three popish priests, and the duke
of Lorraine.

     This James, schoolmaster, in the city of St. Michael in the
dukedom of Barens in Lorraine, disputed, with three priests, that the
sacrament of baptism and of the supper did not avail, unless they
were received with faith:  which was as much as to say, as that the
mass did profit neither the quick nor dead. For the which, and also
for his confession, which he, being in prison, sent of his own accord
by his mother unto the judge, he was burned, and most quietly
suffered.

Peter Clerk, brother to John Clerk, burnt before.
Fourteen blessed martyrs burnt at Meaux, A.D. 1546. Their persecutors
were the Franciscan Friars, the doctors of Sorbon, and others.

Stephen Mangine, James Bouchbeck, John Brisebar, Henry Hutinote,
Thomas Honorate, John Boudovine, John Flesch, Peter and John
Picquere, John Mathestone, Philip Little, Michael Caillow, Francis
Clerk, and Couberon, a weaver.

     These fourteen dwelt at Meaux, a city in France, ten miles from
Paris, where William Briconete, being bishop there, did much good,
brought to them the light of the gospel, and reformed the church. Who
straitly being examined for the same, relented; but yet these with
many others remained constant, who, after the burning of James Pavane
before-mentioned, and seeing superstition to grow more and more,
began to congregate in Mangine's house, and to set up a church to
themselves, after the example of the French church in Strasburg. For
their minister they chose Peter Clerk. First they, beginning with
twenty or thirty, did grow in short time to three or four hundred: 
whereupon the matter being known to the senate of Paris, the chamber
was beset where they were, and they taken; of whom sixty-two men and
women were bound and brought to Paris, singing psalms; especially the
seventy-ninth Psalm. To these it was chiefly objected, that they,
being laymen, would minister the sacrament of the body and blood of
the Lord. Of these sixty-two, fourteen chiefly did stand fast, which
were condemned, and racked to confess more of their fellows:  but they
uttered none. The rest were scourged and banished the country. These
fourteen were sent to sundry monasteries to be converted; but that
would not be. Then they, being sent in a cart to Meaux to be burned,
by the way, three miles from Paris, a certain weaver called Couberon
by chance meeting them, cried to them aloud, bidding them to be of
good cheer, and to cleave fast unto the Lord; who also was taken, and
bound with them in the cart. Coming to the place of execution, which
was before Mangine's house, it was told them, that they which would
be confessed should not have their tongues cut out; the others
should:  of whom seven there were, who, to save their tongues,
confessed; the other seven would not. Of the first was Stephen
Mangine, who, having his tongue first cut, notwithstanding spake so
that he might be understood, saying thrice, "The Lord's name be
blessed!" As they were burning, the people sung psalms. The priests
seeing that, would also sing their songs:  O salutaris hostia, and
Salve Regina, till the sacrifice of these holy martyrs was finished.
Theirwives being compelled to see their husbands in torments, were
afterwards put in prison; from whence they being promised to he let
go, if they would say that their husbands were damned, they refused
so to say.

     Peter Chapot, at Paris, A.D. 1546, apprehended by John Andre,
bookseller, promoter; and examined by three Sorbonist doctors, M.
Nicholas Clerici, doctor of divinity, John Picard, and Nicholas
Maillard.

     Peter Chapot first was a corrector to a printer in Paris. After
he had been at Geneva, to do good to the church of Christ, like a
good man he came with books of Holy Scripture into France, and
dispersed them abroad unto the faithful. Which great zeal of his
caused him to be apprehended by John Andre, which was the common
promoter to Liset the president, and to the Sorbonists.

     This good Chapot being taken and brought before the
commissaries, rendered promptly an account of his faith; unto whom he
exhibited a supplication, or writing, wherein he learnedly informed
the judges to do their office uprightly. Then were three doctors of
Sorbon assigned, Nicholas. Clerici, John Picard, and Nicholas
Maillard, to dispute with him; who when they could find no advantage,
but rather shame at his hands, they waxed angry with the judges for
letting them dispute with heretics.

     This done, the judges consulting together upon his
condemnation, could not agree; so that Chapot, as it seemed, might
have escaped, had not a wicked person, the reporter of the process,
sought and wrought his condemnation; which condemnation was at length
concluded thus:  that he should be burned quick, only the cutting off
of his tongue was pardoned. The doctor appointed to be at his
execution was Maillard, with whom he was greatly encumbered; for this
friar called upon him still not to speak to the people; but he
desired him that he might pray. Then he bade him pray to our Lady,
and confess her to be his advocate. He confessed that she was a
blessed virgin, and recited the Lord's prayer and the creed, and was
about to speak of the mass, but Maillard would not let him, making
haste to his execution, and said, unless he would say Ave Maria, he
should be burnt quick. Then Chapot prayed, "O Jesus, Son of David!
have mercy upon me." Maillard then bade him say, "Jesus Maria!" and
so he should be strangled. Chapot again excused, that he was so weak
that he could not speak. "Say," said Maillard, "Jesus Maria! or else
thou shalt be burned quick." As Chapot was thus striving with the
friar, suddenly, as it happened, Jesus Maria! escaped out of his
mouth, but he, by and by, repressing himself, "O God!" said he, "what
have I done? pardon me, O Lord! to thee only have I sinned." Then
Maillard commanded the cord to be plucked about his neck to strangle
him; notwithstanding yet he felt something the fire. After all things
done, Mallard, all full of anger, went to the council house, called
La Chambre Ardente, declaring what an uproar there had almost
happened amongst the people; saying that he would complain upon the
judges for suffering those heretics to have their tongues. Whereupon
immediately a decree was made, that all who were to be burned, unless
they recanted at the fire, should have their tongues cut off. Which
law diligently afterwards was observed.

Saintinus Nivet, at Paris, A.D. 1546. Persecuted by M. Peter Liset,
president of the council of Paris.

     After the burning of those fourteen, whose names are described
before, this Saintinus (who was a lame cripple) with his wife removed
out of Meaux to Montbelliard, where when he had continued a while in
safe liberty of religion, and saw himself there to do no good, but to
be a burden to the church, cast in his mind to return home to Meaux
again, and so did. Where at last, as he was selling certain small
wares in the fair, he was there known and apprehended:  whereof when
information was given, he, being examined, at once confessed all, and
more than they were willing to hear. In the time of this inquisition,
as they were examining him of certain points of religion, and asked
him whether he would stand to what he said, or not? he gave this
answer, worthy to be registered in all men's hearts, saying, "And I
ask you again, lord judges! dare you be so bold as to deny, what is
so plain and manifest by the open words of the Scripture?" So little
regard had he to save his own life, that he desired the judges both
at Meaux, and at Paris, for God's sake, that they would rather take
care of their own lives and souls, and to consider how much innocent
blood they spilled daily, in fighting against Christ Jesus and his
gospel.

     At last, being brought to Paris, through the means of M. Peter
Liset, a great persecutor, for that they of Meaux should take by him
no encouragement, there he was detained, and suffered his martyrdom;
where no kind of cruelty was lacking, which the innocent martyrs of
Christ Jesus were wont to be put unto.

Stephen Polliot, martyred at Paris, A.D. 1546.

     Stephen Polliot, coming out of Normandy (where he was born)
unto Meaux, tarried not there long, but was compelled to fly, and
went to a town called La Fere, where he was apprehended and brought
to Paris, and there cast into a foul and dark prison, in which he was
kept in bands and fetters a long space, where he saw almost no light.
At length, being called for before the senate, and his sentence given
to have his tongue cut out, and to be burned alive, his satchel of
books hanging about his neck:  "O Lord," said he, "is the world in
blindness and darkness still?" for he thought, being in prison so
long, that the world had been altered from its old darkness to better
knowledge. At last the worthy martyr of Jesus Christ, having his
books about his neck, was put into the fire, where he, with much
patience, ended this transitory life.

John English. A.D. 1547.

     He was executed and burned at Sens in Burgundy, being condemned
by the high court of Paris for confessing the true word of God.

Michael Michelote, a tailor. A.D. 1547.

     This tailor, being apprehended for the gospel's sake, was
judged first, if he would turn, to be beheaded; and if he would not
turn, then to be burned alive. Who being asked, whether of these two
he would choose? he answered, that he trusted that He who had given
him grace not to deny the truth, would also give him patience to
abide the fire. He was burned at Warden by Tournay.

Leonard de Prato. A.D. 1547.

     This Leonard, going from Dijon to Bar, a town in Burgundy, with
two false brethren, and talking with them about religion, was
betrayed of them, and afterwards burned.

Seven martyrs burned at Langres:  John Taffington, and Joan his wife;
Simon Mareschal, and Joan his wife; William Michaut; James Boulerau;
James Bretany. A.D. 1547.

     All these seven, being of the city of Langres, for the word and
truth of Jesus Christ were committed to the fire, wherein they died
with much strength and comfort but especially Joan, which was Simon's
wife, being reserved to the last place, because she was the youngest,
confirmed her husband and all the others with words of singular
consolation; declaring to her husband, that they should the same day
be married to the Lord Jesus, to live with him for ever.

Four martyrs burned at Paris:  Michael Mareschal, John Camus, Great
John Camus, and John Serarphin. A.D. 1547.

     These also, the same year, and about the same time, for the
like confession of Christ's gospel were condemned by the senate of
Paris, and in the same city also with the like cruelty were burned.

Octovian Blondel, a merchant of precious stones at Paris, A.D. 1548,
betrayed by his host, at Lyons; and by Gabriel of Saconnex,
presenteur.

     This Octovian, as he was a great occupier in all fairs and
countries of France, and well known both in court and elsewhere, so
was he a singular honest man of great integrity, and also a favourer
of God's word; who, being at his host's house at Lyons, rebuked the
filthy talk, and superstitious behaviour, which there he heard and
saw. Wherefore the host, bearing to him a grudge, chanced to have
certain talk with Gabriel of Saconnex, presenteur, concerning the
riches, and a sumptuous collar set with rich jewels, of this
Octovian.

     Thus these two, consulting together, did suborn a certain
person to borrow of him a certain sum of crowns, which because
Octovian refused to lend, the other caused him to be apprehended for
heresy, thinking thereby to make attachment of his goods:  but such
order was taken by Blondel's friends, that they were frustrated of
their purpose. Then Blondel, being examined of his faith, gave a
plain and full confession of that doctrine, which he had learned; for
the which he was committed to prison, where he did much good to the
prisoners there. For some that were in debt, he paid their creditors
and loosed them out. To some he gave meat, to others, raiment. At
length, through the importune persuasions of his parents and friends,
he gave over and changed his confession. Notwithstanding the
presenteur, not leaving him so, appealed him up to the high court of
Paris. There Octovian being asked again touching his faith, which of
his two confessions he would stick to, he, being before admonished of
his fall, and of the offence given thereby to the faithful, said he
would live and die in his first confession, which he defended to be
consonant to the verity of God's word. Which done, he was condemned
to be burned, and so haste was made to his execution, lest his
friends in the court might come between, and save his life.

Hubert Cheriet, alias Burre, a young man, a tailor, at Dijon, A.D.
1549.

     Hubert, being a young man of the age of nineteen years, was
burned for the gospel at Dijon; who, neither by any terrors of death, 
nor allurements of his parents, could be otherwise persuaded, but
constantly to remain in the truth unto death.

Master Florent Venote, priest, martyred at Paris, A.D. 1549.
Persecuted by Peter Liset, president of the council of Paris, and
other Sorbonists.

     This Florent remained in prison in Paris four years and nine
hours. During which time there was no torment which he did not abide
and overcome. Among all other kinds of torments, he was put in a
narrow prison or break, so strait, that he could neither stand nor
lie, which they call the hose or boot, ad Nectar Hippocratis; because
it is strait beneath, and wider above, like to the instrument
wherewith apothecaries are wont to make their hypocras. In this he
remained seven weeks, where, the tormentors affirm, that no thief or
murderer could ever endure fifteen days, but was in danger of life or
madness.

     At last, when there was a great show in Paris at the king's
coming into the city, and divers other martyrs in sundry places of
the city were put to death, he, having his tongue cut off, was
brought to see the execution of them all; and last of all, in the
Place of Maulbert, was put into the fire, and burned, the 9th of July
at afternoon.

Ann Audebert, an apothecary's wife and widow, martyred at Orleans,
A.D. 1549.

     She, going to Geneva, was taken and brought to Paris, and by
the council there adjudged to be burned at Orleans. When the rope was
put about her, she called it her wedding-girdle wherewith she should
be married to Christ; and as she should be burned upon a Saturday,
upon Michaelmas-even; "Upon a Saturday," said she, "I was first
married, and upon a Saturday I shall be married again." And seeing
the dung-cart brought, wherein she should be carried, she rejoiced
thereat, showing such constancy in her martyrdom as made all the
beholders to marvel.

A poor godly tailor of Paris, dwelling in the street of St. Anthony
at Paris, A.D. 1549. Persecuted by Henry the Second, the French king;
apprehended by an officer of the king's house; examined by Peter
Castellane, bishop of Macon.

     Amongst many other godly martyrs that suffered in France, the
story of this poor tailor is not the least nor worst to be
remembered. His name is not yet sought out in the French stories for
lack of diligence in those writers; more is the pity. The story is
this:  Not long after the coronation of Henry the Second, the French
king, at whose coming into Paris divers good martyrs were there
brought out, and burned for a spectacle, as is abovesaid, a certain
poor tailor, who then dwelt not far from the king's palace, in the
street bearing the name of St. Anthony, was apprehended by a certain
officer in the king's house, for that upon a certain holy day he
followed his occupation, and did work for his living. Before he was
had to prison, the officer asked him, why he did labour and work,
giving no observation to the holy day?

     To whom he answered, that he was a poor man, living only upon
his labour; and as for the day, he knew no other but only the Sunday,
wherein he might not lawfully work for the necessity of his living.
Then the officer began to ask of him many questions; whereunto the
poor tailor did so answer, that eftsoons he was clapped in prison.
After that, the officer, coming into the court to show what good
service he had done for the holy church, declared to certain estates,
how he had taken a Lutheran working upon a holy day; showing that he
had such answers of him, that he commanded him to prison. When the
rumour hereof was noised in the king's chamber, through the motion of
those who were about the king, the poor man was sent for to appear,
that the king might have the hearing of him.

     Hereupon the king's chamber being voided, save only a few of
the chiefest peers remaining about the king, the simple tailor was
brought. The king, sitting in his chair, commanded Peter Castellane,
bishop of Macon, (a man very fit for such inquisitions,) to question
with him. The tailor, being entered, and nothing appalled at the
king's majesty, after his reverence done unto the prince, gave thanks
to God, that he had so greatly dignified him being such a wretch, as
to bring him where he might testify his truth before such a mighty
prince. Then Castellane, entering talk, began to reason with him
touching the greatest and chiefest matter of religion; whereunto the
tailor without fear, or any halting in his speech, with present
audacity, wit, and memory, so answered for the sincere doctrine and
simple truth of God's gospel, as was both convenient to the purpose,
and also to his questions aptly and fitly correspondent.

     Notwithstanding, the nobles there present, with cruel taunts
and rebukes, did what they could to dash him out of countenance. Yet
all this terrified not him, but with boldness of heart, and free
liberty of speech, he defended his cause, or rather the cause of
Christ the Lord, neither flattering with their persons, nor fearing
their threats; which was to them all a singular admiration, to behold
that simple poor artificer to stand so firm and bold, answering
before a king, to those questions propounded against him. Whereat
when the king seemed to muse with himself, as one somewhat amazed,
and which might soon have been induced, at that present, to further
knowledge, the egregious bishop and other courtiers, seeing the king
in such a muse, said, he was an obstinate and stubborn person,
confirmed in his own opinion, and therefore was not to be marvelled
at, but to be sent to the judges, and to be punished. And therefore,
lest he should trouble the ears of the said Henry the king, he was
commanded again to the hands of the officer, that his cause might be
informed:  and so, within few days after, he was condemned, by the
high steward of the king's house, to be burned alive. And lest any
deep consideration of that excellent fortitude of the poor man might
further, peradventure, pierce the king's mind, the cardinals and
bishops were ever in the king's ear, telling him, that these
Lutherans were nothing else but such as carry vain smoke in their
mouths, which being put to the fire, would soon vanish. Wherefore the
king was appointed himself to be present at his execution, which was
sharp and cruel, before the church of Mary the Virgin; where it
pleased God to give such strength and courage to his servant, in
suffering his martyrdom, that the beholding thereof did more astonish
the king than all the other did before.

Claudius Thierry, at Orleans, A.D. 1549.

     The same year, and for the same doctrine of the gospel, one
Claudius also was burned at the said town of Orleans, being
apprehended by the way coming from Geneva to his country.

Leonard Galimard, at Paris, A.D. 1549.

     This Leonard, for the confession likewise of Christ and his
gospel, was taken and brought to Paris, and there, by the sentence of
the council, was judged to be burnt the same time that Florent
Venote, above-mentioned, did suffer at Paris.

Macæus Moreou, martyred at Troyes, A.D. 1549.

     He was burned at Troyes in Champagne, (a town in France,)
remaining constant to the end in the gospel, for the which he was
apprehended.

Johan Godeau, and Gabriel Berandine, A.D. 1550.

     These two were of the church of Geneva. Afterward, for their
friendly admonishing a certain priest, which in his sermon had abused
the name of God, they were taken at Chambery. Godeau standing to his
confession, was burned. Gabriel, though he began a little to shrink
for fear of the torments, yet being confirmed by the constant death
of Godeau, recovered again, and standing likewise to his confession,
first had his tongue cut out; who, notwithstanding, through God's
might, did speak so as he might be understood. Whereupon the hangman,
being accused for not cutting off his tongue rightly, said that he
could not stop him of his speech. And so these two, after they had
confirmed many in God's truth, gave their life for Christ's gospel.

Thomas Sanpaulinus, at Paris, A.D. 1551. His persecutors were John
Andreas, promoter; Peter Liset, president of the council of Paris;
Maillard and others, Sorbonists; also one Aubertus, a councillor.

     This Thomas, a young man of the age of eighteen years, coming
from Geneva to Paris, rebuked there a man for swearing; for the which
cause he, being suspected for a Lutheran, was followed and watched
whither he went, and was taken and brought before the council of
Paris, and put in prison, where he was racked and miserably
tormented; to the intent he should either change his opinion, or
confess other of his profession. His torments and rackings were so
sore, through the setting on of Maillard and other Sorbonists, that
the sight thereof made Aubert, one of the council, a cruel and
vehement enemy against the gospel, to turn his back and weep. The
young man, when he had made the tormentors weary with racking, and
yet would utter none, at last was had to Maulbert Place in Paris to
be burned; where he, being in the fire, was plucked up again upon the
gibbet, and asked whether he would turn? to whom he said, that he was
in his way towards God, and therefore desired them to let him go.
Thus this glorious martyr, remaining inexpugnable, glorified the Lord
with constant confession of his truth.

Maurice Secenate, in Provence, A.D. 1551.

     He, first having interrogations put to him by the lieutenant of
that place, made his answers thereunto, so as no great advantage
could be taken thereof. But he being greatly compuncted and troubled
in his conscience for dissembling with the truth, and called
afterward before the lord chief judge, he answered so directly, that
he was condemned for the same, and burned in Provence.

John Putte, or de Puteo, surnamed Medicus, at Uzez, in Provence, A.D.
1551.
Accused by a citizen of Uzez.

     This Medicus, being a carpenter and unlettered, had a
controversy about a certain pit with a citizen of the town of Uzez,
where he dwelt. He, to cast this Medicus, in the law, from the pit,
accused him of heresy, bringing for his witnesses those labourers
whom Medicus had hired to work in his vineyard; wherefore he, being
examined of the sacrament of the Lord's supper, was condemned and
burned at Uzez, in Provence.

Claudius Monerius, at Lyons, A.D. 1551.
His persecutors were, the governor of Lyons, and the official of the
archdeacon of Lyons.

     This man, being well instructed in the knowledge of God's word,
for the which he was also driven from Avernia, came to Lyons, and
there taught children. Hearing of the lord president's coming to the
city, went to give warning to a certain familiar friend of his, and
so conducted him out of the town. In returning again to comfort the
man's wife and children, he was taken in his house; and so he,
confessing that which he knew to be true, and standing to that which
he confessed, after much affliction in prisons and dungeons, was
condemned and burned at Lyons. He was noted to be so gentle and mild
of conditions, and constant withal, and also learned, that certain of
the judges could not forbear weeping at his death.

     The said Monerius, being in prison, wrote certain letters, but
one especially very comfortable to all the faithful, which, the Lord
willing, in the end of these histories shall be inserted. He wrote
also the questions and interrogatories of the official, with his
answers likewise to the same; which summarily we have contracted, as
followeth

     The official. "What believe you of the sacrament? is the body
of Christ in the bread, or no?" The martyr. "I worship Jesus Christ
in heaven, sitting at the right hand of God the Father." Official.
"What say you by purgatory?"

     The martyr. "Forasmuch as there is no place of mercy after this
life, therefore no need there is of any purgation; but necessary it
is that we be purged before we pass hence."

     Official. "Of the pope what think you?"

     The martyr. "I say he is a bishop as other bishops are, if he
be a true follower of St. Peter."

     Official. "What say you of vows?"

     The martyr. "No man can vow to God so much, but the law
requireth much more than he can vow."

     Official. "Are not saints to be invocated?"

     The martyr. "They cannot pray without faith, and therefore it
is in vain to call upon them. And again, God hath appointed his
angels about us, to minister in our necessities."

     Official. "Is it not good to salute the blessed Virgin with Ave
Maria?"

     The martyr. "When she was on this earth she had then need of
the angel's greeting; for then she had need of salvation, as well as
others:  but now she is so blessed, that no more blessing can be
wished unto her."

     Official. "Are not images to be had?"

     The martyr. "For that the nature of man is so prone to
idolatry, ever occupied and fixed in those things which lie before
his eyes, rather than upon those which are not seen; images therefore
are not to be set before Christians. You know nothing is to be
adored, but that which is not seen with eyes, that is, God alone,
which is a Spirit, and him we must worship only in spirit and truth."

     Official. "What say you by the canonical or ordinary hours for
prayer?"

     The martyr. "To hours and times, prayer ought not to be tied: 
but whensoever God's Spirit doth move us, or when any necessity
driveth us, then ought we to pray."

     Then the official asked, what he thought of holy oil, salt,
with such other like? to whom the martyr answered, that all these
things were a mere Maranismus, that is, savoured of the law of
Maranorum, and of the superstition of the Jews.

Renate Poyet, at Saumur, in France, A.D. 1552.

     Renate Poyet, the son of William Poyet, which was chancellor of
France, for the true and sincere profession of the word of God,
constantly suffered martyrdom, and was burned in the city of Saumur,
A.D. 1552.

John Joyer, and his servant, a young man, at Toulouse, A.D. 1552.

     These two coming from Geneva to the country with certain books,
were apprehended by the way, and at length had to Toulouse, where the
master was first condemned. The servant being young, was not so
prompt to answer them, but sent them to his master, saying that he
should answer them. When they were brought to the stake, the young
man, first going up, began to weep. The master, fearing lest he would
give over, ran to him, and he was comforted, and they began to sing.
As they were in the fire, the master, standing upright to the stake,
shifted the fire from him to his servant, being more careful for him
than for himself; and when he saw him dead, he bowed down into the
flame, and so expired.

Hugh Gravier, a schoolmaster and minister, of Cortillon, in the
country of Neufchatel, at Berg, A.D. 1552.

     At Berg, in Bresse, a day's journey from Lyons, this Gravier
was burned. He coming from Geneva to Neufchatel, there was elected to
be minister. But first, he going to see his wife's friends at Macon,
there, as he was coming away out of the town, was taken upon the
bridge, with all his company; and in the end, he, willing for the
women and therest of the company to lay the fault on him for bringing
them out, was sentenced to be burned, notwithstanding that the lords
of Bern sent their heralds to save his life, and also that the
official declared him to be an honest man, and to hold nothing but
agreeing to the Scriptures.

Martial Alba, Peter Scribe, Bernard Seguine, Charles Faber, Peter
Navihere, at Lyons, A.D. 1553.

     Their persecutors were:  Tignatius, the governor or deputy of
Lyons; Buatherius, official to the archbishop of Lyons; Clepierius,
chamberlain; three Orders of Friars; Judge Melierus; Dr. Cunuban, a
Grey Friar; Judge Vilard; Primatius, the official; Cortrerius, a
judge.

     These five students, after they had remained in the university
of Lausanne a certain time, consulted amongst themselves, being all
Frenchmen, to return home every one to his country, to the intent
they might instruct their parents and other their friends in such
knowledge as the Lord had given them. So, taking their journey from
Lausanne, first they came to Geneva, where they remained awhile. From
thence they went to Lyons, where they, sitting at the table of one
that met them by the way, and desired them home to his house, were
apprehended and led to prison, where they continued a whole year;
that is, from the first of May to the sixteenth of the same month
again. As they were learned and well exercised in the Scriptures, so
every one of them exhibited severally a learned confession of his
faith; and with great dexterity, through the power of the Lord's
Spirit, they confounded the friars with whom they disputed;
especially Peter Scribe or Scrivener, and Seguine.

     They were examined sundrily of the sacrament of the Lord's
body, of purgatory, of confession and invocation, of free-will, and
of the supremacy, &c. Although they proved their cause by good
Scripture, and refuted their adversaries in reasoning, yet right
being overcome by might, sentence was given, and they burned in the
said town of Lyons. Being set upon the cart, they began to sing
psalms. As they passed by the market-place, one of them with a loud
voice saluted the people with the words of the last chapter to the
Hebrews:  The God of peace, which brought again from death the great
Pastor of the sheep in the blood of the eternal testament, &c. Coming
to the place, first the two youngest, one after another, went up upon
the heap of wood to the stake, and there were fastened, and so after
them the rest. Martial Alba, being the eldest, was the last; who
likewise being stripped of his clothes, and brought to the stake,
desired this petition of the governor, which was that he might go
about his fellows tied at the stake, and kiss them:  which being
granted, he went and kissed every one, saying, "Farewell, my
brother." Likewise the other four, following the same example, bade
each one, "Farewell, my brother." With that, fire was commanded to be
put unto them. The hangman had tied a rope about all their necks,
thinking first to strangle them; but their faces being smeared with
fat and brimstone, the rope was burnt before they were strangled. So
the blessed martyrs, in the midst of the fire, spake one to another
to be of good cheer, and so departed.

Their examinations briefly touched.

     The friar. "Thou sayest, friend! in thy confession, that the
pope is not supreme head of the church; I will prove contrary. The
pope is successor of St. Peter:  ergo, he is supreme head of the
church."

     The martyr. "I deny first your antecedent."

     Friar. "The pope sitteth in the place of St. Peter:  ergo, he is
the successor of St. Peter."

     The martyr. "I will grant neither of both:  first, because that
he which succeedeth in the room of Peter, ought to preach and teach
as Peter did; which thing the pope doth not. Secondly, although he
did so preach as Peter did, he might well follow the example of
Peter, yet should he not therefore be the head of the church, but a
member only of the same. The head of men and angels, whom God hath
appointed, is Christ alone, saith St. Paul, Eph. i."

     Friar. "Although Christ be the head of the whole church
militant and triumphant, yet his vicar here on earth is left to
supply his room."

     The martyr. "Not so, for the power of his Divinity being so
great, to fill all things, he needeth no vicar or deputy to supply
his absence."

     Friar. "I will prove, that although Christ be King both of
heaven and earth, yet he hath here on earth many vicars under him, to
govern his people."

     The martyr. "It is one thing to rule in the civil state,
another thing to rule spiritually. For in civil regiment we have
kings and princes ordained of God by the Scriptures, for the
observation of public society:  in the spiritual regiment and kingdom
of the church it is not so."

     Another friar. "Thou sayest St. Peter is not the head of the
church; I will prove he is. Our Lord said to Peter, Thou shalt be
called Cephas; which Cephas is as much as to say in Latin, caput: 
ergo, Peter is head of the church."

     The martyr. "Where find you that interpretation? St. John, in
his first chapter, doth expound it otherwise:  Thou shalt be called
Cephas, that is as much (saith he) as petrus, or stone."

     Then the judge Vilard, calling for a New Testament, turned to
the place, and found it to be so; whereupon the friar was utterly
dashed, and stood mute.

     Friar. "Thou sayest in thy confession, that a man hath no free-
will; I will prove it. It is written in the Gospel, Luke x., how a
man going from Jerusalem to Jericho fell among thieves, and was
spoiled, maimed, and left half dead, &c. Thomas Aquinas expoundeth
this parable to mean free-will, which, he saith, is maimed; yet not
so, but that some power remaineth in man to work."

     The martyr. "This interpretation I do refuse and deny."

     Friar. "What! thinkest thou thyself better learned than St.
Thomas?"

     The martyr. "I do arrogate no such learning unto myself. But
this I say, this parable is not so to be expounded, but is set forth
for example of the Lord, to commend to us charity towards our
neighbour, how one should help another."

     Friar. "Thou sayest in thy confession, that we are justified
only by faith, I will prove that we are justified by works. By our
works we do merit:  ergo, by works we are justified."

     The martyr. "I deny the antecedent."

     Friar. "St. Paul, in the last chapter of Hebrews, saith, Forget
not to do good, and to distribute unto others:  for by such oblations
God is merited. We merit God by our works:  ergo, we are justified by
our works."

     The martyr. "The words of St:  Paul in that place be otherwise,
and are thus to be translated:  With such sacrifices God is delighted,
or is well pleased."

     Vilard, the judge, turned to the book, and found the place even
to be so as the prisoner said. Here the friars were marvellously
appalled and troubled in their minds:  of whom one asked then, What he
thought of confession? To whom the martyr answered, that confession
only is to be made to God, and that those places which they allege
for auricular confession, out of St. James and other, are to be
expounded of brotherly reconciliation between one another, and not of
confession in the priest's ear. And here again the friars stood,
having nothing to say against it.

     A Black Friar. "Dost thou not believe the body of Christ to be
locally and corporally in the sacrament? I will prove the same. Jesus
Christ taking bread, said, This is my body:  ergo, it is truly his
body."

     The martyr. "The verb est is not to be taken here substantively
in its own proper signification, as showing the nature of a thing in
substance, as in philosophy it is wont to be taken; but as noting the
property of a thing signified, after the manner and phrase of the
Scripture; where one thing is wont to be called by the name of
another, so as the sign is called by the name of the thing signified,
&c. So is circumcision called by the name of the covenant, and yet is
not the covenant; so the lamb hath the name of the passover, yet is
not the same; in which two sacraments of the old law, ye see the verb
est to be taken, not as showing the substance of being, but the
property of being in the thing that is spoken of. And so likewise in
the sacrament of the new law."

     Friar. "The sacraments of the old law and of the new do differ
greatly; for these give grace, so did not the other."

     The martyr. "Neither the sacraments of the old, nor of the new
law, do give grace, but show Him unto us, which giveth grace indeed.
The minister giveth the sacraments, but Jesus Christ giveth grace by
the operation of the Holy Ghost:  of whom it is said, This is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost," &c.

     Friar. "The fathers of the Old Testament, were they not
partakers of the same grace and promises with us?" John ii.

     The martyr. "Yes, for St. Paul saith, that the fathers of the
Old Testament did eat the same spiritual meat, and did drink of the
same spiritual drink with us."

     Friar. "Jesus Christ saith, John vi., Your fathers did eat
manna in the desert, and are dead:  ergo, they were not partakers of
the same grace with us in the New Testament."

     The martyr. "Christ here speaketh of them which did not eat
that manna with faith, which was a type and figure of that Bread of
Life that came from heaven; and not of them which did eat the same
with faith, as Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Caleb, and such others; who,
under the shadows of the Old Testament, did look for Christ to come.
For so it is written of Abraham, that he saw the day of Christ, and
rejoiced; -- not seeing it with his bodily eyes, but with the eyes of
his faith."

     Here the doltish doctor was at a stay, having nothing to say,
but "Hear, friend; be not so hot, nor so hasty, tarry a while, tarry
a while." At length, after his tarrying, this came out.

     Friar. "I will prove that they of the Old Testament were not
partakers of the same grace with us. The law (saith St. Paul) worketh 
anger; and they that are under the law, are under malediction:  ergo,
they of the old law and testament were not partakers of the same
grace with us."

     The martyr. "St. Paul here proveth, that no man by the law can
be justified, but that all men are under the anger and curse of God
thereby, forasmuch as no man performeth that which in the law is
comprehended; and therefore, we have need every man to run to Christ,
to be saved by faith, seeing no man can be saved by the law. For
whosoever trusteth to the law, hoping to find justification thereby,
and not by Christ only, the same remaineth still under malediction: 
not because the law is cursed, or the times thereof under curse, but
because of the weakness of our nature, which is not able to perform
the law."

     Friar. "St. Paul, Rom. vii., declareth in the Old Testament to
be nothing but anger and threatenings, and in the New Testament to be
grace and mercy, in these words where he saith, Wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of
God, by Jesus Christ."

     The martyr. "St. Paul in this place neither meaneth nor
speaketh of the difference of times between the Old and the New
Testament, but of the conflict between the flesh and the spirit; so
that whereas the flesh is ever rebelling against the spirit, yet the
spiritual man notwithstanding, through the faith of Christ, hath the
victory. Furthermore, the true translation of that place hath not
gratis Dei, but gratias ago Deo, per Jesum Christum," &c.

     Primacius, the official, seeing the friar almost here at a
point, set in, and said, "Thou lewd heretic, dost thou deny the
blessed sacrament?"

     The martyr. "No, sir, but I embrace and reverence the
sacrament, so as it was instituted by the Lord, and left by his
apostles."

     Official. "Thou deniest the body of Christ to be in the
sacrament, and thou tallest the sacrament bread."

     The martyr. "The Scripture teacheth us to seek the body of
Christ in heaven, and not on earth; where we read, Col. iii., If ye
be risen with Christ, seek not for the things which are upon the
earth; but for the things which are in heaven, where Christ is
sitting at the right hand of God, &c. And whereas I affirm the
sacrament not to be the body, but bread, speaking of bread remaining
in its own substance, herein I do no other but as St. Paul doth,
which doth call it bread likewise, four or five times together," 1
Cor. xi.

     Friar. "Jesus Christ said, that he was the bread of life."

     Official. "Thou naughty heretic! Jesus Christ said that he was
a vine, and a door, &c., where he is to be expounded to speak
figuratively; but the words of the sacrament are not so to be
expounded."

     The martyr. "Those testimonies which you allege, make more for
me than for you."

     Official. "What sayest thou, lewd heretic! is the bread of the
Lord's supper, and the bread that we eat at home, all one, and is
there no difference between them?"

     The martyr. "In nature and substance there is no difference:  in
quality and in use there is much difference. For the bread of the
Lord's table, though it be of the same nature and substance with the
bread that we eat at home, yet when it is applied to be a sacrament,
it taketh another quality, and is set before us to seal the promise
of our spiritual and eternal life."

     And this was the effect of their examinations.

Petrus Bergerius, at Lyons, A.D. 1553.

     About the same time when these five students above specified
were apprehended, this Bergerius also was taken at Lyons, and with
them examined, and made also the like confession with them together,
and shortly after them suffered the same martyrdom. He had been
before an occupier or merchant of wines. He had wife and children at
Geneva, to whom he wrote sweet and comfortable letters. In the
dungeon with him was a certain thief and malefactor, which had lain
there the space of seven or eight months. This thief, for pain and
torment cried out of God, and cursed his parents that begat him,
being almost eaten up with lice, miserably handled, and fed with such
bread as dogs and horses had refused to eat:  so it pleased the
goodness of Almighty God, that through the teaching and prayers of
this Bergerius, he was brought to repentance of himself, and
knowledge of God; learning much comfort and patience by the word of
the gospel preached unto him. Touching his conversion, he wrote a
sweet letter to those five students above mentioned, wherein he
praiseth God for them, and specially for this Bergerius; declaring
also in the same letter, that the next day after that he had taken
hold of the gospel, and framed himself to patience, according to the
same, his lice, which he could pluck out before no less than twenty
at once, betwixt his fingers, now were so gone from him that he had
not one. Furthermore, so the alms of good men were extended towards
him, that he was fed with white bread, and that which was very good: 
such is the goodness of the Lord toward them that love and seek his
truth. The name of this convert was John Chambone.

Stephen and Dionysius Peloquine, brethren, at Ville Franche, near
Lyons, A.D. 1553.

     Stephen Peloquine, brother to this Dionysius, was taken about
two or three years before, with Ann Audebert above mentioned, and
also martyred for the testimony of the gospel at the same time, with
a small fire. After whom followed Dionysius Peloquine, in the same
steps of martyrdom, who was his brother. This Dionysius had been
sometime a monk, and changing his weed, took a wife, with whom he
lived a certain space at Geneva in godly order and modesty of life.
Coming afterward to Ville Franche, six miles from Lyons, from thence
he was had to Lyons, where he remained in prison ten months. From
thence he was reversed to Ville Franche, where he was condemned,
degraded, and burned. The articles whereupon he was condemned, were
for the mass, the sacrament, auricular confession, purgatory, the
Virgin Mary, and the pope's supremacy. He suffered on the eleventh of
September, A.D. 1553. In his martyrdom, such patience and fortitude
God gave, that when he was half burned, yet he never ceased holding
up his hands to heaven, and calling upon the Lord; to the great
admiration of them that looked on.

Ludovicus Marsace, and Michael Gerard, his cousin; also Stephen
Gravot, carpenter:  at Lyons, A.D. 1553. Their persecutors were, the
king's lieutenant at Lyons; the official; and the friars.

     At Lyons the same year these three also were apprehended and
sacrificed. Ludovicus had been of the order of the Demi-lances, which
served the king in his wars:  afterwards coming to Geneva, he was
trained up in the knowledge and doctrine of the Lord. Upon divers
articles he was examined, as the invocation of saints, and of the
Virgin Mary; free-will, merits and good works, auricular confession,
fasting, and the Lord's supper. In his second examination, they
inquired of him, and also of the other two, touching vows, the
sacraments, the mass, and the vicar of Christ; in all which articles,
because his and their judgment dissented from the doctrine of the
pope's church, they were condemned. The answers of Marsace to the
articles, are to be seen at large in the Book of the French Martyrs,
set out by John Crispine.

     The lieutenant, among other blasphemies, had these words:  "Of
the four evangelists, but two were pure, Matthew and John; the other
two, Mark and Luke, were but gatherers out of the others. The
Epistles of St. Paul, but that the doctors of the church had
authorized them, he would otherwise esteem them no better than the
fables of Æsop."

     Item, The said lieutenant said to M. Cope's maid, speaking
somewhat of the law, "Cursed be the God of that law."

     When the sentence of condemnation was given against these
three, they were so glad thereof, that they went out praising God,
and singing psalms. This troubled the judges sore, to see them so
little to esteem their death:  insomuch that the lieutenant caused 
them to be made to hold their peace; saying, "Shall these vile
abjects so vaunt themselves against the whole state of the realm?"
Then as Marsace was going into a corner by, to pray, one of the
soldiers would not suffer him:  to whom he said, "That little time
which we have, will you not give us to pray?" With that the soldier,
being astonished, went his way.

     As they should be brought out of prison to the stake, the
hangman tied a rope about the necks of the other two. Marsace seeing
himself to be spared because of his order and degree, called by the
way to the lieutenant, that he might also have one of the precious
chains about his neck, in honour of his Lord; which being granted, so
were these three blessed martyrs committed to the fire, where they,
with meek patience, yielded up their lives to the hands of the Lord,
in testimony of his gospel.

Mattheus Dimonetus, merchant, at Lyons, A.D. 1553. The persecutors
were the lieutenant of Lyons, Primacius and Buatherius, officials,
and Orus, an inquisitor.

     This merchant first lived a vicious and detestable life, full
of much corruption and filthiness. He was also a secret enemy and
searcher-out of good men, when and where they convented together;
who, being called, notwithstanding, by the grace of God, to the
knowledge and favour of his word, shortly after was taken by the
lieutenant, and Buatherius the official, in his own house at Lyons;
and so, after a little examination, was sent to prison. Being
examined by the inquisitor and the officials, he refused to yield any
answer to them, knowing no authority they had upon him, but only to
the lieutenant. His answers were, that he believed all that the holy
universal church of Christ did truly believe, and all the articles of
the creed. To the article of the holy catholic church, being bid to
add also "Romanam," that is, the Church of Rome, that he refused.
Advocates he knew none, but Christ alone. Purgatory he knew none, but
the cross and passion of the Lamb, which purgeth the sins of all the
world. True confession, he said, ought to be made not to the priest
once a year, but every day to God and to such whom we have offended.
The eating of the flesh and blood of Christ he took to be spiritual: 
and the sacrament of the flesh and blood of Christ to be eaten with
the mouth, and that sacrament to be bread and wine under the name and
signification of the body and blood of Christ; the mass not to
beinstituted of Christ, being a thing contrary to his word and will.
For the head of the church, he knew none, but only Christ. Being in
prison, be had great conflicts with the infirmity of his own flesh,
but especially with the temptation of his parents, brethren, and
kinsfolks, and the sorrow of his mother:  nevertheless the Lord so
assisted him, that be endured to the end. At his burning he spake
much to the people, and was heard with great attention. He suffered
on the fifteenth of July, A.D. 1553.

William Neel, an Austin Friar, at Evreux in France, A.D. 1553. His
persecutors were Legoux, the Dean Ilieriensis; and M. Simon Vigor,
the penitentiary of Evreux.

     Henry Pantaleon, and likewise Crispine and Adrian, make mention
also of one William Neel, a friar Augustine, who suffered in much
like sort the same year, and was burned at Evreux in France. The
occasion of his trouble rose first, for the rebuking of the vicious
demeanour of the priests there, and of the dean, named Legoux:  for
the which the dean caused him to be sent to Evreux, to the prison of
the bishop. The story of this William Neel, with his answers to their
articles objected, is to be read more at large in the ninth book of
Pantaleon, and others.

Simon Laloe, at Dijon, A.D. 1553. His persecutor was the bailiff or
steward of the city of Dijon.

     Simon Laloe, a spectacle-maker, coming from Geneva into France
for certain business, was laid hand of by the bailiff of Dijon. Three
things were demanded of him:  first, where he dwelt? secondly, what
was his faith? thirdly, what fellows he knew of his religion? His
dwelling (he said) was at Geneva. His religion was such as was then
used at Geneva. As for his fellows (he said) he knew none, but only
them of the same city of Geneva, where his dwelling was. When they
could get of him no other answer but this with all their racking and
torments, they proceeded to his sentence, and pursued the execution
of the same, which was on the twenty-first of November, A.D. 1553.
The executioner, who was named James Silvester, seeing the great
faith and constancy of that heavenly martyr, was so compuncted with
repentance, and fell in such despair of himself, that they had much
ado, with all the promises of the gospel, to recover any comfort in
him. At last, through the mercy of Christ, he was comforted, and
converted; and so he, with all his family, removed to the church at
Geneva.

Nicholas Nayle, at Paris, A.D. 1553.

     This Nicholas, a shoemaker, coming to Paris with certain
fardels of books, was there apprehended; who, stoutly persisting in
confessing the truth, was tried with sundry torments, to utter what
fellows he had besides of his profession, so cruelly, that his body
was dissolved almost one joint from another; but so constant he was
in his silence, that he would express none. As they brought him to
the stake, first they put a gag or piece of wood in his mouth, which
they bound with cords to the hinder part of his head so hard, that
his mouth on both sides gushed out with blood, and disfigured his
face monstrously. By the way they passed by an hospital, where they
willed him to worship the picture of St. Mary standing at the gate: 
but he turned his back as well as he could, and would not. For this
the blind people were so grieved, that they would have fallen upon
him. After he was brought to the fire, they so smeared his body with
fat and brimstone, that at the first taking of the fire, all his skin
was parched, and the inward parts not touched. With that the cords
burst which were about his mouth, whereby his voice was heard in the
midst of the flame, praising the Lord; and so the blessed martyr
departed.

Peter Serre, near Toulouse, A.D. 1553. His persecutors were a woman
of Toulouse; the official of the bishop of Toulouse; and the
inquisitor and chancellor of the bishop of Cozeran.

     Peter Serre was first a priest; then changing his religion, he
went to Geneva, and learned the shoemakers' craft, and so lived.
Afterwards, upon a singular love, he came to his brother at Toulouse,
to the intent to do him good. His brother had a wife, which was not
well pleased with his religion and coming. She, in secret counsel,
told another woman, one of her neighbours, of this. What doth she,
but goeth to the official, and maketh him privy to all. The official
thinking to foreslack no time, taking counsel with his fellows, laid
hands upon this Peter, and brought him before the inquisitor; to whom
he made such a declaration of his faith, that he seemed to reduce the
inquisitor to some feeling of conscience, and began to instruct him
in the principles of true religion. Notwithstanding, all this helped
not, but that he was condemned by the said chancellor to be degraded,
and committed to the secular judge. The judge inquiring of what
occupation he was, he said, that of late he was a shoemaker:  whereby
the judge, understanding that he had been of some other faculty
before, required what it was. He said he had been of another faculty
before, but he was ashamed to utter it, or to remember it, being the
worst and vilest science of all others in the whole world besides.
The judge and the people, supposing that he had been some thief or
cutpurse, inquired to know what it was; but he for shame and sorrow
stopped his mouth, and would not declare it. At last, through their
importunate clamour, he was constrained to declare the truth, and
said, that he had been a priest! The judge thereupon was so moved,
that he condemned him; first, enjoining him in his condemnation, to
ask the king forgiveness, he then judged him to have his tongue cut
out, and so to be burned. From this sentence, he appealed to the
parliament of Toulouse:  not for that he thought thereby to save his
life, but because he was enjoined to ask the king's forgiveness, whom
he had never offended; also because he was judged to have his tongue
cut off, wherewith he would praise his God. Notwithstanding, by the
sentence of that parliament, he was likewise condemned to be burned;
only he was pardoned for asking forgiveness of the king, and the
cutting off of his tongue, so that he would say nothing against their
religion.

     As he went to burning, he passed by the college of St. Martial,
where he was bid to honour the picture of the Virgin standing at the
gate; which because he refused, the judge commanded his tongue to be
cut off:  and so being put to the fire, he stood so quiet, looking up
to heaven all the time of his burning, as though he had felt nothing;
bringing such admiration to the people, that one of the parliament
said, that way was not the best, to bring the Lutherans to the fire,
for that would do more hurt than good.

Stephen King, and Petrus Denocheus, at Chartres, A.D. 1553.
Persecuted by the governor of Marches.

     Stephen King, after he had been at Strasburg a while, returned
again into his country, dwelling in a town bearing the name of St.
George, not far from Chaustors; where he served in the place of a
notary, and had under him a clerk named Peter Denoche, who also had
been at Geneva, and was there zealous in instructing the ignorant,
and rebuking blasphemous swearers, and other offenders. These two
were not long together but they were both suspected of Lutheranism,
and so apprehended by the governor of the Marches, or the marshal,
and so were carried to Chartres, where, after their constant
confession, upon their examination made, they were enclosed in
prison, and there sustained long and tedious endurance; during which
mean time, Stephen King made many worthy songs and sonnets in the
praise of the Lord, whereby to recreate his spirit in that doleful
captivity. At length, when, after long persuasions and fair promises
of the bishop and of others, they could not be revoked from the
doctrine of their confession, they were condemned. From that
condemnation they appealed to the court of Paris, but the council
there, confirming their former sentence, returned them again to
Chartres, from whence they came, where they were both executed with
cruel punishment of fire.

Antonius Magnus, or Magnæus, at Paris, A.D. 1554. Persecuted by the
priests of Bruges.

     Antonius Magnus was sent by the five who were in prison at
Lyons, above-mentioned, and by others also that were in captivity at
Paris, to Geneva, to commend them to their prayers unto God for them;
who, after certain business there despatched, returned again into
France, and there, within three hours of his coming, was betrayed and
taken by certain priests at Bruges, and there delivered by the said
priests unto the official. After a few days the king's justices took
him from the official, and sent him to Paris, where, after great
rebukes and torments he suffered in the prison, and firmly persisting
in the profession of the truth, by their capital sentence was
adjudged to have his tongue cut out, and so was burned at Maulbert
Place in Paris.

William Alençon, bookseller; also a certain shear-man, at
Montpelliers, A.D. 1454. Betrayed by false brethren.

     This Alençon did much good in the provinces of France by
carrying books. Coming to Montpelliers, he was there circumvented by
false brethren, detected and laid in prison. In his faith he was firm
and constant to the end of his martyrdom, being burned the seventh of
January, 1554.

     Thege was the same time at Montpelliers a certain shearman or
clothworker, who had been long in durance for religion, but at
length, for fear and infirmity, he revolted; to whom it was enjoined 
by the judges to make public recantation, and to be present also at
the burning of Alençon aforesaid:  at the beholding of whose death and
constancy, it pleased God to strike into this man such boldness, that
be desired the judges, that he might burn with this Alençon, or else
be brought again into prison, saying, that he would make no other
recantation, but so. Wherefore, within three days after he was
likewise condemned to the fire, and burned in the town aforesaid.

Paris Panier, a lawyer, at Dol, A.D. 1554.

     At Dol was beheaded a good and godly lawyer, Lamed Paris
Panier, for constant standing to the gospel of Christ, A.D. 1554.

Peter du Val, shoemaker, at Nismes, A.D. 1554.

     At Nismes in Dauphine, Peter du Val sustained sore and grievous
rackings and torments; wherewith his body being broken, dissolved,
and maimed, yet he, notwithstanding, manfully abiding all their
extremity, would name and utter none. Then was he had to the fire,
and there consumed, A.D. 1554.

Johannes Filieul, or Filiolus, carpenter; and Julianus le Ville,
point-maker, at Sanserre, A.D. 1554. Their persecutors were Giles le
Hers, lieutenant for the marshal of St. Andrew, and inquisitor for
the province of Bourbon; and also John Bergeronius, another
inquisitor or counsellor.

     These two blessed and constant martyrs, as they were going
toward Geneva, with one of their sons and a daughter, were
apprehended by Giles le Pers; who, in the way overtaking them, and
most wickedly and Judasly pretending great favour to them, and to
their religion, which he (as he said) supposed them to be of, with
these and many other fair words circumvented and allured them to
confess, what was their faith? whither they went with their children?
and also that their wives were at Geneva? When they had declared
this, the wretched traitor gave a sign to his horsemen, and so were
these simple saints of Christ entrapped and brought to the castle of
Nivern. Being in prison, they were examined of many things, whereunto
they answered uprightly, according to their faith.

     First, touching the sacrament, they affirmed the
transubstantiation of the bishop of Rome to be against the article of
the Creed, which saith that Christ is gone up to heaven, and there
sitteth at the right hand of God:  and therefore the bread and the
wine must needs remain in their properties; bearing, notwithstanding,
a sacrament, or a holy sign, of the body and blood of the Lord. For
like as by bread and wine the heart of man is comforted, so the body
of Christ crucified, and his blood shed, spiritually hath the like
operation in the souls of the believers.

     For the mass, they said it was a thing most superstitious, and
mere idolatry; and if we put any part of salvation therein, (they
said,) it was utterly a robbing of the passion of Christ the Son of
God, and that it was not once to be named out of a Christian mouth.
Also, that those who say that Peter either was pope, or author of the
said mass, are far deceived. And as for turning bread into the body
of Christ by the words of consecration, it was an error (they said)
more of madmen, than any of sadmen:  forasmuch as God is neither
subject to men, nor to the tongues or exorcisms of men. Purgatory
they denied to be any, save only the blood of Jesus Christ.

     Furthermore, as they would not bereave the saints of God of
their due honour, so neither the saints themselves (said they) will
be contented to rob God of his honour only due to him.

     As touching confession, their opinion was, that the wounds and
causes of conscience belong to no man, but only to God.

     After these answers given and written, they were sent to the
monastery of St. Peter, there to be disputed with. That done, the
matter came to be debated among the judges, what was to be done with
them. Some would their goods to be taken by inventory, and them to be
banished. But Bergeronius at last caused to be determined, that they
should be burned, and first to hear mass. From that court they
appealed to the court of Paris; but the matter there was nothing
amended, where behold the judgment of God. In the mean time, while
they were at Paris, the wretched persecutor, Giles le Pers, was
suddenly struck mad and died in a frenzy; which made many men to
wonder, and especially the martyrs to be more constant.

     At last, the decree of the sentence was read against them.

     I. For speaking against the sacrament:  which they denied.

     II. For speaking against baptism:  which also they denied.

     III. For speaking contumely against the saints:  which they in
like manner denied.

     After this, the officer, to cause them to recant, threatened
them with torments, which they sustained very extreme, the space from
after dinner till three of the clock. When all that would not turn
them, he sent to them a friar Dominic, a man captious and
sophistical, to press them in disputation:  but as he could do no hurt
unto them, so could they do no good upon him. When the time of their
execution did approach, the officer aforesaid put into their hands,
being tied, a wooden cross, which they took with their teeth, and
flung away:  for which, the officer commanded both their tongues to be
cut off. Herein appeared another marvellous work of the Lord:  for
nevertheless that their tongues were taken from them, to the intent
they should not speak, yet God gave them utterance, their tongues
being cut out, to speak at their death, saying, "We bid sin, the
flesh, the world, and the devil, farewell for ever, with whom we
shall never have to do hereafter." Divers other words they spake
besides, which the people did hear and note. At last, when the
tormentor came to smear them with brimstone and gunpowder, "Go to,"
said Filiolus, "salt on, salt on the stinking and rotten flesh."
Finally, as the flame came bursting up to their faces, they,
persisting constant in the fire, gave up their lives, and finished
their martyrdoms.

Dionysius Vayre, at Rouen, A.D. 1554. Persecuted by William Langlois,
under-sheriff, and John Langlois, the king's procurator.

     In the same year suffered, at Rouen, Denis Vayre, who, first
leaving his popish priesthood, went to Geneva, where he learned the
art of bookbinding, and brought many times books into France. After
that, in the reign of King Edward the Sixth, he came to Jersey, and
there was minister, and preached. After the death of King Edward, the
time not serving him to tarry, thinking to return again to Geneva, he
came into Normandy with his books, into a town called Feueillet;
where he, going out to hire a cart, William Langlois, with John
Langlois his brother, came in and stayed his books, and him also who
had the custody of them. Denis, albeit he might have escaped, yet
hearing the keeper of his books to be in trouble, came, and
presenting himself, was committed; the other was delivered. First,
after two months and a half imprisonment, he was charged to be a spy,
because he came out of England. Then from that prison he was removed
to the bishop's prison, and then to Rouen; where sentence was given,
that he should be burned alive, and thrice lifted up and let down
again into the fire. After the sentence given, they threatened him
with many terrible torments, unless he would disclose such as he knew
of that side. To whom he answered, that the sounder part of all
France, and of the senate, was of that religion:  notwithstanding, he
would utter no man's name unto them. And as for their torments, he
said, he cared not; for if he were killed with racking, then he
should not feel the burning of the fire. When they saw him so little
to care for their torments, they left that, and proceeded to his
burning:  and first, they put a cross in his hands, which he would not
hold. Then because he, coming by the image of the Virgin Mary, would
not adore the same, they cried, "Cut out his tongue: " and so they
cast him into the fire, where he should be thrice taken up; but the
flame went so high, that the hangman, being not able to come near
him, cried to the people standing by to help, and so did the officers
with their staves lay upon the people, to help their tormentors, but
never a man would stir. And this was the end and martyrdom of that
blessed Denis.



158. MARTYRS IN FRANCE – II.


     There was a rich merchant of Paris, who said in jest to the
friars of St. Francis, "You wear a rope about your bodies, because
St. Francis once should have been hanged, and the pope redeemed him
upon this condition, that all his life after he should wear a rope."
Upon this the Franciscan Friars of Paris caused him to be apprehended
and laid in prison, and so judgment passed upon him that he should be
hanged:  but he, to save his life, was contented to recant; and so
did. The friars, hearing of his recantation, commended him, saying,
if he continued so, he should be saved; and so calling upon the
officers, caused them to make haste to the gallows, to hang him up
while he was yet in a good way, said they, lest he fall again. And so
was this merchant, notwithstanding his recantation, hanged for
jesting against the friars.

     To this merchant may also be adjoined the brother of Tamer,
who, when he had before professed the truth of the gospel, and
afterwards by the counsel and instruction of his brother was removed
from the same, fell in desperation and such sorrow of mind, that he
hanged himself.

Thomas Galbergne, a coverlet-maker, at Tournay, A.D. 1554.

     This Thomas had copied out certain spiritual songs out of a
book in Geneva, which he brought with him to Tournay, and lent the
same to one of his fellows. This book being espied, he was called for
by the justice, and examined of the book, which, he said, contained
nothing but that was agreeing to the Scripture; and that he would
stand by.

     Then he was had to the castle, and after nineteen days was
brought to the town-house, and there adjudged to the fire; whereunto
he went cheerfully, singing psalms. As he was in the flame, the
warden of the friars stood crying, "Turn, Thomas! Thomas! yet it is
time, remember him that came at the last hour." To whom he cried out
of the flame with a loud voice, "And I trust to be one of that sort;"
and so calling upon the name of the Lord, gave up his spirit.

     Add also to this, one Nicholas Paul, beheaded at Gaunt. These
two should have been placed among the Dutch martyrs in the table
before.

     Richard Feurus, a goldsmith, at Lyons, A.D. 1554. Persecuted by
the latrunculator, or under-marshal or examiner of Dauphine; also by
the lieutenant, and his attorney, and a scribe, with divers others.

     Feurus, a goldsmith, born at Rouen, first being in England, and
in London, there received the taste and knowledge of God's word, as
in his own epistle he recordeth. Then he went to Geneva, where he
remained nine or ten years; and from thence returning to Lyons, there
he was apprehended and condemned. Upon this he appealed to the high
court of Paris, through the motion of his friends; where, in the way,
as he was led to Paris, he was met by certain whom he knew not, and
by them taken from his keepers, and so set at liberty; which was A.D.
1551.

     After that, continuing at Geneva about the space of three
years, he came upon business to the province of Dauphine, and there,
as he found fault with the grace said in Latin, he was detected, and
taken in his inn at night, by the under-marshal, or him which had the
examination of malefactors. The next day he was sent to the justice,
from him to the bishop; who ridding their hands of him, then was he
brought to the lieutenant, who sent his advocate with a notary to him
in the prison, to examine him of his faith. The whole process of his
examinations, with his adversaries and the friars, in his story
described, is long; the principal contents come to this effect: 

     Inquisitor. "Dost thou believe the Church of Rome?"

     The martyr. "No, I do believe the catholic and universal
church."

     Inquisitor. "What catholic church is that?"

     The martyr. "The congregation or communion of Christians."

     Inquisitor. "What congregation is that, or of whom doth it
consist?"

     The martyr. "It consisteth in the number of God's elect, whom
God hath chosen to be the members of his Son Jesus Christ, of whom he
is also the head."

     Inquisitor. "Where is the congregation, or how is it known?"

     The martyr. "It is dispersed through the universal world, in
divers regions, and is known by the spiritual direction wherewith it
is governed, that is to say, both by the word of God, and by the
right institution of Christ's sacraments."

     Inquisitor. "Do you think the church that is at Geneva,
Lausanne, Berne, and such other places, to be a more true church than
the holy Church of Rome?"

     The martyr. "Yea, verily, for these have the notes of the true
church."

     Inquisitor. "What difference then make you between those
churches and the Church of Rome?"

     The martyr. "Much; for the Church of Rome is governed only with
traditions of men, but those are ruled only by the word of God."

     Inquisitor. "Where learned you this doctrine first?"

     The martyr. "In England; at London."

     Inquisitor. "How long have you been at Geneva?"

     The martyr. "About nine or ten years."

     Inquisitor. "Dost thou not believe the Virgin Mary to be a
mediatrix and advocate to God for sinners?"

     The martyr. "I believe, as in the word of God is testified,
that Jesus Christ is the only mediator and advocate for all sinners: 
albeit the Virgin Mary be a blessed woman, yet the office of an
advocate belongeth not unto her."

     Inquisitor. "The saints that be in paradise, have they no power
to pray for us?"

     The martyr. "No; but I judge them to be blessed, and to be
contented with the grace and glory which they have; that is, that
they be counted the members of the Son of God."

     Inquisitor. "And what then judge you of them who follow the
religion of the Church of Rome? think you them to be Christians?"

     The martyr. "No, for that Church is not governed with the
Spirit of God, but rather fighteth against the same."

     Inquisitor. "Do you then esteem all them who separate
themselves from the Church of Rome to be Christians?"

     The martyr. "I have not to answer for others, but only for
myself. Every man, saith St. Paul, shall bear his own burden."

     And thus the advocate, when he had asked him whether he would
put his hand to that he had said, and had obtained the same, departed
to dinner.

     At the next examination was brought unto him a Franciscan
Friar, who, first entering with him touching the words that he spake
in his inn, asked him, why grace might not be said in Latin?"
Because," said he, "by the word of God, Christians are commanded to
pray with heart and with spirit, and with that tongue which is most
understood, and serveth best to the edification of the hearers."

     Then the friar, bringeth forth his Benedicite, Agimus tibi
gratias, &c., Laus Deo, Pax, vivis, Requies defunctis, &c., began
thus to reason: 

     Friar. "God understandeth all tongues, and the Church of Rome
hath prescribed this form of praying, receiving the same from the
ancient church and the fathers, who used then to pray in Latin. And
if any tongue be to be observed in prayer, one more than another, why
is it not as good to pray in the Latin tongue, as to pray in the
French?"

     The martyr. "My meaning is not to exclude any kind of language
from prayer, whether it be Latin, Greek, Hebrew, or any other, so
that the same be understood, and may edify the hearers."

     Friar. "When Christ entered the city of Jerusalem, the people
cried, lauding him with Hosanna filio David; and yet understood they
not what they said, as Jerome writeth."

     The martyr. "It may be that Jerome so writeth, how they
understood not the prophetical meaning, or the accomplishment of
these words upon Christ's coming:  but that they understood the phrase
of that speech or language which they spake, speaking in their own
language, Jerome doth not deny."

     Then the friar, declaring that he was no fit person to expound
the Scriptures being in the Latin tongue, inferred the authorities of
councils and doctors, and testimonies of men; which seemed to move
the officer not a little, who, then charging him with many things, as
with words spoken in contempt of the Virgin Mary and of the saints,
also with rebellion against princes and kings, came at last to the
matter of the sacrament, and demanded thus: 

     Inquisitor. "Dost thou believe the holy host which the priest
doth consecrate at the mass or no?"

     The martyr. "I believe neither the host, nor any such
consecration."

     Inquisitor. "Why? dost thou not believe the holy sacrament of
the altar, ordained of Christ Jesus himself?"

     The martyr. "Touching the sacrament of the Lord's supper, I
believe that whensoever we use the same according to the
representation of St. Paul, we are refreshed spiritually with the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true spiritual
meat and drink of our souls."

     The friar then inferred the words of St. John's Gospel, saying,
My flesh is meat indeed, &c., and said, that the doctors of the
church had decided that matter already, and had approved the mass to
be a holy memorial of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

     The martyr. "The sacrament of the supper I believe to be
ordained of the Lord for a memorial of his death, and for a stirring
up of our thanksgiving to him; in which sacrament we have nothing to
offer up to him, but do receive with all thanksgiving the benefits
offered of God to us most abundantly in Christ Jesus his Son."

     And thus the advocate with the friar, bidding the notary to
write the words that he had spoken, departed; who after eight days,
being accompanied by the said Franciscan, and other friars more of
the Dominics, sent for the said Richard Feurus again to his house,
and thus began to inquire: 

     Inquisitor. "Dost thou believe any purgatory?"

     The martyr. "I believe that Christ with his precious blood hath
made an end of all purgatory, and purgation of our sins."

     Inquisitor. "And dost thou think then that there is no place
after this life, where souls of men departed remain till they have
made satisfaction for their sins?"

     The martyr. "No; but I acknowledge one satisfaction once made
for the sins of all men, by the blood and sacrifice of Jesus Christ
our Lord, which is the propitiation and purgation for the sins of the
whole world."

     Friar. "In Matthew xviii., Christ, speaking, by way of a
parable or similitude, of a certain cruel servant, who, because he
would not forgive his fellow servant, was cast into prison, saith,
That he shall not come out from thence till he hath paid the
uttermost farthing:  by which similitude is signified unto us a
certain middle place, which is left for satisfaction to be made after
this life for sins."

     The martyr. "First, the satisfaction for our sins by the death
of Christ is plain and evident in the Scriptures; as in these places: 
Come to me, all you that labour and be burdened, and I will refresh
you. I am the door, he that entereth by me, shall be saved. I am the
way, verity, and life. Blessed he they that die in the Lord, for they
rest from their labours. Also to the thief who hanged with the Lord,
it was said, This day thou shalt be with me in paradise, &c.
Secondly, as touching this similitude, it hath no other demonstration
but to admonish us of our duty, in showing charity, and forgiving one
another; which unless we do, there is no mercy to be looked for at 
the hands of God."

     Friar. "If this be true that you say, then it should follow
that there is neither purgatory nor any limbus, which were against
our Christian faith and our Creed, which saith, He descended into
hell," &c.

     Deputy. "Dost thou not believe there is a Limbus?"

     The martyr. "Neither do I believe there is any such place, nor
doth the Scripture make any mention thereof."

     Friar. "Where were the old fathers then, before the death of
Christ?"

     The martyr. "In life, I say, eternal, which they looked for,
being promised before to Adam, Abraham, and the patriarchs, in the
seed to come."

     Deputy. "What, dost thou believe that the pope hath any power?"

     The martyr. "Yea verily."

     Deputy. "Dost thou believe that the pope, as the vicar of Jesus
Christ, can here bind and loose?"

     The martyr. "That I do not believe."

     Deputy. "How then dost thou understand the power of the pope?"

     The martyr. "I understand the power of the pope so as St. Paul
declareth, 2 Thess., saying, that because the world refused to
receive the love of the truth unto salvation, therefore God hath
given to Satan, and to his ministers, power of illusions and errors,
that men should believe lies, and set up to themselves pastors and
teachers such as they deserve."

     Friar. "Christ gave to St. Peter power to bind and loose, whose
successor, and vicar of Christ, is the pope, for the government of
the church, that it might have one head in the world, as it hath in
heaven. And though the pastors do not live according to the word
which they preach, yet their doctrine is not therefore to be refused,
as Christ teacheth in the twenty-third of Matthew."

     The martyr. "If the pope and his adherents would preach the
word purely and sincerely, admixing no other inventions of their own,
nor obtruding laws of their own devising, I would then embrace their
doctrine, howsoever their lives were to the contrary:  according as
Christ doth tell us of the scribes and Pharisees, admonishing us to
follow their doctrine, and not their lives. But there is great
difference, whether they that take the governance of the church do
sit in Moses's chair, which is the seat of truth, or else do sit in
the chair of abomination, spoken of by Daniel, and also by St. Paul,
where he saith, that the man of perdition shall sit in the temple of
God, vaunting himself insolently above all that is called God.

     "And as touching the keys of binding and loosing, given to
Peter, Christ therein assigned to Peter and other apostles the office
of preaching the word of the gospel, which they did also well
observe, in preaching nothing else but only the word; in the which
word is all the power contained of binding and loosing. Neither is it
to be granted, the church to have two heads, one in heaven, another
in earth; the head whereof is but one, which is Jesus Christ, whom
the Father hath appointed to be head alone both in heaven and earth,
as St. Paul in many places of his Epistles doth teach."

     Friar. "You have no understanding how to expound the
Scriptures, but the old doctors have expounded the Scriptures, and
holy councils, whose judgments are to be followed. But what say you
to auricular confession?"

     The martyr. "I know no other confession but that which is to be
made to God, and reconciliation towards our neighbour, which Christ
and his apostles have commended to us."

     Friar. "Have you not read in the gospel, how Christ doth bid us
to confess to the priest, where he commanded the leper, being made
whole, to show himself to the priest?"

     The martyr. "The true church of the Lord Jesus Christ never
observed this strange kind of confession, to carry our sins to the
priest's ear. And though the Church of Rome hath intruded this manner
of confessing, it followeth not thereby that it is to be received.
And as touching the leper whom the Lord sent to the priest, he was
not sent therefore to whisper his sins in the priest's ear, but only
for a testimony of his health received according to the law.

     "Of the other confession which is to be made to God, we have
both the examples and testimonies of the prophet David full in the
Psalms, where he saith, that he confessed his sins unto the Lord, and
received forgiveness of the same."

     After this, the friar, proceeding further to make comparison
between the Church of Rome and the Church of Geneva, would prove that
the pope hath power to set laws in the church without any express
word of God:  for so it is written, said he, that there were many
other things besides, which are not written in this book. Also, where
Christ promiseth to his disciples, to send unto them the Holy Ghost,
which should induce them into all truth. Moreover, such decrees and
ordinances as are in the church, were decided, said he, and appointed
by the doctors of the church and by all the councils, directed, no
doubt, by the Holy Ghost. Furthermore he inferred, that the Church
also of Geneva had their ordinances and constitutions made without
any word of God. And for example, he brought forth the order of the
Psalms and service publicly observed and appointed upon Wednesday, in
the Church of Geneva, as though that day were holier than another.

     To this the martyr answered again, declaring that the ordinance
of those public prayers and psalms on Wednesday in the Church of
Geneva, was not to bind conscience, or for any superstitious
observation, or for any necessity which either should bind the
conscience, or could not be altered at their arbitrement; but only
for an order or commodity for public resort, to hear the word of God,
according as ancient kings and temporal magistrates have used in old
time to do, in congregating the people together; not to put any
holiness in the day, or to bind the conscience to any observation,
(as the pope maketh his laws,) but only for order's sake, serving
unto commodity.

     And as touching that any thing should be left for doctors and
councils to be decided, without the express word of God, that is not
so; for that all thingsbe expressed and prescribed by the word,
whatsoever is necessary either for government of the church, or for
the salvation of men; so that there is no need for doctors of the
church, or councils, to decide any thing more than is decided
already.

     Paul saith, that he durst utter nothing but what the Lord had
wrought by him. St. John, speaking of the doctrine of Christ Jesus,
willeth us to receive no man, unless he bring with him the same
doctrine. St. Paul warneth the Galatians, not to believe an angel
from heaven, bringing another doctrine than that which they had
already received. Christ, calling himself the good shepherd, noteth
them to be his sheep which hear his voice, and not the voice of
others. And St. Peter admonishing the pastors of the church,
forewarns them to teach only the word of God, without any seeking of
lordship or dominion over the flock. From this moderation how far the
form of the pope's church doth differ, the tyranny which they use
doth well declare.

     Friar. "In the old church priests and ministers of the church
were wont to assemble together for deciding of such things as
pertained to the government and direction of the church; whereas in
Geneva no such thing is used, as I can prove by this your own
testament here in my hands, that you the better may understand what
was then the true use and manner of the church."

     The martyr. "What was the true order and manner that the
apostles did institute in the church of Christ, I would gladly hear,
and also would desire you to consider the same; and when you have
well considered it, yet shall you find the institution and regiment
of the Church of Geneva, not to be without the public counsel and
advisement of the magistrates, elders and ministers of that church,
with such care and diligence as Paul and Silas took in ordering the
church of Thessalonica, Berea, &c., wherein nothing was done without
the authority of God's word, as appeareth in the 17th chapter of the
Acts. As likewise also in stablishing the church of Antioch, when the
apostles were together in council for the same, there was no other
law nor doctrine followed, but only the word of God, as may appear by
the words of the council, Quid tentatis Deum, jugum imponere? &c. And
albeit the ministers of the Church of Rome, and the pope, were not
called to the institution of the aforesaid Church of Geneva, yet it
followeth not therefore, that there was no lawful order observed,
either in establishing that church or any other."

     Friar. "You were first baptized in the church of the pope, were
ye not?"

     The martyr. "I grant I was, but yet that nothing hindereth the
grace of God; but he may renovate and call to further knowledge whom
he pleaseth."

     A councillor. "I would wish you not to stick to your own wisdom
and opinion. You see the churches in Germany, how they dissent one
from another; so that if you should not submit your judgment to the
authority of the general councils, every day you shall have a new
Christianity."

     The martyr. "To mine own wisdom I do not stick, nor ever will,
but only to that wisdom which is in Christ Jesus, although the world
doth account it foolishness. And where ye say, that the churches of
Germany dissent among themselves one from another; that is not so,
for they accord in one agreement altogether, touching the foundation
and principal grounds of Christian faith. Neither is there any such
fear that every day should rise up a new Christianity, unless the
church be balanced with authority of the councils, as you pretend.
For so we read in the prophet David, in Psalm xxxiii., and in other
places of Scripture more, that the councils of the nations and people
shall be overthrown and subverted by the Lord, &c. Wherefore the best
is, that we follow the counsel of God and his word, and prefer the
authority thereof before all other counsels and judgments of men. And
thus doing, I for my part had rather dwell and settle myself in this
little Christianity, be it ever so small, than in that populous
papality, be it ever so great in multitude."

     And thus was this godly Feurus commanded again by the deputy to
the bishop's prison, and from thence shortly after removed to Lyons,
not by the open and beaten way, but by secret and privy journeys,
lest perhaps he should be taken from them again, as he was before.

     After he was come to Lyons, he was brought before Tignatius the
judge, and a doctor of Sorbonne, called Furnosus, who questioned with
him touching sundry articles of religion. But in conclusion, when
they neither with arguments could convict him, nor with promises
allure him, nor with threatening terrors stir him, either to betray
the truth which he knew, or to bewray those whom he knew not, which
took him away before from his keepers, they proceeded at last to the
sentence, condemning him first to have his tongue cut out, and then
to be burned. All which he received willingly and quietly for
righteousness' sake, thus finishing his martyrdom, on the seventh of
July, A.D. 1554.

Nicholas du Chense, at Gry, near Besancon, A.D. 1554. Persecuted by
an inquisitor monk.

     The cause and occasion why this Nicholas came in trouble was,
for that he, going from Lausanne, (where he abode for his
conscience,) to fetch his sister, and her husband, and certain other
of his friends; as he went from Besancon, toward the town of Gry, did
not do homage to a certain cross in the way; where a certain monk,
who was an inquisitor, overtook him, and thereby suspected him. He
was guided by the same monk, craftily dissembling his religion, to a
lodging in Gry; where the justice of the place coming in incontinent
took him. Nicholas seeing how he was by the monk, his conductor,
betrayed; "O false traitor!" said he, "Hast thou thus betrayed me?"
Then after examination he was condemned. Being carried to the place
of martyrdom, by the way he was promised, that if he would kneel down
and hear a mass, he should be let go as a passenger. But Nicholas,
armed with perseverance, said, he would rather die than commit such
an act; who calling upon the name of the Lord, took his death
patiently.

John Bertrand, a forester, or keeper of the forest of Marchenoir, at
Blois, A.D. 1556. Persecutors:  The seigniors or lords of Estnay and
Ciguongnes, dwelling by the town of Marchenoir; and Denis Barbes,
councillor of Blois.

     For the religion and gospel of Christ this John was apprehended
by these persecutors here specified, and led bound to Blois, where he
was examined by Denis the councillor, of divers points:  as, whether
he had spoken at any time against God, against the church, and the
he-saints and the she-saints of paradise? whereunto he said, No.
Item, Whether at any time he had called the mass abominable? which he
granted, for that he, finding no mass in all the Scripture, was
commanded by St. Paul, that if an angel from heaven would bring any
other gospel besides that which was already received, he should
account it accursed. After his condemnation they would have him to be
confessed, and presented to him a cross to kiss:  but he bade the
friars with their cross depart; "That is not the cross," said he,
"that I must carry." Entering into the cart before the multitude, he
gave thanks to God, that he was not there for murder, theft, or
blasphemy, but only for the quarrel of our Saviour. Being tied to the
post, he sang Psalm xxv. Of age he was young, his countenance was
exceeding cheerful and amiable, his eyes looked up to heaven. "O the
happy journey," said he, seeing the place where he should suffer,
"and the fair place that is prepared for me! "When the fire was
kindled about him, "O Lord," cried he, "give thy hand to thy servant;
I commend my soul unto thee; "and so meekly yielded up his spirit: 
whose patient and joyful constancy so astonied the people, that of
long time before nothing did seem to them so admirable.

Peter Rousseau, A.D. 1556. Persecuted by his own brother-in-law.

     Peter Rousseau, coming from Geneva and Lausanne to his country,
partly to communicate with certain of his acquaintance in the word of
God, partly for other certain affairs, because he required his
inheritance of his brother-in-law, was by him betrayed. Then, being
constant in his confession which he offered up, he was put to the
rack three times, which he suffered constantly with great torments.
Afterward he had his tongue cut off, and a ball of iron put in his
mouth. He was drawn upon a hurdle, all broken and maimed, to the
fire, where he was lifted up into the air and let down three times;
and when he was half burned, the ball fell from his mouth, and he
with a loud voice called on the name of God, saying, "Jesus Christ,
assist me." And so this blessed martyr gave up his life to God.

Arnold Moniere, and John de Cazes, at Bourdeaux, A.D. 1556. The name
of his persecutor was Anthony de Lescure, the king's attorney.

     After that Arnold Moniere was taken and examined of the
justice, and so was laid in prison, John de Cazes, resorting to the
same town of Bourdeaux, and hearing of him, and being admonished
moreover, that if he went to him he should be impeached of heresy,
notwithstanding went to comfort him, and so was also imprisoned.
After many examinations, sentence was given upon them to be burned.
When the time came of their martyrdom, they were drawn through the
dirt upon a hurdle to the place, accompanied by a number of bills,
glaves, gunners, and trumpeters. Moreover, albeit there was no such
cause, (they being two simple poor men,) yet the magistrates
commanded (upon what occasion I know not) all the gates of the city
to be shut, and guarded with keepers. When the blessed martyrs were
brought and bound to the post, which was before the palace, they,
much rejoicing that they were made worthy to suffer for Christ, made
confession of their faith, and many earnest exhortations unto the
people. But, to stop the hearing of these saints, the trumpeters were
commanded to sound, who, during all the time of their suffering,
never ceased. The hangman, preparing himself first to strangle Cazes,
chanced to fall down from the top of the post to the pavement, and
brake his head in such sort as the blood followed in great quantity.
Notwithstanding, recovering himself, he went to Moniere, and him he
strangled, who patiently rendered up his life. Cazes, who was the
stronger of them both, being set on fire before the hangman came,
suffered the extremity of the fire with great pains, but greater
patience; for as his legs were almost half burnt, yet he endured,
crying, "My God! my Father! "and so gave up his life.

     And further, to note the work of God that followed when these
two mild and martyred saints were almost consumed in the fire to
ashes, suddenly, without matter or cause, such a fear fell upon them
at the execution, that the justices and the people, notwithstanding
that they had the gates locked to them, and were defended with all
manner of weapons about them, not knowing wherefore, took them to
their legs, in such haste fleeing away, that they overran one
another. The prior of St. Anthony's fell down, so that a great number
went over him. The judge Pontacke on his mule, with his red robe,
fleeing as the other did, was overthrown with the press in the street
called Poteuin, in such sort that he was fain to be carried to
Pichon's house, a widow, and there cried within, "Hide me; save my
life; I am dead! I see even the like matter as at the last commotion!
My friends! hide my mule, that no man see her nor know her." Briefly,
such was the fear which cane upon them, that every man shut up their
houses. After the fear was past, every man asked what the matter was,
but none could tell, neither could the enemies of God's truth
perceive, who was he that put them so to flight and fear, without any
semblance of any adversary about them. This story is testified, and
to be found both in the volume of the French martyrs, printed by John
Crispine, lib. vi., also in the book of Dutch martyrs, written by
Adrian.

Bartholomew Hector, at Turin, A.D. 1556. Persecuted by a gentleman
called Perriere; by M. Bartholomew Eme, president; and by M.
Augustine d'Eglise, councillor.

     First, this Hector was a traveller about the country, and a
seller of books, having his wife and children at Geneva. As he came
into the vale of Angrogne, in Piedmont, to get his living with
selling of books, he was taken by a certain gentleman, and there
arrested and sent to Turin, then examined, and at last condemned.
Being condemned, he was threatened, that if he spake any thing to the
people, his tongue should be cut off; nevertheless he ceased nothing
to speak. After his prayers made, wherein he prayed for the judges,
that God would forgive them, and open their eyes, he was offered his
pardon at the stake, if he would convert; which he refused. Then he
prepared himself to his death, which he took patiently:  whereat many
of the people wept, saying, "Why doth this man die, who speaketh of
nothing but God?"
Illustration:  Martyrs Burned at the Stake

Philip Cene, and James his fellow, at Dijon, A.D. 1557.

     This Philip Cene was an apothecary at Geneva. He was taken at
Dijon, and there imprisoned, and in the same town of Dijon he, with
one James his companion, was burned. As this Philip went to his death
singing psalms, the friar, standing by, stopped his mouth with his
hand. The most part of the people wept bitterly, saying, "Be of good
courage, brethren! be not afraid of this death;" which when one of
the adversary part heard, he said to one of the magistrates, "Do you
not see how almost the half part of the people is of their side, and
doth comfort them?"

Archambant Seraphon, and M. Nicholas du Rousseau, at Dijon, A.D.
1557.

     These two were in prison together with Philip and James above-
mentioned, at Dijon. Archambant, going about with a packet of pedlary
ware to get his living, and coming towards his wife, heard of certain
prisoners at Dijon, to whom he wrote, to comfort them with his
letters. The next day after, he was searched at Aussone, and letters
of certain scholars of Paris found about him. Then he was brought to
Dijon, where he, with the other, called M. Nicholas du Rousseau,
constantly suffered.

     The same Archambant had been also condemned three years before
at Toul, and as he was led to Bourdeaux, he escaped.

Philbert Hamlin, at Bourdeaux, A.D. 1557. Persecuted by the king's
attorney of Sainctes Ville.

     Philbert Hamlin first was a priest:  he then went to Geneva,
where he exercised printing, and sent books abroad. After that he was
made minister at the town of Allenart, in Saintonge, in which and in
other places more he did much good in edifying the people. At last he
was apprehended at Sainctes Ville, and with him his host, a priest,
whom he had instructed in the gospel; and after confession made of
his faith, he, with the said priest, was carried to Bourdeaux before
the president. As he was in prison on a Sunday, a priest came in with
all his furniture to say mass in the prison; whom Philbert, seeing to
be revested, came and plucked his garments from his back with such
zeal and vehemency, that the mass garments, with the chalice and
candlesticks, fell down and were broken; saying, "Is it not enough
for you to blaspheme God in churches, but you must also pollute the
prison with your idolatry?" The jailer, hearing of this, in his fury
laid upon him with his staff, and also complained of him; whereby he
was removed to the common prison, and laid in a low pit, laden with
great irons, so that his legs were swollen withal; and there
continued eight days. A little before, perceiving the priest his host
to decline from the truth, he did what he could to confirm him in the
same:  but when he knew he had flatly renounced Christ and his word,
he said unto him, "O unhappy and more than miserable! is it possible
for you to he so foolish, as for saving of a few days which you have
to live by the course of nature, so to start away, and to deny the
truth? Know you therefore, that although you have, by your
foolishness, avoided the corporal fire, yet your life shall be never
the longer; for you shall die before me, and God shall not give you
the grace that it shall be for his cause, and you shall be an example
to all apostates." He had no sooner ended his talk, but the priest,
going out of prison, was slain by two gentlemen which had a quarrel
to him:  whereof when Master Philbert had heard, he affirmed that he
knew of no such thing before, but spake as it pleased God to guide
his tongue. Whereupon immediately he made an exhortation of the
providence of God, which by the occasion hereof moved the hearts of
many, and converted them unto God.

     At last the aforesaid Philbert, after his condemnation, was had
to the place of his martyrdom before the palace; and as he was
exhorting the people, to the intent his words should not be heard,
the trumpets blew without ceasing. And so, being fastened to the
post, this holy martyr, praying and exhorting the people, was
strangled, and his body with fire consumed on Palm-Sunday eve.

Nicholas Sartorius, at Aost, by Piedmont, A.D. 1557. His persecutors
were Ripet, a secretary; Anthony Eschaux, bailiff; and the king's
procurator.

     Nicholas Sartorius, of the age of six and twenty years, born in
Piedmont, came to the parts of Chambery in Lent, where a certain
warden of the friars in the town of Aost had preached on Good Friday,
upon the passion. The report of which sermon being recited to this
Sartorius, by one that heard him, Sartorius reprehended the error and
blasphemies thereof, which were against the Holy Scriptures. Shortly
after, the party that told him went to a secretary, named Ripet, who
covertly came to entrap Nicholas, demanding him of the friar's
sermon:  "And did not our preacher," said he, "preach well?" "No,"
said Nicholas, "but he lied falsely." Ripet, entering further with
him, demanded, "And do you not believe the body of the Lord to be in
the host?" to whom Nicholas then answered again, "That is against our
Creed, which saith, that he ascended up and sitteth," &c.
Incontinently Ripet went to the friar and his companions, to cause
him to be apprehended. The friends of Nicholas, perceiving the
danger, willed him to avoid and save himself, and also accompanied
him out of the town about the space of three leagues. Then was great
pursuit made after him to all quarters, who at length was taken at
the town of St. Remy, at the foot of the mountain of Great St.
Bernard, where he was examined before Anthony Eschaux, bailiff of the
town, and other justices, before whom he answered with great boldness
for his faith. Then they brought him to the rack, and when the
serjeant refused to draw the cord, the bailiff himself, and the
receiver, with a canon, did rack him with their own hands.
Notwithstanding that the lords of Berne wrote for him to the town of
Aost, requiring to have their own subject delivered unto them, they
hastened the execution, and pronounced sentence that he should be
burned; which sentence he received with such constancy, that neither
the king's receiver, nor all the other enemies, could divert him from
the truth of the gospel, which he manfully maintained while any
spirit remained in his body.

George Tardif, with one of Tours, an embroiderer; also Nicholas, a
shoemaker, of Jenvile, at Tours, A.D. 1558.

     The printer of the story of the French martyrs, named Crispine,
among others maketh also memorial of George Tardif, an embroiderer of
Tours, and of Nicholas of Jenvile, declaring that all these three
were together in prison, and afterwards were dissevered, to suffer in
sundry places one from the other; of whom, first, George Tardif was
executed in Sens.

     The embroiderer of Tours, as he was coming with five or six
others out of a wood, being at prayer, was taken, and thereupon
examined. Before he should be examined, he desired the judges that he
might pray; which being granted, after his prayer made, wherein he
prayed for the judges, for the king, and all estates, and for the
necessity of all Christ's saints, he answered for himself with such
grace and modesty, that the hearts of many were broken, unto the
shedding of tears; seeking (as it seemed) nothing else but his
deliverance. Notwithstanding he at last was sent unto Tours, and
there was crowned with martyrdom.

     The third, who was Nicholas, being but young of years, and
newly come from Geneva to his country, for certain money, by means of
a lady there dwelling, was caused to be apprehended. When he was
condemned and set in a cart, his father, coming with a staff, would
have beaten him, but the officers not suffering it, would have struck
the old man. The son, crying to the officers, desired them to let his
father alone, saying, that his father had power over him to do with
him what he would. And going to the place where he should suffer,
having a ball of iron put in his mouth, he was brought at length to
the fire, in the town of Jenvile, where he patiently took his death
and martyrdom, A.D. 1558.

The Congregation of Paris persecuted, to the number of three or four
hundred, A.D. 1558; by the priests of the college of Plessis; the
doctors of Sorbonne; Dr. Demochares; Cenalis, bishop of Auranches;
Martin, the king's attorney; the cardinal of Lorraine; Maillard; and
lastly, Henry the Second, the French king.

     In 1558, the fourth of September, a company of the faithful, to
the number of three or four hundred, were together convented at
Paris, in a certain house having before it the college of Plessis, in
the street of St. James, and behind it the college of Sorbonne, who
there assembled in the beginning of the night, to the intent to
communicate together the Lord's supper:  but incontinently that was
discovered by certain priests of Plessis, who, gathering together
such as were of that faction, came to beset the house, and made an
outcry, that the watch might come and take them; so that in short
time almost all the city of Paris was up in armour, thinking some
conspiracy to have been in the city; who then following the noise,
and perceiving that they were Lutherans, a great part of them were in
extreme rage, furiously seeking to have their blood, and therefore
stopped the streets and lanes with carts, and made fires to see that
none should escape. The faithful, albeit God had given them leisure
to finish their administration and prayers with such quietness as
they never had better, seeing the suddenness of the thing, were
struck with great fear; who then, being exhorted by the governors of
the congregation, fell to prayer. That done, through the counsel of
some who knew the cowardly hearts of the multitude, this order was
taken, that the men who had weapons should adventure through the
press. Only the women and children remained in the house, and a few
men with them who were less bold than the others, to the number of
six or seven score. Where appeared the admirable power of God in them
that went out with weapons, who, notwithstanding that the lanes and
passages were stopped, and the fires made, did all escape save only
one, who was beaten down with stones, and so destroyed. Certain that
remained in the house with the women, afterwards leaped into gardens,
where they were stayed till the magistrates came. The women, who were
all gentlewomen, or of great wealth, only six or seven excepted,
seeing no other hope, and perceiving the fury of the people, went up
to the windows, crying, "Mercy!" and showing their innocent intent,
required ordinary justice. Thus as they were enclosed about six or
seven hours, at last came Martin the king's attorney, with force of
commissaries and serjeants, who, with much ado appeasing the outrage
of the people, entered into the house; where he, viewing the women
and children, and the other furniture there being prepared for that
congregation, perceived testimonies sufficient of their innocency,
insomuch that in considering thereof, for pity of heart his eyes
could not refrain from tears. Notwithstanding, proceeding in his
office, he had them all to prison within the little castle. I omit
here the furious usage of the people by the way, how despitefully
they plucked and haled the women, tore their garments, thrust off
their hoods from their heads, and disfigured their faces with dust
and dirt. Neither were they better treated in prison than they were
in the streets; for all the villains and thieves there were let out
of their holes and stinking caves, and the poor Christians placed in
their room.

     Besides these manifold wrongs and oppressions done to these
poor innocents, followed then (which was worst of all) the cruel and
slanderous reports of the friars and priests, who, in their railing-
sermons, and other talk, cried out on the Lutherans, persuading the
people most falsely, that they assembled together to make a banquet
in the night, and there, putting out the candles, they intended to
commit most filthy abominations:  adding moreover, (to make the lie
more likely,) that certain nuns also and monks were with them. Also
that they should conspire against the king, and other like heinous
crimes, whatsoever their malice could invent for defacing of the
gospel. With such-like malicious misreports and slanders, Satan went
about to extinguish the ancient church of Christ in the primitive
time, accusing the innocent Christians then of incest, conspiracy,
killing of infants, putting out of candles, and filthy whoredom, &c.
These sinister rumours and cursed defamations were no sooner given
out, but they were as soon received, and spread far, not only to them
of the vulgar sort, but also among the estates of the court, and even
to the king's ears. The cardinal of Lorraine the same time bare a
great sway in the court, who then procured a certain judge of the
castle to come in, declaring to the king, that he found there lying
on the floor of the aforesaid house divers couches and pallets, which
they intended to use for evil purposes; also much other furniture and
preparation appointed for a sumptuous feast or banquet:  wherewith the
king was mightily inflamed against them, neither was there any one
person that durst contrary it.

     Here the enemies began highly to triumph, thinking verily that
the gospel, with all the friends thereof, was overthrown for ever. On
the other side, no less perplexity and lamentation were among the
brethren, sorrowing not so much for themselves, as for the
imprisonment of their fellows. Albeit they lost not their courage so
altogether, but, as well as they could, they exhorted one another,
considering the great favour and providence of God, in delivering
them so wonderfully out of the danger. Some comfort they took unto
them, consulting together in this order, that first they should
humble themselves to God in their own private families:  secondly, to
stop the running bruits of their holy assemblies, they should write
apologies, one to the king, another to the people:  thirdly, that
letters of consolation should be written and sent to their brethren
in prison.

     The first apology was written to the king, and conveyed so
secretly into his chamber, that it was found and read openly in the
hearing of the king and all his nobles:  wherein the Christians
learnedly and discreetly both cleared themselves of those reports,
and showed the malice of their enemies, especially of Satan, who
ever, from the beginning of the church, hath gone, and still doth go,
about to overrun the right way of the Lord. Declaring further, by
manifold examples and continual experience, even from the primitive
time, how the nature of the church hath ever been to suffer
vexations, and slanderous reports and infamation by the malignant
adversaries, &c. And lastly, coming to the king, they craved that
their cause might not be condemned, before it had had indifferent
hearing, &c.

     Nevertheless, this apology to the king served to little
purpose; forasmuch as the adversaries incontinently denied all that
was written to the king, making him to believe, that all were but
excuses pretended; neither was there any person that durst reply
again. But the other apology, to the people, did inestimable good, in
satisfying the rumours, and defending the true cause of the gospel.
Whereupon certain doctors of Sorbonne began to write both against the
apology and the persons, of whom one was called Demochares, who,
taking for his foundation, without any proof, that they were all
heretics, cried out for justice, with bills, glaves, fire, and sword.

     Another Sorbonist, more bloody than the first, not only
exclaimed against them for putting out the candles in their
detestable concourses and assemblies, but also accused them as men
who maintained that there was no God, and denied the Divinity and
humanity of Christ, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of
the flesh; and briefly, all the articles of true religion. And thus
he charged them without any proof, moving both the king and people,
without any form of law, to destroy and cut them in pieces, &c.

     The third that wrote against them was Cenalis, bishop of
Avranches, who debated the same matter, but with less vehemency than
the others, defending impudently, that their assemblies were to
maintain whoredom; complaining of the judges because they were no
sharper with them, saying, that their softness was the cause why the
number of them so much increased. Among other points of his book this
one thing he disputeth marvellous pleasantly, touching the signs and
marks of the true church; first, presupposing this one thing, which
is true, that the true church hath its signs, by the which it may be
known from the false church:  and thereupon (making no mention at all
either of preaching, or ministration of sacraments) thus he
inferreth:  that their church, which was the catholic church, had
bells by which their assemblies be ordinarily called together; and
the other church, which is of the Lutherans, hath claps of
harquebusses and pistolets for signs, whereby they (as it is commonly
bruited) are wont to congregate together. Upon this supposal, as upon
a sure foundation, he grounding his matter, he vaunted and triumphed
as one having gotten a great conquest, and made a long antithesis or
comparison, by which he would prove that bells were the mark of the
true church. "The bells," said he, "do sound; the harquebusses do
crack or thunder. The bells do give a sweet tune and melodious; the
signs of the Lutherans make a foul noise and terrible. The bells do
open heaven; the others do open hell. Bells chase away clouds and
thunder; the others engender clouds, and counterfeit thunder;" with
many other properties more, which he brought out to prove that the
Church of Rome is the true church, because it hath those bells.

     Mark, good reader! the profound reasons and arguments which
these great doctors had, either to defend their own church, or to
impugn the apologies of the Christians.

     Briefly, to finish the residue of this story:  as the faithful
Christians were thus occupied in writing their apologies, and in
comforting their brethren in prison with their letters, the
adversaries again with their faction were not idle, but sought all
means possible to hasten forward the execution, giving diligent
attendance about the prison and other open places, to satisfy their
uncharitable desire with the death of those whose religion they
hated.

     Finally, the seventeenth day of September, commission was
directed out by the king, and certain presidents and councillors
appointed to oversee the expedition of the matter. Whereupon divers
of the poor afflicted gospellers were brought forth to their judgment
and martyrdom, as anon, Christ willing, you shall hear.

     Henry Pantaleon, partly touching this persecution of the
Parisians, referreth the time thereof to A.D. 1557, which the French
chronicles do assign to the year 1558; and addeth moreover, that the
Germans being at the same time in a certain colloquy at Worms, divers
learned men resorted thither from Geneva and other quarters, desiring
of the princes and protestants there, that they, by their ambassadors
sent to the French king, would become suitors unto him for the
innocent prisoners, who, for the cause abovesaid, were detained in
bands at Paris. By the means of their intercession, (saith he,) and
especially for that the French king was then at war, as God provided,
with Philip king of Spain, a great part of the captives were rescued
and delivered; albeit certain of the said number were executed before
the coming of the German ambassadors, the names and martyrdom of whom
hereunder do ensue.

Nicholas Clinet, at Paris, A.D. 1558. Persecuted by certain priests
of the college of Plessis; and by Dr. Maillard, Sorbonist.

     Of this godly company thus brought to judgment and to
martyrdom, the first was Nicholas Clinet, of the age of sixty years,
who first being a schoolmaster to youth at Saintonge, where he was
born, was there pursued, and had his image burned. From thence he
came to Paris, where, for his godly conversation, he was made one of
the elders or governors of the church. For his age he was suspected
of the judges to be a minister, and therefore was set to dispute
against the chiefest of the Sorbonists, and especially Maillard, whom
he did so confute both in the Scriptures, and also in their own
Sorbonical divinity, (wherein he had been well exercised and expert,)
in the presence of the lieutenant-civil, that the said lieutenant
confessed that he never heard a man better learned, and of more
intelligence.

Taurin Gravelle, a lawyer, at Paris, A.D. 1558.

     Persecuted by Dr. Maillard, a Sorbonist.

     Taurin Gravelle first was a student of the law at Toulouse: 
after that he was made an advocate in the court of Paris:  lastly, for
his godliness, he was ordained an elder to the said congregation,
with Clinet above mentioned. This Taurin, having in his hands the
keeping of a certain house of one M. Barthomier, his kinsman, and
seeing the congregation destitute of a room, received them into the
said house. And when he perceived the house to be compassed with
enemies, albeit he might have escaped with the rest, yet he would
not, but did abide the adventure, to the intent he would answer for
the fact, in receiving the said assembly into the house. The
constancy of this man was invincible, in sustaining his conflicts
with the Sorbonists. With Dr. Maillard, especially, he was of old
acquaintance, whom he did know so well, even from his youth upwards,
that whensoever the said doctor would open his mouth to speak against
the saints for their nightly assemblies, he again did reproach him
with such filthy acts, &c., that neither they who heard could abide
it, neither yet could he deny it, being so notorious that almost all
the children in the streets did know it; and yet that Sorbonical
doctor shamed not to impeach good men of immorality, for their godly
assemblies in the night; whose life was as far from all chastity, as
were their holy assemblies clear from all impurity. In fine, these
two godly elders, in cruel pains of the fire, finished their
martyrdom.

Philippe de Luns, a gentlewoman, at Paris, A.D. 1558. Persecuted by
the lieutenant-civil; Dr. Maillard, Sorbonist; Mosnier, lieutenant;
evil neighbours; Bertrand, lord-keeper of the seal, and cardinal of
Sens; and the marquis of Trane.

     Next unto these abovesaid, was brought out Mme. Philippe,
gentlewoman, of the age of twenty-three years. She came first from
the parts of Gascony with her husband, who was lord of Graveron, unto
Paris, there to join herself to the church of God, where her husband
also had been a senior or elder; who, in the month of May before, was
taken with an ague, and deceased, leaving this Philippe a widow, who
nevertheless ceased not to serve the Lord in his church, and also in
the house was taken with the said company. Many conflicts she had
with the judges and the Sorbonists, especially Maillard; but she
always sent him away with the same reproach as the others did before,
and bade him, "Avaunt wretch!" saying she would not answer one word
to such a villain. To the judges her answer was this:  that she had
learned the faith which she confessed in the word of God, and in the
same would live and die. And being demanded whether the body of
Christ was in the sacrament:  "How is that possible," said she, "to be
the body of Christ, to whom all power is given, and which is exalted
above all heavens, when we see the mice and rats, apes and monkeys,
play with it, and tear it in pieces?" Her petition to them was, that
seeing they had taken her sister from her, yet they would let her
have a Bible or Testament to comfort herself. Her wicked neighbours,
although they could touch her conversation with no part of
dishonesty, yet many things they laid to her charge, as that there
was much singing of psalms in her house, and that twice or thrice an
infinite number of persons were seen to come out of her house. Also
when her husband was dying, no priest was called for; neither was it
known where he was buried; neither did they ever hear any word of
their infant to be baptized, for it was baptized in the church of the
Lord. Among her other neighbours that came against her, two there
were dwelling at St. Germain in the suburbs; between whom,
incontinent, arose a strife, wherein one of them struck the other
with a knife. The death of this gentlewoman was the more hastened of
the lord-keeper of the seal, Bertrand, cardinal of Sens, and his son-
in-law, the marquis of Trane, for to have the confiscation of her
goods.

     These three holy martyrs above recited, were condemned on the
twenty-seventh of September, by the process of the commissioners and
the lieutenant-civil:  and then being put in a chapel together,
certain doctors were sent to them, but their valiant constancy
remained unmovable. After that they were had out of their prison, and
sent every one in a dung-cart to the place of punishment. Clinet ever
cried by the way, protesting, that he said or maintained nothing but
the verity of God. And being asked of a doctor, whether he would
believe St. Austin, touching certain matters? he said, "Yea;" and
that he had said nothing but what he would prove by his authority.

     The gentlewoman, seeing a priest come to confess her, said,
that she had confessed unto God, and had received of him remission: 
other absolution she found none in Scripture. And when certain
councillors did urge her to take in her hands the wooden cross,
according to the custom of them that go to their death, alleging how
Christ commanded every one to bear his cross, she answered, "My
lords!" said she, "you make me in very deed to bear my cross,
condemning me unjustly, and putting me to death in the quarrel of my
Lord Jesus Christ, who willeth us to bear our cross, but no such
cross as you speak of."

     Gravelle looked with a smiling countenance, and showed a
cheerful colour, declaring how little he passed for his condemnation;
and being asked of his friends to what death he was condemned, "I see
well," said he, "that I am condemned to death, but to what death or
torment I regard not." And coming from the chapel, when he perceived
they went about to cut out his tongue, unless he would return, he
said, that was not so contained in the arrest, and therefore he was
unwilling to grant unto it; but afterward, perceiving the same so to
be agreed by the court, he offered his tongue willingly to be cut,
and incontinent spake plainly these words:  "I pray you pray to God
for me."

     The gentlewoman also, being required to give her tongue, did
likewise, with these words:  "Seeing I do not stick to give my body,
shall I stick to give my tongue? No, no." And so these three, having
their tongues cut out, were brought to Maulbert Place. The constancy
of Gravelle was admirable, casting up his sighs and groanings to
heaven, declaring thereby his ardent affection by praying to God.
Clinet was somewhat more sad than the other, by reason of the
feebleness of nature and his age. But the gentlewoman yet surmounted
all the rest in constancy, which neither changed countenance nor
colour, being of an excellent beauty.

     After the death of her husband, she used to go in mourning
weed, after the manner of the country; but the same day, going to her
burning, she put on her French hood, and decked herself in her best
array, as going to a new marriage, the same day to be joined to her
spouse Jesus Christ. And thus these three, with singular constancy,
were burned:  Gravelle and Clinet were burned alive; Philippe, the
gentlewoman, was strangled, after she had a little tasted the flame
with her feet and visage; and so she ended her martyrdom.

Nicholas Cene and Peter Gabart, at Paris, A.D. 1558. Their
persecutors:  the lieutenant, Dr. Maillard, councillors, and friars.

     Of the same company was also Nicholas Cene, a physician,
brother to Philip Cene above mentioned, and martyred at Dijon, and
Peter Gabart; which two, about five or six days after the other three
before, were brought forth to their death, on the second of October.

     Nicholas Cene was but newly come to Paris the same day, when he
was advertised of the assembly which then was congregated in the
street of St. James; and (as he desired nothing more than to hear the
word of God) came thither even as he was, booted, and was also with
them apprehended, sustaining the cause of God's holy gospel unto
death.

     The other was Peter Gabart, a solicitor of processes, about the
age of thirty years, whose constancy did much comfort the prisoners.
He was put among a great number of scholars in the little castle,
whom when he heard to pass the time in talking of philosophy, "No,
no," said he, "let us forget these worldly matters, and learn how to
sustain the heavenly cause of our God, which lies here in defence of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ our Saviour." And so he began to instruct
them how to answer to every point of Christian doctrine, as well as
if he had done no other thing in all his life, but only studied
divinity; and yet was he but very simply learned. Then was he sent
from them apart to another prison, full of filthy stench and vermin;
where, notwithstanding, he ceased not to sing psalms, that the others
might well hear him. He had a nephew in prison by, being but a child,
of whom he asked what he had said to the judges? He said, that he was
constrained to do reverence to a crucifix, painted. "O thou naughty
boy!" said he, "have not I taught thee the commandments of God?
Knowest thou not how it is written, Thou shalt not make to thyself
any graven image," &c. And so began to expound to him the
commandments; whereunto he gave good attention.

     In their examinations, many questions were propounded by the
doctors and friars, touching matters both of religion, and also to
know of them what gentlemen and gentlewomen were there present at the
ministration of the sacrament:  whereunto they answered in such sort,
as was both sufficient for defence of their own cause, and also to
save their other brethren from blame, saying that they would live and
die in what they had said and maintained.

     When the time of their execution was come, they perceived that
the judges had intended, that if they would relent, they should be
strangled; if not, they should burn alive, and their tongues be cut
from them:  which torments being content to suffer for our Saviour
Jesus Christ, offered their tongues willingly to the hangman to be
cut. Gabart began a little to sigh, for that he might no more praise
the Lord with his tongue; whom then Cene did comfort. Then were they
drawn out of prison in the dung-cart to the suburbs of St. Germain;
whom the people in rage and madness followed with cruel injuries and
blasphemies, as though they would have done the execution themselves
upon them, maugre the hangmen. The cruelty of their death was such as
hath not lightly, been seen; for they were holden long in the air
over a small fire, and their lower parts burnt off, before the higher
parts were much harmed with the fire. Nevertheless these blessed
saints ceased not in all these torments to turn up their eyes to
heaven, and to show forth infinite testimonies of their faith and
constancy.

     In the same fire many Testaments and Bibles at the same time
also were burnt.

     Upon the sight of this cruelty, the friends of the other
prisoners who remained behind, fearing the tyranny of these judges,
presented certain causes of refusal against the said judges,
requiring other commissioners to be placed. But the king, being
hereof advertised by his solicitor, sent out his letters patent,
commanding the said causes of refusal to be frustrated, and willed
the former judges to proceed, all other lets and obstacles to the
contrary notwithstanding:  and that the presidents should have power
to choose to them other councillors, according to their own
arbitrement, to supply the place of such as were absent; amongst whom
also the said solicitor was received, instead of the king's
procurator, to pursue the process. By these letters patent it was
decreed, that these stubborn Sacramentaries (as they were called)
should be judged accordingly, save only that they should not proceed
to the execution, before the king were advertised. These letters
aforesaid stirred up the fire of this persecution not a little, for
that the judges at this refusal took great indignation, and were
mightily offended for that reproach. Notwithstanding so it pleased
God, that a young man, a German, called Albert Hartung, born in the
country of Brandenburg, and godson to Albert, marquis of Brandenburg,
by the king's commandment was delivered, through the importunate suit
of the said marquis.

Frederic Danville, and Francis Rebezies, at Paris, A.D. 1558.
Persecutors:  two presidents, twenty-five councillors, the lieutenant-
civil, doctors, friars, Sorbonists, Benedict, Jacobin, Demochares,
and Maillard.

     Mention was made above of certain young scholars and students
who were in the little castle with Peter Gabart. Of the which number
of scholars were these two, Frederic Danville and Francis Rebezies,
neither of them being past twenty years of age. How valiantly they
behaved themselves in those tender years, sustaining the quarrel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, what confession they made, what conflicts they
had, disputing with the doctors of Sorbonne, their own letters left
in writing do make record; the effect whereof briefly to touch is
this:  and first touching Frederic Danville.

     The lieutenant-civil, who before was half suspected, but now,
thinking to prove himself a right catholic, and to recover his
estimation again, came to him, beginning with these words of
Scripture, "Whosoever denieth me before men, him will I deny before
my Father," &c.:  that done, he asked him what he thought of the
sacrament. To whom Frederic answered, that if he should think Christ
Jesus to be between the priest's hands after the sacramental words,
(as they call them,) then should he believe a thing contrary to the
Holy Scripture, and to the Creed, which saith that he sitteth on the
right hand of the Father:  also to the testimony of the angels, who
spake both of the ascending of Christ, and of his coming down again.
After this he questioned with him touching invocation of saints,
purgatory, &c., whereunto he answered so that he rather did astonish
the enemies, than satisfy them.

     Furthermore, on the twelfth of September, the said Frederic
again was brought before Benedict Jacobin, and his companion, a
Sorbonist, called Nos-ter Magister; who thus began to argue with him.

     The doctor. "What think you to be the true church, the church
of the protestants, or the church of Paris?"

     The martyr. "I recognise that to be the true church where the
gospel is truly preached, and the sacraments rightly administered, so
as they be left by Jesus Christ and his apostles."

     Doctor. "And is the church, think you, of Geneva such a one as
you speak of?"

     The martyr. "I so judge it to be."

     Doctor. "And what if I do prove the contrary, will you believe
me?"

     The martyr. "Yea, if you will prove it by the Scripture."

     Doctor. "Or will you believe St. Austin and other holy doctors
innumerable?"

     The martyr. "Yea, so they dissent not from the Scripture and
the word of God."

     Doctor. "By the authority of St. Austin the church is there
where is the succession of bishops; whereunto I frame this argument: 
There is the church, where is the perpetual succession of bishops:  in
the church of Paris is such succession of bishops:  ergo, the church
of Paris is the true church."

     The martyr. "To your major I answer, that if St. Austin mean
the succession of such as are true bishops indeed, who truly preach
the gospel, and rightly administer the sacraments, such bishops I
suppose to be at Geneva, where the gospel is truly preached, and the
sacraments duly administered, and not in the church of Paris. But
otherwise, if St. Austin mean the succession of false bishops, such
as neither preach nor minister according to God's word, so is the
same in no wise to be granted."

     Doctor. "Calvin is there by his own thrusting in, and only by
the choosing of the people."

     The martyr. "And that soundeth more for him to be of God's
divine election, forasmuch as by him the gospel of God is preached
truly, and from this no man shall bring me."

     After this disceptation, the ninth of the same month came
against him another doctor with two Sorbonists, who bringing forth a
scroll out of his bosom, pretended that a certain scholar, coming
from Geneva, made his confession, wherein was contained, that in
receiving of the bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ is
received really. Whereupon they demanded of him, whether he would
receive the same confession.

     The martyr. "Whatsoever I have said unto you, that will I hold.
And as touching this word really, I know right well, that they of
Geneva do not take it for any carnal presence, as you do; but their
meaning is, to exclude thereby only a vain imagination."

     Doctor. "I marvel much that you so refuse the word really, and
use only spiritually, seeing that Calvin himself doth use the same
word really."

     The martyr. "Calvin meaneth thereby no other thing but as we
do."

     Doctor. "What say you of confession auricular?"

     The martyr. "The same that I said before to Monsieur
Lieutenant, that is, that I take it for a plantation, not planted by
God in his word."

     Doctor. "The Almains, in their confession which they sent to
our king to be approved, have these words:  We do not reject auricular
confession; for it is a gospel secret and privy. And also Melancthon,
in his Book of Common Places, doth call it Evangelium Secretum."

     Another time the said Frederic was called again before the
lords, the twentieth of the said month, where they did nothing but
demand of him certain questions, as where he was born, and whether he
had heard in his country at Oleron, that M. Gerard, the bishop there,
did sing mass. "Yea," said he. "And why do not you also," said they,
"receive the same?" He answered, "Because he did it, to retain and
keep his bishopric." The martyr, for lack of paper, could proceed
herein no further.

The examinations of the aforesaid Francis Rebezies.

     Rebezies had three sundry examinations:  the first with the
lieutenant-civil; the second with the presidents and the councillors;
the third with the friars. First, the lieutenant, inquiring of his
name, country, and parents, asked whether he was at the communion,
whether he received with them the bread and wine, and whether he was
a servitor to M. Nicholas Cene, senior of the congregation? Whereunto
he said, "Yea." Also whether he was a distributor of the tokens,
whereby they were let in that came? That he denied.

     Then he was brought into the council chamber, before two
presidents, and twenty-five councillors; who, after other questions
about his country and parents, demanded whether he was taken with
them in the house? He answered, Yea. What he had to do there? To hear
the word of God, and to receive with them. Who brought him thither?
Himself. Whom there he knew? No man. How he durst, or would enter,
knowing no person there? Truth it was, (said he,) that he knew there
two or three. Who were they? M. Gravelle, Clinet, and John Sansot,
feigning that name of himself. Whether he knew the preacher? That he
denied. Whether he allowed the act there done to be good? Yea.
Whether he did not better like to resort unto their beautified
temples, to hear mass, or whether he did not take the mass to be a
holy thing, and ordained of God? He answered again contrary,
believing that it was a great blasphemy against God, and a service 
set up of the devil. Whether he did not acknowledge purgatory? Yea,
that purgatory, which is the death and passion of Christ, which
taketh away the sins of the whole world. The death of Christ is the
principal thing, (said they,) but thou must also believe another.
Alas, (said he,) can we never content ourselves with the simplicity
of the gospel, but man always will be putting to something of his own
brain:  in so many places of the Scripture we see the blood of Jesus
Christ to be sufficient, as John i., Apocalypse v., Hebrews ix.,
Isaiah xliii., where the Lord himself saith, that it is he, who, for
his own sake, putteth away our iniquities, &c. As St. Paul also
saith, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself,
&c. And on the contrary, when they objected the words of the parable,
Thou shalt not come out till thou hast paid the last farthing:  to
this he answered, that the words of that parable had no such
relation, but to matters civil; and this word "until" meaneth there,
as much as never.

     After that he was charged there by one, for reading the books
of Calvin, Bucer, and Bullinger. The president asked, if he were not
afraid to be burned as were the others before, and to bring his
parents into such dishonour? He answered, that he knew well, that all
who would live godly in Christ Jesus should suffer persecution; and
that to him either to live or to die were advantage in the Lord. And
as touching his parents, Christ himself (said he) doth premonish,
that whosoever loveth father or mother more than him, is not worthy
to be his, &c. "Jesus Maria!" said the president, "what youth are
these now-a-days, who cast themselves so headlong into the fire! "And
so was he commanded away.

     Thirdly, He was brought before Benet, master of the doctors of
Sorbonne, and another called Jacobin, on the fourteenth of October;
where he chancing to speak of the Lord, the doctor began thus to
object as followeth: 

     The doctor. "See how you, and all such as are of your company,
simply name the Lord, without putting to the pronoun, our. So may the
devils well call the Lord, and tremble before his face."

     The martyr. "The devils call the Lord in such sort as the
Pharisees did, when they brought the adulteress before him, and
called him master; yet neither attended they to his doctrine, nor
intended to be his disciples:  whose case I trust is nothing like to
ours, which know, and confess (as we speak) him to be the true Lord
with all our heart, so as true Christians ought to do."

     Doctor. "I know well you hold the church to be, where the word
is truly preached, and the sacraments are sincerely administered,
according as they are left by Christ and his apostles."

     The martyr. "That do I believe, and in that will I live and
die."

     Doctor. "Do you not believe that whosoever is without that
church, cannot obtain remission of his sins?"

     The martyr. "Whosoever doth separate himself from that church,
to make either sect, part, or division, cannot obtain, as you say."

     Doctor. "Now let us consider two churches, the one wherein the
word is rightly preached, and the two sacraments are administered
accordingly as they be left unto us:  the other, wherein the word and
sacraments be used contrarily. Which of these two ought we to
believe?"

     The martyr. "The first."

     Doctor. "Well said. Next is now to speak of the gifts given to
the said church:  as the power of the keys, and confession for
remission of sins after we be confessed to a priest. Also we must
believe the seven sacraments in the same church truly administered,
as they be here in the churches of Paris, where the sacrament of the
altar is ministered, and the gospel is truly preached."

     The martyr. "Sir, now you begin to halt. As for my part, I do
not receive in the church more than two sacraments, which be
instituted in the same for the whole commonalty of Christians. And as
concerning the power of the keys, and your confession, I believe,
that for the remission of our sins, we ought to go to none other but
only to God, as we read in 1 John i., If we confess our sins, God is
faithful and just to pardon our offences, and he will purge us from
all our iniquities, &c. Also in the prophet David, in the nineteenth
and thirty-second Psalms:  I have opened my sin unto thee," &c.

     Doctor. "Should I not believe that Christ, in the time of his
apostles, gave to them power to remit sins?"

     The martyr. "The power that Christ gave to his apostles, if it
be well considered, is nothing disagreeing to my saying:  and
therefore I began to say (which I here confess) that the Lord gave to
his apostles to preach the word, and so to remit sins by the same
word."

     Doctor. "Do you then deny auricular confession?"

     The martyr. "Yea, verily I do."

     Doctor. "Ought we to pray to saints?"

     The martyr. "I believe no."

     Doctor. "Tell me what I shall ask, Jesus Christ being here upon
the earth? Was he not then as well sufficient to hear the whole
world, and to be intercessor for all, as he is now?"

     The martyr. "Yes."

     Doctor. "But we find that when he was here on earth, his
apostles made intercession for the people:  and why may they not do
the same as well now also?"

     The martyr. "So long as they were in the world, they exercised
their ministry, and prayed one for another, as needing human succours
together; but now, they being in paradise, all the prayer that they
make, is this:  that they wish that they who be yet on earth, may
attain to their felicity; but to obtain any thing at the Father's
hand, we must have recourse only to his Son."

     Doctor. "If one man have such charge to pray for another, may
not he then be called an intercessor?"

     The martyr. "I grant."

     Doctor. "Well then, you say there is but one intercessor: 
whereupon I infer, that I, being bound to pray for another, need not
now to go to Jesus Christ to have him an intercessor, but to God
alone, setting Jesus Christ apart; and so ought we verily to
believe."

     The martyr. "You understand not, sir, that if God do not behold
us in the face of his own well-beloved Son, then shall we never be
able to stand in his sight:  for if he shall look upon us, he can see
nothing but sin; and if the heavens be not pure in his eyes, what
shall be thought then of man, so abominable and unprofitable, who
drinketh iniquity like water, as Job doth say?"

     Then the other friar, seeing his fellow to have nothing to
answer to this, inferred as followeth.

     Doctor. "Nay, my friend! as touching the great mercy of God,
let that stand; and now to speak of ourselves, this we know, that God
is not displeased with them which have their recourse unto his
saints."

     The martyr. "Sir, we must not do after our own wills, but
according to that which God willeth and commandeth:  For this is the
trust that we have in him, that if we demand any thing after his
will, he will hear us.

     Doctor. "As no man cometh to the presence of an earthly king,
or prince, without means made by some about him; so, or rather much
more, to the heavenly King above," &c.

     The martyr. "To this earthly example, I will answer with
another heavenly example of the prodigal son, who sought no other
means to obtain his Father's grace, but came to the Father himself."

     Then they came to speak of adoration, which the said Rebezies
disproved by the Scripture, Acts x. xiii. xiv.; Apocalypse xix. xxii: 
Hebrews x. xii.:  where is to be noted, that where the martyr alleged
the twelfth chapter to the Hebrews; the doctors answered, that it was
in the eleventh chapter, when the place indeed is neither in the
eleventh, nor in the twelfth, but in the fourteenth chapter of the
Acts. So well seen were these doctors in their divinity.

     Doctor. "Touching the mass, what say you? believe you not that
when the priest hath consecrated the host, our Lord is there as well,
and in as ample sort, as he was, hanging upon the cross?"

     The martyr. "No, verily; but I believe that Jesus Christ is
sitting at the right hand of his Father; as appeareth by Hebrews x.,
1 Cor. xv., Colossians iii. And therefore (to make short with you) I
hold your mass for none other, but for a false and counterfeited
service, set up by Satan, and retained by his ministers, by the which
you do annihilate the precious blood of Christ, and his oblation once
made of his own body; and you know right well that the same is
sufficient, and ought not to be reiterated."

     Doctor. "You deceive yourselves in the word reiteration, for we
do not reiterate it so as you think; as by example I will show. You
see me now in this religious garment; but if I should put upon me a
soldier's weed, then should I be disguised, and yet for all that I
should remain the same still within my doublet, that I was before in
my friar's weed. So is it with the sacrifice:  we confess and grant,
that naturaliter, that is, naturally, be was once offered in
sacrifice; and also in sitting, naturaliter, that is, naturally, at
the right hand of his Father; but supernaturaliter, et subscriptive,
that is, supernaturally, we sacrifice the same without reiteration.
Supernaturaliter we sacrifice him; but that sacrifice is only
disguised, to understand that he is contained under that curtain and
whiteness which you see."

     The martyr. "Sir, this I say, that such a disguised sacrifice
is a diabolical sacrifice; and this you may take for a resolution."

     Doctor. "And how is your belief touching the holy supper?"

     The martyr. "That if it be ministered unto me by the minister,
in such usage as it hath been left of Christ and his apostles;
preaching also the word purely withal; I believe that, in receiving
the material bread and wine, I receive with lively faith the body and
blood of Jesus Christ spiritually."

     Doctor. "Say corporally."

     The martyr. "No, sir, for his words be spirit and life; and let
this content you."

     Doctor. "What say you, Is it lawful for a priest to marry?"

     The martyr. "I believe it to be lawful for him, in such sort as
the apostle saith, Whosoever hath not the gift of continency, let him
marry; for it is better to marry than to burn. And if this do not
content you, further you may read what he writeth of bishops and
elders, 1 Tim. iii. and Tit. i."

     And thus these doctors, affirming that he denied priesthood,
gave him leave to depart, saying, "God have mercy on you!" "So be
it," said he.

     After this, about the twenty-second of October, the said
Rebezies and Frederic Danville, were brought up to a chamber in the
castle, to be racked, to the intent they should utter the rest of the
congregation; in which chamber they found three councillors, who thus
began with them:  "Lift up thy hand. Thou shalt swear by the passion
of Jesus Christ, whose image here thou seest" (showing him a great
marmoset there painted on paper); whereunto Rebezies answered,
"Monsieur, I swear to you by the passion of Christ, which is written
in my heart." "Why dost not thou swear to us," said the councilors,
"as we say unto thee?" " Because," said he, "it is a great blasphemy
against the Lord." Then the councillors read their depositions, and,
first beginning with Rebezies, said:  "Wilt thou not tell us the
truth, what companions thou knowest to be of this assembly?" Rebezies
named, as he did before, Gravel, Clinet, (which were already burnt,)
and John Sansot. To whom they said, that the court had ordained, that
if he would give no other answer but so, he should be put to the
torture or rack; and so he was commanded to be stripped to his shirt,
having a cross put in his hand, and being bid to commend himself to
God and the Virgin Mary. But he neither would receive the cross, nor
commend himself to the Virgin Mary, saying, that God was able enough
to guard him, and to save him out of the lion's mouth:  and so, being
drawn and stretched in the air, he began to cry, "Come, Lord! and
show thy strength, that man do not prevail," &c. But they cried,
"Tell truth, Francis! and thou shalt be let down."

     Nevertheless he continued still in his invocation and prayer to
the Lord, so that they could have no other word but that. And after
they had thus long tormented him, the councillors said, "Wilt thou
say nothing else?" "I have nothing else," said he, "to say." And so
they commanded him to be loosed, and be put by the fire-side. Who,
being loosed, said to them, "Do you handle thus the poor servants of
God?" And the like was done to Frederic Danville also, his companion,
(who at the same time was also very sick,) of whom they could have no
other answer but as of the other. So mightily did God assist and
strengthen his servants, as ever he did any else, as by their own
letters and confession it doth appear.

     These constant and true martyrs of Christ, after they had
returned from the torture unto their fellow prisoners, ceased not to
thank and praise the Lord for his assistance. Frederic did sigh
oftentimes, and being asked of his fellows, why he so did? he said,
it was not for the evil that he had suffered, but for the evils that
he knew they should suffer afterward. "Notwithstanding," said he, "be
strong, brethren! and be not afraid, assuring yourselves of the aid
of God, who hath succoured us, and also will comfort you." Rebezies
with the rack was so drawn and stretched, that one of his shoulders
was higher than the other, and his neck drawn on the one side, so
that he could not move himself:  and therefore desiring his brethren
to lay him upon his bed, there he wrote his confession, which
hitherto we have followed. When the night came they rejoiced
together, and comforted themselves with meditation of the life to
come, and contempt of this world, singing psalms together till it was
day. Rebezies cried twice or thrice together, "Away from me, Satan!"
Frederic, being in bed with him, asked why he cried, and whether
Satan would stop him of his course? Rebezies said, that Satan set
before him his parents; "but by the grace of God," said he, "he shall
do nothing against me."

     The day next following they were brought once or twice before
the councillors, and required to show what fellows they had more of
the said assembly:  which when they would not declare, the sentence
was read against them, that they should be brought in a dung-cart to
Maulbert Place, and there, having a ball in their mouths, be tied
each one to his post, and afterwards be strangled; and so be turned
into ashes.

     Afterwards came the friars and doctors, Demochares, Maillard,
and others, to confess them, and offering to them a cross to kiss,
which they refused. Then Demochares by force made Rebezies to kiss it
whether be would or no, crying to them moreover, that they should
believe in the sacrament. "What," said Frederic, "will ye have us to
pluck Christ Jesus out from the right hand of the Father?" Demochares
said, that so many of their opinion had suffered death before, and
yet none of them all ever did any miracles, as the apostles and other
holy martyrs did. Frederic asked them, if they required any miracle?"
No," said they; and so stood mute, save only that Demochares prayed
them to consider well what they had said unto them. Maillard also
added, that he would gage his soul to be damned, but it was true.
Frederic answered, that he knew it was contrary.

     At last, being brought to the place of execution, a cross again
was offered them, which they refused. Then a priest standing by, bade
them believe in the Virgin Mary. "Let God," saith they, "reign
alone." The people standing by, "Ali mischievous Lutheran!" said
they. "Nay, a true Christian I am," said he. When they were tied to
their stakes, after their prayers made, when they were bid to be
despatched, one of them comforting the other, said, "Be strong, my
brother! be strong Satan, away from us!" As they were thus exhorting,
one standing by said, "These Lutherans do call upon Satan." One John
Morel, (who afterwards died a martyr,) then standing by at liberty,
answered, "I pray you let us hear," said he, "what they say, and we
shall hear them invocate the name of God." Whereupon the people
listened better unto them, to hearken, as well as they could, what
they said:  they crying still as much as their mouths being stopped
could utter, "Assist us, O Lord." And so they, rendering up their
spirits to the hands of the Lord, did consummate their valiant
martyrdom.

     After the martyrdom of these two abovesaid, the intention of
the judges was to despatch the rest one after another in like sort,
and had procured already process against twelve or thirteen ready to
be judged. But a certain gentlewoman, then prisoner amongst them, had
presented causes of exceptions or refusals against them, whereby the
cruel rage of the enemies was stayed to the month of July following.
In the mean time, as this persecution was spread into other
countries, first the faithful cantons of the Switzers perceiving
these good men to be afflicted for the same doctrine which they
preached in their churches, sent their ambassadors to the king to
make supplication for them. The same time also came letters from the
county palatine, elector, tending to the same end, to solicit the
king for them. The king, standing the same time in great need of the
Germans for his wars, was contented at least that they should proceed
more gently with them; and so the fire for that time ceased. Most of
them were sent to abbeys, where they were kept at the charge of the
priors, to be constrained to be present at the service of idolatry,
especially the young scholars; of whom some shrunk back; others,
being more loosely kept, escaped away. The most part were brought
before the official to make their confession, and to receive
absolution ordinary. Divers made their confession ambiguous and
doubtful, &c.

Rena Seau and John Almarick, at Paris. A.D. 1558.

     These two young men were also of the company above specified,
and were in prison, where they sustained such cruelty, being almost
racked to death, that Almarick could not go when he was called to the
court to be judged. And being upon the rack, he rebuked their
cruelty, and spake so freely, as though he had felt no grief; and as
they said, who came to visit him, he testified unto them, that he
felt no dolour so long as he was upon it. Both these died in prison,
continuing still firm and constant in the pure confession of Christ's
church.

John Bordel, Matthew Vermeil, Peter Bourdon, Andrew de Fou, in the
country of Brasil, A.D. 1558. Persecuted by Villegaignon, a French
captain.

     Mention is made in the French story of one Villegaignon,
lieutenant for the French king, who made a voyage into the land of
Brasil with certain French ships, and took an island nearly to the
same adjoining, and made therein a fortress. After they had been
there a while, Villegaignon (for lack of victuals, as he pretended)
sent certain of them away in a ship to the river Plata, towards the
pole antarctic, a thousand miles off. In this ship were these four
here mentioned; who, forsaking their ship by occasion of tempest,
were carried back again, and so came to the land of Brasil, and
afterwards to their own countrymen. Villegaignon, being much grieved
thereat, first charged them with departing without his leave.
Moreover, being terrified in his mind with false suspicion and vain
dreams, fearing and dreaming lest they had been sent as privy spies
by the Brasilians, because they came from them, and had been friendly
entertained of them; he began to devise how he might put them to
death under some colour of treason:  but the cause was religion. For
albeit sometime he had been a professor of the gospel, yet
afterwards, growing to some dignity, he fell to be an apostate, and
cruel persecutor of his fellows. But when no proof or conjecture
probable could be found to serve his cruel purpose, he, knowing them
to be earnest protestants, drew out certain articles of religion for
them to answer, and so entrapping them upon their confession, he laid
them in irons and in prison, and secretly with one executioner and
his page, he took one after another, beginning with John Bordel, and
first brought him to the top of a rock, and there being half
strangled, without any judgment threw him into the sea; and after the
like manner, ordered also the rest. Of whom three were thus cruelly
murdered and drowned; to wit, John Bordel, Matthew Vermeil, and Peter
Bourdon. The fourth, who was Andrew de Fou, he caused by manifold
allurements somewhat to incline to his sayings, and so he escaped the
danger; not without great offence taken of a great part of the
Frenchmen in that country.
Illustration:  Geneva
Geffery Varagle, at Turin, in Piedmont, A.D. 1558. Persecuted by the
king's lieutenant.

     In the same year, 1558, suffered also Geffery Varagle, preacher
in the valley of Angrogne, at the town of Turin, in Piedmont, who
first was a monk, and said mass the space of seven and twenty years.
Afterwards, returning from Buske toward Angrogne to preach, as he had
used before to do, sent by the ministers of Geneva, and other
faithful brethren, was apprehended in the town of Bruges, and brought
before the king's lieutenant; where he was questioned with, touching
divers articles of religion:  as of justification, works of
supererogation, free-will, predestination, confession, satisfaction,
indulgences, images, purgatory, the pope, &c. Whereunto he answered
again in writing, with such learning and reason, alleging against the
pope's own distinctions, that, as the story reporteth, the court of
Turin, marvelling at his learning, condemned him more for reproach of
shame, than upon true opinion grounded on judgment. When he was
brought to the place of execution, the people which stood by and
heard him speak, declared openly, that they saw no cause why he
should die. A certain old companion of his, a priest, calling him by
his name, "Master Geffery," desired him to convert from his opinions: 
to whom he patiently answered again, desiring him, that he would
convert from his condition. And thus after he had made his prayer
unto God, and had forgiven his executioner, and all his enemies, he
was first strangled, and then burned. In the aforesaid story,
relation is made moreover, concerning the said Geffery, that at the
time of his burning a dove was seen, as was credibly reported of
many, flying and fluttering divers times about the fire; testifying,
as was thought, the innocency of this holy martyr of the Lord. But
the story addeth, that upon such things we must not stay:  and so
concludeth he the martyrdom of this blessed man.

Benet Romaine, a mercer or haberdasher, at Draguignan in Provence,
A.D. 1558. Persecuted by Lanteaume Blanc; De Lauris, councillor and
son-in-law to Miniers, lord of Opede, the cruel persecutor; Anthony
Revest, the lieutenant; Barbosi, judge-ordinary of Draguignan;
Joachim Partavier, the king's advocate; Caval and Cavalieri, consuls;
the official; Gasper Siguiere, officer in Draguignan; and also a
friar observant.

     The lamentable story of Benet Romaine is described at large
among other French martyrs, by John Crispine, printer:  the brief
recital whereof here followeth. This Benet, having wife and children
at Geneva, to get his living used to go about the country with
certain mercenary ware, having cunning also, amongst other things,
how to dress corals. As he was coming toward Marseilles, and passed
by the town of Draguignan, he happened upon one of the like faculty,
named Lanteaume Blanc, who, being desirous to have of his corals, and
could not agree for the price, also knowing that he was one of
Geneva, went to a councillor of the court of Aix; being then at
Draguignan, whose name was De Lauris, son-in-law to Miniers, lord of
Opede, the great persecutor against Merindol, &c. This De Lauris,
consulting together with the aforesaid Blanc, and pretending to buy
certain of his coral which he saw to be very fair, and knowing also
that he had to the worth of three hundred crowns, incontinent after
his departing from him, he sent to the officer of the town to attach
the said Benet, as one being the greatest Lutheran in the world. Thus
when he was arrested for the king's prisoner, Blanc and his fellows,
which, sought nothing but only the prey, were ready to seize on his
goods; and likewise of the other two men whom he hired to bear his
merchandise. Then were these three poor men separated asunder, and
Romaine examined before the consuls, and the king's advocate, and
other councillors, where he kept his Easter? whether he received at
the same Easter? whether he was confessed before, and fasted the
Lent. Also he was bid to say his Pater Noster, the Creed, and Ave
Maria; which two first he did, but refused to say Ave Maria. Then was
he asked for worshipping of saints, women-saints and men-saints, and
when he heard mass? He said, he would worship none but God alone: 
mass he heard none these four years, nor ever would. Whereupon he was
committed to a stinking and loathsome place, with iron chains upon
his legs. De Lauris thus having his will upon the poor man, sent for
the lieutenant, named Anthony Revest, told him what he had done, and
willed him to see the prisoner. The lieutenant, being angry, that he
did so usurp upon his office, denied to go with him to the prisoner,
excusing the filthy savour of the place. Notwithstanding, the same
day the lieutenant with another went to the prison, and caused the
said Romaine to come before him, of whom he inquired many things, of
his dwelling, of his name and age, his wife and children, of his
faculty, and the cause of his coming; also of his religion, and all
such points thereto belonging. Unto whom he answered again simply and
truly in all respects, as lay in his conscience; and thereunto, being
required, (because he could not write,) he put to his mark. After
this confession being thrice made, and his answer taken, certain
faithful brethen of that place found means to come to him, and
counselled him, that seeing he had sufficiently already made
confession of his faith, he would seek means to escape out from his
enemies, which sought nothing but his death; and showed unto him what
he should say unto the lieutenant. But he refused so to do, being
willing there to render account of his faith, and contented to die
for the same.

     The fame of his constancy being known in the town, judge
Barbosi, a man blind and ignorant, and no less deformed, came to see
him, and asked, "What, do they believe," said he, "in any God in
Geneva?" Romaine looking upon him, "What art thou," said he, "that so
wretchedly dost blaspheme?" "I am," said he, "the judge-ordinary of
this place." "And who hath put thee," said Romaine, "such a gross and
deformed person, in such an office? Thinkest thou that we be
infidels, and no Christians? And if the devils themselves do confess
a God, suppose you that they of Geneva do deny their God? No! no! we
believe in God, we invocate his name, and repose all our trust in
him," &c. Barbosi took such grief with this, departing from Romaine,
that he ceased not to pursue him to death.

     The lieutenant then being urged, and much called upon, and also
threatened by this Barbosi and other, prepared to proceed in judgment
against him, taking to him such judges and advocates as the order
there required. There was at the same time an Observant Friar, who
had there preached all the Lent. He, being very eager and diligent to
have the poor Christian burned, and seeing the judges intentive about
the business, to set the matter forward, said, that he would go and
say mass of the Holy Ghost, to illuminate their intents to have the
said Romaine condemned and burned alive at a little fire. Moreover,
he procured Caval and Cavalieri, the consuls, to threaten the
lieutenant, that they would complain of him to the high court of
parliament, if he would not after that sort condemn him to be burnt.
In the mean time the faithful Christians of the said town, fearing
lest by his racking danger might happen to the brethren, sent to
Romaine again in the prison certain instructions and means how he
might be aided, such as should not be against God:  but when the
lieutenant came, the poor man forgot his instructions; so simple he
was, and ignorant of the subtleties of this world.

     When the time came that the judges were set, and the process
should be read, Barbosi, with other whom the friar had procured, had
agreed before, that he should be fired alive, and put to the rack, to
disclose his fellows, and also gagged, that he might not speak and
infect the residue. On the other part, one there was of the
advocates, (albeit a man wholly superstitious,) seeing the rage of
the others, gave contrary advice, saying, that he should be sent home
again, for that he was a town-dweller of Geneva, neither had taught
there any kind of doctrine, nor brought any books, or had they any
informations against him; and that which he had spoken, was a thing
constrained by his oath, forced by the justice. And as touching his
opinion, it was no other but as other young men did follow, which
were either of the one part, or of the other; and therefore that here
remained no more, but only the lieutenant to give his verdict, &c.
Thus much being spoken, and also because the lieutenant was before
suspected, and the time of dinner drew near, they arose for that
time, deferring the matter to another season. The Friar Observant in
this mean while was not idle, inciting still the consuls and the
people, who, at the ringing of a bell being assembled together with
the official and the priests in a great rout, came crying to the
lieutenant to burn the heretic, or else they would fire him, and all
his family; and in semblable wise did the same to the other judges
and advocates:  the official moreover added, that if it were not
better seen unto than so, the Lutherans would take such courage, and
so shut up their church doors, that no man should enter in. Then,
because the lieutenant would not take to him other judges after their
minds, in all post-haste the people contributed together, that at
their own charge the matter should be pursued at the parliament of
Aix, and so compelled the lieutenant to bring the process unto
judgment, every man crying, "To the fire, to the fire, that he may be
burned!!"

     The lieutenant, being not able otherwise to appease the people,
promised to bring the matter to the high court of Aix, and so he did.
They, hearing the information of the cause, commanded the lieutenant
and the other judges to deal no further therein, but to send up the
process and the prisoner unto them. This went greatly against the
minds of them of Draguignan, which would fain have had him condemned
there. Whereupon Barbosi was sent out to the parliament of Aix, where
he so practised and laboured the matter, that the cause was sent down
again to the lieutenant, and he enjoined to take unto him such
ancient advocates, as their old order required, and to certify them
again within eight days. And so Romaine, by the sentence of those old
judges, was condemned to be burned alive, if he turned not; if he
did, then to be strangled, and before the execution, to be put upon
the rack, to the intent he should disclose the rest of his company;
from the which sentence Romaine then appealed, saying that he was no
heretic. Whereupon he was carried unto Aix, singing the Commandments
as he passed by the town of Draguignan:  which when the king's
advocate did see, looking out of his window, he said unto him, that
he was one of them that concluded his death, but desired God to
forgive him; Romaine answered again, and said, "God will judge us all
in the last day of judgment." After he was come to Aix, he was
brought before the councillors, before whom he remained no less
constant and firm than before. Then was a fumish friar sent, who,
being three hours with him, and could not remove him, came out to the
lords, and said that he was damned:  by reason whereof, the sentence
given before his condemnation was confirmed, and he sent back again
from whence he came.

     At this return again from Aix, the consuls of Draguignan sent
abroad by parishes unto the curates, that they should signify unto
their parishioners the day of his death, to the end that they should
come; also caused to be cried through the town by the sound of a
trumpet, that all good Christians should bring wood to the great
market-place, to burn the Lutheran. The day being come, which was
Saturday, the sixteenth of May, the poor servant of God was first
brought to the rack or torture, where, at his first entry, were
brought before him the cords, irons, and weights, to terrify him.
Then, said they, he must utter his complices, and renounce his
religion, or else he should be burned alive. He answered with a
constant heart, that he had no other accomplices nor companions,
neither would he hold any other faith but that which Jesus Christ did
preach by his apostles. Then was he demanded of his fellows taken
with him, whether they did hold the faith of Rome, or whether he did
ever communicate with them, or did know them in the town, or in the
province to be of his faith? He said, No. Item, What he had to do in
that town? He said, To sell his coral. Item, Who gave him counsel to
appeal? God, he said, by his Spirit.

     Upon this he was put upon the gin or rack, where he, being torn
most outrageously, ceased not still to cry unto God, that he would
have pity on him for the love of Jesus Christ his Son. Then was he
commanded to call to the Virgin Mary, but that he would not.
Whereupon his torture was renewed afresh, in such cruel sort, that
they thought they had left him for dead; for which they sent him to
the barbers, and finding that he could endure no longer, were afraid
lest he had been past, and hastened to bring him to the fire. So,
after they had essayed him by priests and friars as much as they
could, to make him revolt, they helped the hangman to bear him, all
broken and dismembered as he was, unto the heap of wood, where they
tied him to a chain of iron which was let down upon the faggots.
Romaine, seeing himself to be alone lying upon the wood, began to
pray to God; whereat the friars being moved, ran to him again to
cause him to say Ave Maria:  which when he would not do, they were so
furious, that they plucked and tore his beard. In all these anguishes
the meek saint of God had recourse still to God in his prayers,
beseeching him to give him patience. Then left they him lying as
dead; but so soon as they descended down from the wood, he began to
pray to God again in such sort as one would have thought that he had
felt no hurt. Then another great friar, supposing to do more with him
than the rest, came up to the wood unto him, to admonish him. Romaine
thought at first that he had been a faithful Christian, by his gentle
speech; but afterwards when he urged him to pray to the Virgin Mary,
he desired him to depart, and let him alone in peace. As soon as he
was departed, Romaine lifted up his head and his eyes on high,
praying God to assist him in his great temptation. Then a certain
father, a warden, to bring the people in more hatred, cried out and
said, "He blasphemeth! he blasphemeth! he speaketh against the
blessed Virgin Mary!" Whereat Barbosi cried, "Stop his mouth, let him
be gagged!" The people cried, "To the fire! let him be burned! "Then
the hangman set fire to the straw and little sticks that were about,
which incontinent were set on fire. Romaine still remained hanging in
the air till he died. When all his nether parts were burnt well near,
he was seen to lift up his head to heaven, moving his lips, without
any cry:  and so this blessed saint rendered his spirit to God!

     Of this assembly there were divers judgments and sundry bruits.
Some said, that if good men had been about him, it had gone better
with him; and that those priests and monks which were about him, were
whoremasters and infamous.

     Others said, that he had wrong, and that a hundred of that
company there were, who more deserved death than he, especially among
those who condemned him. Other went away marvelling, and disputing of
his death and doctrine. And thus was the course finished of this
valiant and thrice blessed martyr-and servant of the Lord Jesus the
Son of God.

Francis Civaux, at Dijon, A.D. 1558. Persecuted by the convent of the
Jacobin Friars at Dijon, and a priest of that place.

     This Francis Civaux was secretary to the French ambassador here
in England in Queen Mary's time, who afterwards, being desirous to
hear the word of God, went to Geneva. Also he was placed to be
secretary to the senate or council of Geneva; where he continued
about the space of a year. Having then certain business, he came to
Dijon.

     There was the same time a priest that preached at Dijon such
doctrine, that the said Francis, being worthily offended thereat,
came friendly unto the priest, and reasoned with him touching his
doctrine, showing by the Scriptures how and where he had erred. The
priest excused himself, that he was not so well instructed to
dispute, but he would bring him the next day to a certain learned
man, whom he knew there in the town, and desired the said Francis to
go with him to breakfast, where he would be glad to hear them two in
conference together. Whereunto when Francis had consented, the priest
incontinent went to the Jacobin Friars, where the matter was thus
contrived, that at the breakfast time Francis there unawares should
be apprehended.

     When the next day came, the priest brought Francis, according
to his appointment, to a Jacobin Friar, who, pretending much fair
friendship unto him, as one glad and desirous of his company,
besought him to take a breakfast with him the next morrow, and there
they would enter conference together. With this also Francis was
content, and to prepare himself the better to that conflict, sat up
almost all the night writing with his fellow. The next morrow, as
Francis with his fellow were preparing themselves toward the
breakfast, the Jacobin in the mean time went to the justice of the
town, to admonish him to be ready at the time and place appointed.
Thus, as the Jacobin was standing at the justice's door, the
companion of Francis, seeing the friar there stand, began to mistrust
with himself, and told Francis, willing him to beware of the friar.
Moreover, the same night Francis had in his dream, that the said
friar should commit him to the justice. But he, either not caring for
his dreams, or else not much caring for the danger, committed himself
to the hands of God, and went. As they were together disputing in the
convent of the Jacobins, Francis, thus betrayed of the priest, was
apprehended by the officers, carried to prison, and within seven days
after, being Saturday before the nativity of our Lord, was brought to
the place of execution, where first he was strangled, and then
burned. And as touching the fellow and companion of this Francis
above mentioned, he was also apprehended with him, and put in prison;
but because he was but a young novice, and yet not fully confirmed,
he recanted, and was delivered.

Peter Arondeau, at Paris, A.D. 1559. His persecutors were the priests
of Rochelle, Manroy a priest, the lieutenant of Rochelle, the
cardinal of Lorraine, and two presidents, to wit, Magister and St.
Andre.

     The town of Rochelle, as it is a place of great commodity
because of the sea, so was it not inferior to other good towns in
France, for nourishing and supporting the holy assemblies of the
Lord. Unto the which town, about A.D. 1559, resorted one Peter
Arondeau, a man of base condition, with a little packet of mercery
ware there to sell:  who there, being known to join himself to the
church and congregation of the faithful, was demanded of certain
ministers of antichrist, whether he would go to hear mass or no? He
said, that he had been there too oft to his great grief; and that
since the time that the Lord had taken the veil from his eyes, he
knew the mass to be abominable, forged in the shop of the enemy of
all mankind. They to whom he thus answered were priests; amongst whom
was one named Manroy, who, taking the others there present for
witnesses, brought him straight to the lieutenant. The deposition
being taken, and information made, it was decreed incontinent, that
his body should be attached. And although by one of his friends he
was admonished to save himself, and to avoid the danger, yet he
ceased not to put himself into his enemy's hands; and so was led
prisoner. As he was in prison, many of the faithful came to comfort
him, but rather he was able to comfort not only them which came to
comfort him, but also the others who were there prisoners with him.
The priests left no diligence unsought to stir up the lieutenant,
which was of himself too much inflamed in such matters.

     Arondeau, after many interrogations, and threatening words, and
also fair promises of his pardon, still continued one man. Then the
lieutenant seeing his constancy, condemned him to death. Arondeau,
praising God for his grace given, did not a little rejoice that he
might suffer in that quarrel, and in token of rejoicing, did sing a
psalm, being fully resolved to accept the said condemnation, without
any appeal. But his friends, not pleased with his resolution, came to
him; and so persuaded with him not to give his life so good cheaply
over to his enemies' hands, that he was turned from that, and made
his appeal. The appeal being entered, the lieutenant, seeking to
gratify the adversaries of the gospel, and especially the cardinal of
Lorraine, secretly, by the backside of the town, and out of the
highway, conveyed the poor prisoner unto Paris; who, being brought
unto Paris by privy journeys, as is said, was put into prison,
committed to the custody of two presidents, to wit, Magister, and St.
Andre; by the means of whom the sentence of the lieutenant was
confirmed, and also put in execution the fifteenth day of November,
in the year abovesaid; on the which day the said Arondeau was burned
quick at the place called St. John, in Greve, at Paris. The constancy
heroical which God gave him, and wherein he endured victorious unto
death, was a mirror or glass of patience unto M. Anne du Bourge,
councillor in the parliament of Paris, and to divers others then
prisoners; and was to them a preparation toward the like death, which
shortly after they suffered.

     Not long after the happy end of this blessed martyr, the
aforenamed Manroy, which was the principal accuser and party against
him, was struck with a disease called apoplexia, and thereupon
suddenly died.

     By this, and many other such-like examples, the mighty judgment
of God most evidently may appear; who, albeit commonly he doth use to
begin his judgment with his own household in this world, yet neither
do his adversaries themselves always escape the terrible hand of his
justice.

     Also the lord lieutenant which was his condemner tarried not
long after the priest, but he was arrested personally to appear
before the king's council, through the procurement of a certain
gentleman of Poland, called Anthony de l'Eglise, against whom the
said lieutenant had given false and wrong judgment before; by reason
whereof the aforesaid gentleman so instantly did pursue him before
the lords of the council, that all the extortions and pollings of the
lieutenant were there openly discovered, and so he condemned to pay
to the gentleman a thousand French crowns of the sum, within fourteen
days, upon pain of double as much. Also he was deposed of his office,
and there declared unworthy to exercise any royal office hereafter
for ever, with infamy and shame perpetual.

Thomas Moutard, at Valenciennes, A.D. 1559.
Persecuted by a priest of that town.

     In the town of Valenciennes, not far from France, in the same
year, which was 1559, in the month of October, suffered Thomas
Moutard; who, first being converted from a disordered life to the
knowledge of the gospel, is to us a spectacle of God's great gracious
mercy toward his elected Christians. This Moutard was attached for
certain words spoken to a priest, saying thus:  That his god of the
host was nothing but an abomination, which abused the people of God.
These words were taken first as spoken in drunkenness; but the next
day after, when the same words were repeated to him again, to know
whether he would abide by the words there uttered, or no, he said,
"Yea; for it is an abuse," said he, "to seek Jesus Christ any
otherwhere than in heaven, sitting at the glory and right hand of God
his Father:  and in this he was ready to live and die." His process
being made, he was condemned to be burned quick. But, as he was
carried from the town-house to the place of punishment, it was never
seen a man with such constancy to be so assured in heart, and so to
rejoice at that great honour which God had called him unto. The
hangman hasted as much as was possible, to bind him, and despatch
him. The martyr, in the midst of the flaming fire, lifting up his
eyes unto heaven, cried to the Lord that he would have mercy on his
soul; and so in great integrity of faith and perseverance, he gave up
his life to God.

     This Dutch story should have gone before with the Dutch
martyrs; but seeing Valenciennes is not far distant from France, it
is not much out of order to adjoin the same with the French martyrs;
who, at length, shall be joined altogether in the kingdom of Christ: 
which day the Lord send shortly. Amen!

     Thus have we (through the assistance of the Lord) deduced the
table of the French, and also of the Dutch martyrs, unto the time and
reign of Queen Elizabeth, that is, to the year 1560. Since the which
time divers also have suffered both in France and in the lower
country of Germany; whose story shall be declared (the Lord willing)
more at large, when we come to the time of Queen Elizabeth. In the
mean season, it shall suffice for this present to insert their names
only, which here do follow.

The residue of the French martyrs.

     Anne du Bourge, councillor of Paris; Andrew Coffier, John
Isabeau, John Indet, martyrs, of Paris; Geffery Guerien, John Morel,
John Barbeville, Peter Chevet, Malin Marie, Margarite Rich, Adrian
Daussi, Giles le Court, Philip Parmentier, Marin Rosseau, Peter
Milot, John Berfoy:  besides the tumult of Amboise, and the
persecution of Vassy; also Austin Marlorat, and Master Mutonis.

The residue of the Dutch martyrs.

     James de Lo, of the isle of Flanders; John de Buissons, at
Antwerp; Peter Petit, John Denys, Guymon Guilmein, Simeon Herme, of
the Isle of Flanders:  John de Lannoy, at Tournay; Andrew Michel, a
Mind man, at Tournay; Francis Varlut, at Tournay; Alexander Dayken,
of Bramcastle; William Cornu, in Hainault; Anthony Caron, of Cambray;
Renaudine de Francville. Certain suffered at Tournay:  Michel
Robilert, of Arras; Nicaise de le Totnbe; Roger du Mont.

     To the catalogue of French martyrs above rehearsed, the story
of Merindol and Cabriers, withthe lamentable handling of them, is
also to be annexed. But because the tractation thereof is prolix, and
cannot well be contracted into a short discourse, therefore we have
deferred the same to a more convenient room, after the table here
following next of the Spanish and Italian martyrs, where better
opportunity shall be given to prosecute more at full that tragical
persecution, the Lord so permitting.



159. MARTYRS IN SPAIN

A table of such martyrs, as, for the cause of religion, suffered in
Spain

Franciscus San Romanus, at Burgos, in Spain. Persecuted by certain
Spanish merchants in Antwerp, and also by the friars of that city.
Illustration:  A Martyr Hung over a Fire

     In the year 1540 this Francis was sent by certain Spanish
merchants of Antwerp, to Bremen, to take up money due, to be paid by
certain merchants there; where he, being at a sermon, hearing Master
Jacobus (prior some time of the Austin Friars of Antwerp) preach, was
so touched and drawn, through the marvellous working of God's Spirit,
at the hearing thereof, albeit having no perfect understanding of the
Dutch tongue, that not only he understood all that was there said,
but also coming to the preacher, and accompanying him home, (all his
other worldly business set apart,) there recited the whole contents
of his sermon, every thing (as they said, which heard the said
minister of Bremen preach) in perfect form and order as he had
preached. After this little taste, and happy beginning, he proceeded
further, searching and conferring with learned men, that in short
space he was grown in great towardness and ripe knowledge in the word
of life. The minister, marvelling at the sudden mutation of the man,
and also seeing the vehemency of his zeal joined withal, began to
exhort him how to temper himself with circumspection and discretion,
still more and more instructing him in the word and knowledge of the
gospel, which he so greedily did receive, as one that could never be
satisfied; and so remained he with the minister three days together,
committing his worldly business, and the message that he was sent
for, unto his fellow which came with him. Thus being inflamed with
another desire, he ceased to seek for temporal trifles, seeking
rather for such French or Dutch books as he could get to read; and
again, read the same so diligently, that partly by the reading
thereof, partly by Master Jacobus, and also by Master Maccabeus,
(which was there the same time,) he was able in a short time to judge
in the chief articles of our religion; insomuch that he took upon him
to write letters unto his countrymen the merchants of Antwerp. In the
which letters first he gave thanks to God for the knowledge of his
holy word which he had received:  secondly, he bewailed the great
cruelty and gross blindness of his countrymen; desiring God to open
their eyes and ears, to see and understand the word of their
salvation:  thirdly, he promised shortly to come to them at Antwerp,
to confer with them touching the grace of God, which he had received: 
fourthly, declareth to them his purpose in going also to Spain,
intending there likewise to impart to his parents, and other friends
at Burgos, the wholesome doctrine which the Lord had bestowed upon
him.

     Beside this, he addressed other letters also to Charles the
emperor, opening to him the calamities and miserable state of
Christ's church; desiring him to tender the quietness thereof: 
especially that he would reform the miserable corruption of the
church of Spain, &c. Over and besides all this, he wrote there a
catechism, and divers other treatises, in the Spanish tongue. And
allthis he did in one month's space.

     In the mean time the Spanish merchants of Antwerp,
understanding by his letters, both his change of religion, and also
his purpose of coming to Antwerp, sent him letters again, pretending
outwardly a fair countenance of much good will, but secretly
practising his destruction; for at the day appointed of his coming,
certain friars were set ready to receive him, who took him coming
down from his horse, rifled his books, and had him into a merchant's
house near hand, where they examined him; with whom he again disputed
mightily:  and when they found him not agreeing to their faith, they
bound him hand and foot, crying out upon him, and calling him
Lutheran; and burnt his books before his face, threatening to burn
him also. At this disputation within the house, divers Spaniards were
present, which made the friars more bold. Being demanded to show of
what faith and religion he was; "My faith," said he, "is to confess
and preach Christ Jesus only, and him crucified, which is the
truefaith of the universal church of Christ through the whole world;
but this faith and doctrine you have corrupted, taking another
abominable kind of life, and by your impiety have brought the most
part of the world into blindness most miserable." And to explain his
faith to them more expressly, he recited all the articles of the
Creed.

     This done, then the friars asked, whether he believed the
bishop of Rome to be Christ's vicar, and head of the church, having
all the treasures of the church in his own power, and being able to
bind and loose? also to make new articles, and abolish the old, at
his own will and arbitrement? Hereunto Francis answered again, that
he believed none of all this, but contrary did affirms that the pope
was antichrist, born of the devil, being the enemy of Jesus Christ,
transferring to himself God's honour; and who, moreover, being
incited by the devil, turned all things upside down, and corrupted
the sincerity of Christ's religion, partly by his false pretences
beguiling, partly by his extreme cruelty destroying, the poor flock
of Christ, &c. With the like boldness he uttered his mind likewise
against the mass and purgatory. The friars could suffer him meanly
well to speak, till he came to the pope, and began to speak against
his dignity, and their profit; then could they abide no longer, but
thundered against him words full of cruelty and terror. As they were
burning his books, and began also to cast the New Testament into the
fire, Francis, seeing that, began to thunder out against them again.
The Spaniards then, supposing him not to be in his right senses,
conveyed him into a tower six miles distant from Antwerp, where he
was detained in a deep cave or dungeon, with much misery, the space
of eight months; in which time of his imprisonment many grave and
discreet persons came to visit him, exhorting him that he would
change his opinion, and speak more modestly. Francis answered again,
that he maintained no opinion erroneous or heretical; and if he
seemed to be somewhat vehement with the friars, that was not to be
ascribed to him, so much as to their own importunity; hereafter he
would frame himself more temperately. Hereupon the Spaniards,
thinking him better come to himself, discharged him out of prison,
which was about the time when the emperor was in his council at
Ratisbon, A.D. 1541.

     San Romanus, being thus freed out of prison, came to Antwerp,
where he remained about twenty days. From thence he went to Louvain,
unto a certain friend of his, named Francis Dryander, (who also
afterwards died a martyr,) with whom he had much conference about
divers matters of religion; who gave him counsel not to alter the
state of his vocation, being called to be a merchant, which state he
might exercise with a good conscience, and do much good. And as
touching religion, his counsel was, that he should say or do nothing
for favour of men, whereby the glory of God should be diminished; but
so that he required notwithstanding in the same, a sound and right
judgment, conformed to the rule of God's word, lest it might chance
to him as it doth to many, who, being carried with an inconsiderate
zeal, leave their vocations, and while they think to do good, and to
edify, destroy and do harm, and cast themselves needlessly into
danger.

     "It is God," said he, "that hath the care of his church, and
will stir up faithful ministers for the same; neither doth he care
for such which rashly intrude themselves into that function without
any calling."

     This advertisement of Dryander Francis did willingly accept,
promising hereafter to moderate himself more considerately. But this
promise was shortly broken, as you shall hear; for, passing from
Dryander he went to Ratisbon, and there, having time and opportunity
convenient to speak to the emperor, he stepped boldly unto him,
beseeching him to deliver his country and subjects of Spain from
false religion, and to restore again the sincerity of Christ's
doctrine, declaring and protesting, that the princes and protestants
of Germany were in the truer part, and that the religion of Spain,
being drowned in ignorance and blindness, was greatly dissonant from
the true and perfect word of God; with many other words pertaining to
the same effect. The emperor all this while gave him gentle hearing,
signifying that he would consider upon the matter, and so do therein
as he trusted should be for the best. This quiet answer of the
emperor ministered to him no little encouragement of better hope; and
albeit he might perceive there in the city many examples to the
contrary, yet all that discouraged not him, but he went the second,
and also the third, time unto the emperor, who quietly again so
answered him as before. And yet this our Francis, not satisfied in
his mind, sought with a greater ardency the fourth time to speak to
the emperor; but he was repulsed by certain of the Spaniards about
the emperor, who, incontinent, without all further hearing or
advising in the cause, would have thrown him headlong into the river
Danube, had not the emperor staid them, and willed him to be judged
by the laws of the empire. By this commandment of the emperor he was
reserved and detained with other malefactors in bonds, till the
emperor took his voyage into Africa. Then Francis, with other
captives following the court, after the emperor was come into Spain,
was there delivered to the inquisitors; by whom he was laid in a dark
prison under the ground. Oft and many times he was called for to
examination, where he suffered great injuries and contumelies, but
ever remained in his conscience firm and unmovable. The articles
whereupon he stood, and for which he was condemned were these: 

     That life and salvation in the sight of God, come to no man by
his own strength, works, or merits, but only by the free mercy of
God, in the blood and sacrifice of his Son our Mediator.

     That the sacrifice of the mass, which the papists do account
available, ex opere operato, for the remission of sin both to the
quick and the dead, is horrible blasphemy.

     That auricular confession with the numbering up of sins, also
that satisfaction, purgatory, pardons, invocation of saints, and
worshipping of images, be mere blasphemy against the living God.

     Item, That the blood of Christ is profaned and injured in the
same aforesaid.

     After the inquisitors perceived that by no means he could be
reclaimed from his assertions, they proceeded at last to the
sentence, condemning him to be burned for a heretic. Many other
malefactors were brought also with him to the place of execution, but
all they were pardoned and dismissed:  he only for the gospel, being
odious to the whole world, was taken and burned. As he was led to the
place of suffering, they put upon him a mitre of paper, painted full
of devils, after the Spanish guise.

     Furthermore, as he was brought out of the city gate to be
burned, there stood a wooden cross by the way, whereunto Francis was
required to do homage; which he refused, answering, that the manner
of Christians is not to worship wood, and he was, said he, a
Christian. Hereupon arose great clamour among the vulgar people, for
that he denied to worship the wooden cross. But this was turned
incontinent into a miracle. Such was the blind rudeness of that
people, that they did impute this to the divine virtue, as given to
the cross from heaven, for that it would not suffer itself to be
worshipped of a heretic:  and immediately, for the opinion of that
great miracle, the multitude with their swords did hew it in pieces,
every man thinking himself happy who might carry away some chip or
fragment of the said cross.

     When he was come to the place where he should suffer, the
friars were busy about him to have him recant, but he continued ever
firm. As he was laid upon the heap of wood, and the fire kindled
about him, he began a little, at the feeling of the fire, to lift up
his head toward heaven; which when the inquisitors perceived, hoping
that he would recant his doctrine, they caused him to be taken from
the fire. But when they perceived nothing less in him, the
adversaries, being frustrate of their expectation, willed him to be
thrown in again; and so was he immediately despatched.

     After that the martyrdom of this blessed man was thus
consummate, the inquisitors proclaimed openly, that he was damned in
hell, and that none should pray for him; yea, and that all were
heretics, whosoever doubted of his damnation. Nevertheless certain of
the emperor's soldiers gathered of his ashes; also the English
ambassador procured a portion of his bones to be brought unto him,
knowing right well that he died a martyr. Yet this could not be so
secretly done, but it came to the ears of the inquisitors, and of the
emperor; wherefore the soldiers, going in great danger of life, were
committed to prison. Neither did the ambassador himself escape clear
from the danger of the pope's scourge; for he was upon the same
sequestered from the court, and commanded to be absent for a space.
And thus much concerning the notable martyrdom of this blessed San
Romanus.

Rochus, at St. Lucar in Spain, A.D. 1545. Persecuted by an
inquisitor.

     Rochus was born in Brabant, his father dwelling in Antwerp. By
his science he was a carver or graver of images; who, as soon as he
began first to taste the gospel, fell from making such images as use
to serve for idolatry in temples, and occupied himself in making
seals, save only that he kept standing on his stall an image of the
Virgin Mary artificially graven, for a sign of his occupation. It
happened unhappily, that a certain inquisitor passing by in the
street, and beholding the carved image, asked of Rochus what was the
price thereof? which when Rochus had set, (not willing belike to sell
it,) the inquisitor bade him scarce half the money. The other
answered again, that he could not so live of that bargain. But still
the inquisitor urged him to take his offer; to whom Rochus again:  "It
shall be yours," said he, "if you give me that which my labour and
charges stand me in, but of that price I cannot afford it:  yea, I had
rather break it in pieces." "Yea," said the inquisitor, "break it?
let me see thee." Rochus with that took up a chisel, and dashed it
upon the face of the image, wherewith the nose, or some other part of
the face, was blemished. The inquisitor, seeing that, cried out that
he was mad, and commanded Rochus forthwith to prison:  to whom Rochus
cried again, that he might do in his own works what he listed; and if
the workmanship of the image were not after his fantasy, what was
that to them? But all this could not help Rochus, but within three
days after, sentence was given upon him, that he should be burned,
and so was he committed to the executioners. As Rochus was entering
the place there to be burned, he cried with a loud voice, asking
among the multitude which there stood by, if any man of Flanders were
there? It was answered, Yea; and also that there were two ships
already fraught, and appointed to sail to Flanders. Then said he, "I
would desire some of them to signify to my father dwelling in
Antwerp, that I was burned here in this city, and for this cause
which you all have heard." And thus, after his prayers made to God,
this good man, being wrongfully condemned, after his godly life made
this blessed end, A.D. 1545.

     And lest this so rare and strange example of cruelty should
seem to lack credit, in the fifth book of the History of Pantaleon
there is recorded, that a certain Spaniard, coming to Antwerp, made
diligent inquisition there amongst the image-makers, to find out the
parents of this Rochus, and signified to them what had happened
toward their son, as hath been by his said parents and friends
declared; insomuch that it is also testified, that his father, at the
hearing of the said message, for sorrow thereof, died shortly after.

     Furthermore, besides these above-recited, and also before their
time, I hear and understand by faithful relation, that divers other
have been in the said country of Spain, whose hearts God had
marvellously illuminated, and stirred up, both before, and also
since, the coming in of the inquisition, to stand in defence of his
gospel, and who were also persecuted for the same, and are said to
have died in prison; albeit their names as yet are unknown, for the
stories of that country be not yet come to light, but, I trust,
shortly shall, as partly some intelligence I have thereof. In the
mean time we will come now to the inquisition of Spain, speaking
something of the ceremonial pomp and also of the barbarous abuse and
cruelty of the same.

The execrable inquisition of Spain.
Illustration:  Martyrs Tortured by the Inquisition

     The cruel and barbarous inquisition of Spain first began by
King Ferdinand and Isabella his wife, and was instituted against the
Jews, which after their baptism, maintained again their own
ceremonies:  but now it is practised against them that be never so
little suspected to favour the verity of the Lord. The Spaniards, and
especially the great divines there, do hold that this holy and sacred
inquisition cannot err, and that the holy fathers, the inquisitors,
cannot be deceived.

     Three sorts of men most principally be in danger of these
inquisitors:  they that they be greatly rich, for the spoil of their
goods:  they that be learned, because they will not have their
misdealings and secret abuses to be spied and detected:  they that
begin to increase in honour and dignity, lest they, being in
authority, should work them some shame or dishonour.

     The abuse of this inquisition is most execrable. If any word
shall pass out of the mouth of any, which may be taken in evil part;
yea, though no word be spoken, yet if they bear any grudge or evil
will against the party, incontinent they command him to be taken, and
put in a horrible prison, and then find out crimes against him at
leisure, and in the mean time no man living is so hardy as once to
open his mouth for him. If the father speak one word for his child,
he is also taken and cast into prison as a favourer of heretics: 
neither is it permitted to any person to go in to the prisoner; but
there he is alone, in such a place where be cannot see so much as the
ground where he is; and is not suffered either to read or write, but
there endureth in darkness palpable, in horrors infinite, in fear
miserable, wrestling with the assaults of death.

     By this it may be esteemed what trouble and sorrow, what
pensive sighs and cogitations they sustain, which are not thoroughly
instructed in holy doctrine. Add, moreover, to these distresses and
horrors of the prison, the injuries, threats, whippings, and
scourgings, irons, tortures, and racks which they endure. Sometimes
also they are brought out, and showed forth in some higher place to
the people, as a spectacle of rebuke and infamy. And thus are they
detained there, some many years, and murdered by long torments, and
whole days together treated much more cruelly, out of all comparison,
than if they were in the hangman's hands to be slain at once. During
all this time, what is done in the process no person knoweth, but
only the holy fathers and the tormentors, which are sworn to execute
the torments. All is done in secret, and (as great mysteries) pass
not the hands of these holy ones. And after all these torments so
many years endured in the prison, if any man shall be saved, it must
be by guessing; for all the proceedings of the court of that
execrable inquisition are open to no man, but all is done in hugger-
mugger and in close corners, by ambages, by covert ways, and secret
counsels. The accuser is secret, the crime secret, the witness
secret, whatsoever is done is secret, neither is the poor prisoner
ever advertised of any thing. If he can guess who accused him,
whereof and wherefore, he may be pardoned peradventure of his life: 
but this is very seldom, and yet he shall not incontinent be set at
liberty before he hath long time endured infinite torments; and this
is called their penitence, and so is he let go:  and yet not so but
that he is enjoined before he pass the inquisitor's hands, that he
shall wear a garment of yellow colours for a note of public infamy to
him and his whole race. And if he cannot guess right, showing to the
inquisitors by whom he was accused, whereof and wherefore, (as is
before touched,) incontinent the horrible sentence of condemnation is
pronounced against him, that he shall be burned for an obstinate
heretic. And so yet the sentence is not executed by and by, but after
that he hath endured imprisonment in some heinous prison.

     And thus have ye heard the form of the Spanish inquisition. By
the vigour and rigour of this inquisition many good true servants of
Jesus Christ have been brought to death, especially in these latter
years, since the royal and peaceable reign of this our Queen
Elizabeth; the names and stories of whom partly we will here recite,
according as we have faithful records of such as have come to our
hands by writing. The others which be not yet come to our knowledge,
we will defer till further intelligence and opportunity, by the
Lord's aid and leave, shall serve hereafter.
Illustration:  Martyrs Paraded at Valladolid

     IN the year 1559, May. 21, in the town of Valladolid, where
commonly the council of the inquisition is wont to be kept, the
inquisitors had brought together many prisoners both of high and low
estate, to the number of thirty; also the coffin of a certain noble
woman, with her picture lying upon it, which had been dead long 
before, there to receive judgment and sentence. To the hearing of
this sentence, they had ordained in the said town three mighty
theatres or stages. Upon the first was placed Dame Jane, sister to
King Philip, and chief regent of his realms; also Prince Charles,
King Philip's son, with other princes and states of Spain. Upon the
other scaffold mounted the archbishop of Seville, prince of the
synagogue of the inquisitors, with the council of the inquisition;
also other bishops of the land, and the king's council with them.

     After that the princes and other spiritual judges and
councillors were thus set in their places, with a great guard of
archers and halberdiers, and harnessed soldiers, with four heralds-
at-arms also giving their attendance to the same, and the earl of
Buendia bearing the naked sword, all the market-place where the
stages were being environed with an infinite multitude of all sorts
of the world there standing, and gazing out of windows and houses to
hear and see the sentences and judgments of this inquisition:  then,
after all, were brought forth, as a spectacle and triumph, the poor
servants and witnesses of Jesus Christ, to the number, as is
aforesaid, of thirty, clothed with their Sanbenito, as the Spaniards
do call it, which is a manner of vesture of yellow cloth, coming both
before them and behind them, spangled with red crosses, and having
burning cierges in their hands; also before them was borne a crucifix
covered with black linen cloth, in token of mourning. Moreover they
which were to receive the sentence of death, had mitres of paper upon
their heads, which the Spaniards call coracas. Thus they being
produced, were placed in their order, one under another, according as
they were esteemed culpable; so that first of all stood up Doctor
Cacalla, an Austin Friar, a man notable and singular in knowledge of
divinity, preacher sometime to Charles the Fifth, emperor both in
higher and lower Germany.

     These things thus disposed, then followed a sermon made by a
Dominic friar, which endured about an hour. After the sermon
finished, the procurator-general, with the archbishop, went to the
stage where the princes and nobles stood, to minister a solemn oath
unto them upon the crucifix painted in the mass-book; the tenor of
which oath was this: 

     "Your Majesties shall swear, that you will favour the holy
inquisition, and also give your consent unto the same; and not only
that you shall by no manner of way hinder and impeach the same, but
also you shall employ the uttermost of your help and endeavour,
hereafter, to see all them to be executed, which shall swerve from
the Church of Rome, and adjoin themselves to the sect of the Lutheran
heretics, without all respect of any person or persons, of what
estate, degree, quality, or condition soever they be."

     And thus much for the first article of the oath; the second was
this that followeth

     Item, "Your Majesties shall swear, that you shall constrain all
your subjects to submit themselves to the Church of Rome, and to have
in reverence all the laws and commandments of the same; and also to
give your aid against all them, whosoever shall hold of the heresy of
the Lutherans, or take any part with them."

     In this sort and manner, when all the princes and states, every
one in their degree, had received their oath, then the archbishop,
lifting up his hand, gave them his benediction, saying, "God bless
your Highnesses, and give you long life! "This solemn pageant thus
finished, at last the poor captives and prisoners were called out,
the procurator-fiscal, or the pope's great collector, first beginning
with Dr. Cacalla, and so proceeding to the others in order, as
hereafter, in the table which followeth, with their names and their
judgments, is described: 

1. Dr. Cacalla, a Friar Augustine. The persecutors of Dr. Cacalla and
the twenty-seven that follow, were these:  The pope's great collector,
or procurator-fiscal; the archbishop of Seville, the bishop of
Valencia, the bishop of Orense, and lastly, the inquisitors of Spain.

     Before the pope's great proctor, or collector-fiscal, first was
called forth Doctor Austin Cacalla. This doctor was a friar of
Austin's order, and priest of the town of Valladolid, and preacher
sometime to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, a man well accounted of
for his learning; who for that he was thought to be as the standard-
bearer of the gospellers, (whom they call Lutherans,) and preacher
and doctor unto them; therefore, he being first called for, was
brought from his stage nearer to the procurator-fiscal, there to hear
the sentence of his condemnation; which was, that he should be
degraded, and presently burned, and all his goods confiscated to the
profit and advancement of justice.

2. Francis de Bivero, priest of Valladolid, and brother to the
aforesaid Cacalla.

     The second prisoner, and next to Doctor Cacalla that was
called, was Francis de Bivero his brother, priest also of Valladolid,
who received likewise the same sentence of condemnation. And to the
intent he should not speak any thing to the prejudice, or against the
abuse, of the sacred inquisition, as he before had done both within
and without the prison with much boldness; and also because he was
much favoured of the people; to the end therefore that no commotion
should come by his speaking, his mouth was so stopped and shut up,
that he could not speak one word.

3. Dame Blanche de Bivero.

     The third was Dame Blanche, sister to the other two aforesaid,
against whom also was pronounced the like sentence, as upon her
brethren before.

4. John de Bivero.

     The fourth was John de Bivero, brother to the same kindred, who
was also judged a heretic, and condemned to perpetual prison, and to
bear his Sanbenito all his life long; which is an habiliment of
dishonour.

5. Dame Constance de Bivero, sister to the same aforesaid.

     Dame Constance de Bivero, was the fifth sister to the others
before specified, and widow of Ferdinando Ortis, dwelling sometime at
Valladolid, who was also condemned, with the like sentence with her
brethren, to be burned.

6. The coffin with the dead corpse of Dame Leonore de Bivero, the
mother of these aforesaid.

     The sixth thunderbolt of condemnation was thundered out against
a poor coffin, with the dead corpse of Dame Leonore de Bivero, mother
to these above-named, being herself the sixth, and being already dead
long before at Valladolid. Above her coffin was her picture laid,
which was also condemned with her dead corpse to be burned for a
heretic; and yet I never heard of any opinion that this picture did
hold, either with or against the Church of Rome. This good mother,
while she lived, was a worthy maintainer of Christ's gospel, with
great integrity of life; and retained divers assemblies of the saints
in her house for the preaching of the word of God. In fine, her
corpse and image also, being brought before the fiscal, was condemned
likewise (as the mother with her seven children in the Bock of
Maccabees) to be burned for a Lutheran heretic, and all her goods to
be seized to the behoof of the superior powers, and also her house
utterly to be razed and cast down to the ground; and for a memorial
of the same, a marble stone was appointed there to be set up in the
house, whereon the said cause of her burning should be engraved.

7. Master Aflonse Perez, priest of Valencia.

     In the seventh place was condemned Master Aflonse Perez; priest
of Valencia, first to be degraded, and afterwards to be burned as a
heretic, and all his goods likewise confiscated, and seized, to the
behoof of the superiority.

     When these seven aforesaid had received their sentence, then
the bishop of Valencia, in his pontificalibus, caused Doctor Cacalla,
Francis his brother, and Aflonse Perez, to be apparelled and re-
vested in priestly vesture. Which done, he took from them first the
chalice out of their hands, and so all their other trinkets in order,
according to their accustomed solemnity. And thus they, being
degraded, and all their priestly unctions taken from their fingers,
also their lips and their crowns rased, so were their yellow habits
of Sanbenito put over their shoulders again, with their mitres also
of paper upon their heads. This done, Doctor Cacalla began to speak,
praying the princes and the lords to give him audience:  but that not
being granted to him, he was rudely repulsed, and returned again to
his standing. Only thus much he protested clearly and openly, that
his faith, for which he was so handled, was not heretical, but
consonant to the pure word of God; for the which also he was pressed
and ready to suffer death as a true Christian, and not as a heretic: 
besides many other worthy sentences of great consolation, which he
there uttered in the mean space, while the judges were busy in their
sentences against the residue of the martyrs.

8. Don Peter Sarmiento, knight of the order of Alcanta.

9. Dame Mencia, wife of the said Don Peter.

10. Don Lovis de Roxas, son and heir of the marquis de Poza.

11. Dame Anne Henriques.

12. Christopher Dell Campo.

13. Christopher de Padilla.

14. Anthony de Huezuello.

15. Katharine Romain.

16. Frances Errem.

17. Katharine Ortega.

18. Isabell Strada.

19. Jane Valesques.

20. A smith.

21. A Jew.

22. Dame Jane de Silva.

23. Leonore de Lisueros, wife of Huezuello.

24. Marina de Sajavedra.

25. Daniel Quadra.

26. Dame Mary de Royas.

27. Anthony Dominick.

28. Anthony Basor, an Englishman.

     After these sentences had been thus pronounced, they which were
condemned to be burned, with the coffin of the dead lady and her
picture upon the same, were committed to the secular magistrate and
to their executioners, which were commanded to do their endeavour.
Then were they all incontinent taken, and every one set upon an ass,
their faces turned backward, and led with a great garrison of armed
soldiers unto the place of punishment, which was without the gate of
the town, called Del Campo.

     When they were come to the place, there were fourteen stakes
set up of equal distance one from another, whereunto every one
severally being fastened according to the fashion of Spain, they were
all first strangled, and then burned and turned to ashes, save only
Anthony Huezuello, who, forasmuch as he had, both within and without
the prison, vehemently detested the pope's spiritually, therefore he
was burned alive, and his mouth stopped from speaking. And thus these
faithful Christians, for the verity and pure word of God, were led to
death as sheep to the shambles; who not only most Christianly did
comfort one another, but also did so exhort all them there present,
that all men marvelled greatly, both to hear their singular
constancy, and to see their quiet and peaceable end.

     It is reported that, besides these aforesaid, there remained
yet behind thirty-seven other prisoners, at the said town of
Valladolid, reserved to another tragedy and spectacle of that bloody
inquisition.

     Furthermore, whereas the story of the said inquisition, being
set out in the French tongue, doth reckon the number of the martyrs
above-mentioned to be thirty, and yet, in particular declaration of
them, doth name no more but eight and twenty; here is therefore to be
noted, that either this number lacked two of thirty, or else that two
of the said company were returned back without judgment into the
prison again.

     And thus much for this present, touching the proceeding of the
church of Spain in their inquisition against the Lutherans; that is,
against the true and faithful servants of Jesus Christ. Albeit there
be other countries also, besides Spain, subject unto the same
inquisition, as Naples and Sicily; in which kingdom of Sicily, I hear
it credibly reported, that every third year are brought forth to
judgment and execution a certain number, after the like sort, of
Christian martyrs; sometimes twelve, sometimes six; sometimes more, 
and sometimes less. Among whom there was one, much about the same
year above-mentioned, A.D. 1559, who, coming from Geneva to Sicily,
upon zeal to do good, was at last laid hands on and being condemned
the same time to the fire, as he should take his death, was offered
there of the hangman to be strangled, having the cord ready about his
neck; but he, notwithstanding, refused the same, and said that he
would feel the fire. And so endured he, singing with all his might
unto the Lord, till he was bereaved both of speechand life, in the
midst of the flame:  such was the admirable constancy and fortitude of
that valiant soldier of Christ, as is witnessed to me by him, which,
being there present the same time, did both then see that which he 
doth testify, and also doth now testify what he then saw.



160. MARTYRS IN ITALY

     Now it remaineth further, according to my promise, in like
order of a compendious table, to comprehend also such martyrs as
suffered for the verity and true testimony of the gospel, in the
places and countries of Italy; which table consequently here next
ensueth.

A table of such martyrs as suffered for the testimony of the gospel
in Italy.

     N. Encenas, otherwise called Dryander, martyred at Rome, A.D.
1546. Persecuted by certain popish Spaniards at Rome.

     This Encenas, or Dryander, a Spaniard, born at Burgos, was
brother to Franciscus Encenas, the learned man so oft before
mentioned; and was also the teacher or instructor in knowledge of
religion to Diazius, the godly martyr above recorded. He was sent of
his superstitious parents, being young, unto Rome; who there, after
long continuance, growing up in age and knowledge, but especially
being instructed by the Lord in the truth of his word, after he was
known to dislike the pope's doctrine, and the impure doings at Rome,
was apprehended and taken of certain of his own countrymen, and some
of his own household friends at Rome, at the same time when he was
preparing to take his journey to his brother Francis Encenas, in
Germany. Thus he, being betrayed and taken by his own countrymen, was
brought before the cardinals, and there committed straight to prison.
Afterwards he was brought forth to give testimony of his doctrine,
which, in the presence of the cardinals, and in the face of all the
pope's retinue, he boldly and constantly defended; so that not only
the cardinals, but especially the Spaniards, being therewith
offended, cried out upon him that he should be burned. The cardinals
first, before the sentence of death should be given, came to him,
offering, if he would take it, (after the manner of the Spaniards,)
the badge of reconciliation, which hath the name of Sanbenit's cloth,
made in form of a mantle, going both before him and behind him, with
signs of the red cross. But Encenas, still constant in the profession
of truth, denied to receive any other condition or badge, but only
the badge of the Lord, which was to seal the doctrine of his religion
with the testimony of his blood. At last the matter was brought to
that issue, that the faithful servant and witness of Christ was
judged and condemned to the fire; where he, in the sight of the
cardinals, and in the face of the apostolic see pretended, gave up
his life for the testimony of the gospel.

     And forasmuch as mention hath been made both in this story, and
many others before, of Franciscus Encenas, his brother, here is not
to be pretermitted, how the said Franciscus, being a man of notable 
learning as ever was any in Spain, being in the emperor's court at
Brussels, offered unto the emperor Charles the Fifth the New
Testament of Christ, translated into Spanish. For the which he was
cast into prison, where he remained in sorrowful captivity and
calamity the space of fifteen months, looking for nothing more than
present death. At last, through the marvellous providence of Almighty
God, on the first of February, A.D. 1545, at eight o'clock after
supper, he found the doors of the prison standing open, and he
secretly was moved in his mind to take the occasion offered, and to
shift for himself; and so, issuing out of the prison, without any
hasty pace, but going as leisurely as he could, he escaped from
thence, and went straight to Germany.

Faninus, at Ferrara, A.D. 1550. Persecuted by Pope Julius the Third.

     Faninus, born in Faventia, a town in Italy, through the reading
of godly books translated into the Italian tongue, (having no perfect
skill in the Latin,) was converted from great blindness, to the
wholesome knowledge of Christ and of his word; wherein he took such a
sweetness, and so grew up in the meditation of the same, that he was
able in short time to instruct others. Neither was there any
diligence Lacking in him to communicate that abroad which he had
received of the Lord:  being so in his mind persuaded, that a man,
receiving by the Spirit of God the knowledge and illumination of his
verity, ought in no case to hide the same in silence, as a candle
under a bushel. And therefore, being occupied diligently in that
behalf, albeit he used not publicly to preach, but by private
conference to teach, he was at length by the pope's clients espied,
apprehended, and committed to prison. Albeit he remained not long in
prison, for by the earnest persuasions and prayers of his wife, his
children and other friends, he was so overcome, that he gave over,
and so was dismissed shortly out of prison. After this, it was not
long but he fell into horrible perturbation of mind; insomuch that
unless the great mercy of God had kept him up, he had fallen into
utter desperation, for slipping from the truth, and preferring the
love of his friends and kindred before the service of Jesus Christ,
whom he so earnestly before had professed. This wound went so deep
into his heart, that he could in no case be quieted, before he had
fully fixed and determined in his mind, to adventure his life more
faithfully in the service of the Lord.

     Whereupon, he being thus inflamed with zeal of spirit, he went
about all the country of Romania, publicly preaching the pure
doctrine of the gospel, not without great fruit and effect in places
as he went. As he was thus labouring, it so fell out that he was
apprehended again, A.D. 1547, in a place called Bagnacavallo, where
also he was condemned to be burned; but he said his hour was not yet
come, and the same to be but the beginning of his doctrine. And so it
was; for shortly after he was removed unto Ferrara, where he was
detained two years. At last the inquisitors of the pope's heresies
condemned him to death, A.D. 1549; and yet his time being not come,
he remained after that to the month of September, A.D. 1550. In the
mean time many faithful and good men came to visit him, for which the
pope commanded him to be enclosed in straiter custody; wherein he
suffered great torments the space of eighteen months, and yet had
suffered greater, if the Dominic Friars might have got him into their
house, as they went about. Thus Faninus, removed from prison to
prison, many times changed his place, but never altered his
constancy.

     At length he was brought into a prison, where were divers great
lords, captains, and noble personages there committed, for stirring
up commotions and factions, (as the country of Italy is full of
such,) who at first, hearing him speak, began to set him at nought,
and to deride him, supposing that it was but a melancholy humour that
troubled his brain. Whereupon, such as seemed more sage amongst them,
began to exhort him to leave his opinion, and to live with men as
other men do, and not to vex his mind, but to suspend his judgment
till the matter were decided in the general council. To whom Faninus
again, first giving them thanks for their friendly good wills
wherewith they seemed to respect his well-doing, modestly and quietly
declared unto them, how the doctrine which he professed was no humour
or opinion of man's brain, but the pure verity of God, founded in his
word, and revealed to men in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and
especially now in these days restored; which verity he had fully
determined in his mind never to deny, to believe the lying fantasies
of men. And as in his soul, which was redeemed by the blood of the
Son of God, he was free from all bondage; so likewise as touching
councils, he looked for no other sentence or authority, he said, but
that only which he knew to be declared to us by Christ Jesus in his,
gospel, which he both preached with his word, and confirmed with his
blood, &c. With these and such other words, he so moved their minds,
that they were clean altered unto a new kind of life, having him now
in admiration, whom they had before in derision, and accounted him
for a holy person:  to whom he proceeded still to preach the word of
grace, declaring and confessing himself to be a miserable sinner; but
by the faith of the Lord Jesus, and through the grace only of him, he
was fully persuaded and well assured his sins were forgiven:  like as
all their sins also should be remitted to them through their faith in
Christ only, they believing his gospel.

     There were others also besides these, who, having used before a
more delicate kind of life, could not well away with the sharpness
and the hardness of the prison. These also received such comfort by
the said Faninus, that not only they were quietly contented, but also
rejoiced in this their captivity, by the occasion whereof they had
received and learned a better liberty than ever they knew before.

     When the imprisonment of this Faninus was known to his parents
and kinsfolk, his wife and sister came to him with weeping
persuasions, to move him to consider and care for his poor family; to
whom he answered again, that his Lord and Master had commanded him,
not to deny Him for looking to his family; and that it was enough for
them that he had once, for their sakes, fallen into that cowardliness
which they knew. Wherefore he desired them to depart in peace, and
solicit him no more therein, for his end, he said, he knew to draw
near:  and so he commended them unto the Lord.

     About the same time died Pope Paul the Third, and after him
succeeded Julius the Third, which then sent letters and commandment
that Faninus should be executed; whereof when one of the magistrates'
officers brought him word the next day, he rejoiced thereat, and gave
the messenger thanks, and began to preach a long sermon to them that
were about him, of the felicity and beatitude of the life to come.
Then the messenger exhorted him that, in case he would change his
opinion, he should save both this life, and enjoy that to come.
Another asked him in what case he should leave his little children
and his wife, or what stay should they be at, he so leaving them: 
wherefore he desired him to have respect both to himself and to them.
Faninus answered, that he had left them with an overseer, which would
see unto them sufficiently:  and being asked who he was? "The Lord
Jesus Christ," said he, "a faithful keeper, and a conserver of all
that is committed to him." After that the messenger was thus departed
from Faninus, all full of tears and sorrow, the next day following he
was removed into the common prison, and delivered to the secular
magistrate. Who in all ways, his words, his gestures, and his
countenance, declared such constancy of faith, such modesty of
manners and tranquillity of mind, that they that before were extreme
against him, thinking him rather to have a devil, began now
favourably to hearken to him, and to commend him. With such grace and
sweetness he talked, ever speaking of the word of God, that divers of
the magistrates' wives, in hearing him, could not abstain from 
weeping. The executioner also wept himself. One of the public scribes
then came to him, and said, that if he would relent from his opinion,
the pope's pleasure was, that he should be saved:  but that he
refused. This was marvellous, that he, having but small skill in the
Latin, yet recited so many and sundry places of the Scripture without
book, and that so truly and promptly, as though he had studied
nothing else. One, seeing him so jocund and merry going to his death,
asked, why he was so merry at his death, seeing Christ himself sweat
blood and water before his passion? "Christ," said he, "sustained in
his body all the sorrows, and conflicts with hell and death, due unto
us; by whose suffering we are delivered from sorrow and fear of them
all." Finally, early in the morning he was brought forth where he
should suffer, who, after his prayers most earnestly made unto the
Lord, meekly and patiently gave himself to the stake, where, with a
cord drawn about his neck, he was secretly strangled of the hangman,
in the city of Ferrara, three hours before day, to the intent the
people should not see him, nor hear him speak:  and after, about
dinner-time, his body in the same place was burned. At the burning
thereof such a fragrant and odoriferous scent came to all them there
present, and so struck their senses, that the sweetness thereof
seemed to refresh them no less than his words would have done, if
they had heard him speak.

     The custom is of that city, that the bones and ashes which be
left, should be carried out of the city; but neither the magistrate,
nor the bishop, nor his great vicar or chancellor, nor any divine
else, would take any charge thereof, every man transferring that
burden from themselves, to him which was the cause of his death.
Whereby it may appear, what secret judgment and estimation all they
had of that good and blessed man. At last, the people took his burned
bones, with the cinders, and carried them out of the street of the
city.

Dominicus de Basana, at Placentia, A.D. 1550.

     The same year that the aforesaid Faninus suffered in Ferrara,
Dominicus also suffered in the city of Placentia. This Dominicus was
a citizen in Basana, and followed the wars of Charles the emperor in
Germany, where he received the first taste of Christ's gospel,
wherein he increased more and more by conferring and reasoning with
learned men, so that in a short time he was able to instruct many;
and so did, working and travelling in the church, till at length, in
the year 1550, he, coming to the city of Naples, there preached the
word, and from thence proceeding to Placentia, preached there
likewise unto the people, of true confession, of purgatory, and of
pardons. Furthermore, the next day he treated of true faith and of
good works, how far they are necessary to salvation, promising
moreover the next day to speak of antichrist, and to paint him out in
his colours. When the hour came that he should begin his sermon, the
magistrate of the city commanded him to come down from the chair in
the market-place, and deliver himself to the officers. Dominicus was
willing and ready to obey the commandment, saying, that he did much
marvel that the devil could suffer him so long in that kind of
exercise. From thence he was led to the bishop's chancellor, and
asked whether he was a priest, and how he was placed in that
function? He answered, that he was no priest of the pope, but of
Jesus Christ, by whom he was lawfully called to that office. Then was
he demanded, whether he would renounce his doctrine? He answered,
that he maintained no doctrine of his own, but only the doctrine of
Christ, which also he was ready to seal with his blood, and also gave
hearty thanks to God, which so accepted him, as worthy to glorify his
name with his martyrdom. Upon this he was committed to a filthy and
stinking prison, where after he had remained a few months, he was
exhorted divers times to revoke, otherwise he should suffer; but
still he remained constant in his doctrine:  whereupon when the time
came assigned for his punishment, he was brought to the market-place,
where he preached, and there was hanged; who, most heartily praying
for his enemies, so finished his days in this miserable, wretched
world.

Galeazius Trecius, at the city called Laus Pompeia, in Italy, A.D.
1551. Accused by the bishop of St. Angelo and his priests.

     St. Angelo is a certain fortress or castle in Italy, within
Lombardy, not far from the city called Laus Pompeia, belonging also
to the same diocese. In this fort of St. Angelo was a house of
Augustine Friars, unto whom used much to resort a certain friar of
the same order, dwelling at Pavia, named Mainard, a man well expert
in the study of Scripture, and of a godly conversation. By this
Mainard, divers not only of the friars, but also of other townsmen,
were reduced to the love and knowledge of God's word, and to the
detestation of the pope's abuses. Among whom was also this Galeazius,
a gentleman of good calling, and wealthy in worldly substance, and
very beneficial to the poor, who, first by conference with the
friars, and also with his brother-in-law, began to conceive some
light in God's truth, and afterwards was confirmed more thoroughly by
Cœlius Secundus Curio, who, then being driven by persecution, came
from Pavia to the said place of St. Angelo. In process of time, as
this Galeazius increased in judgment and zeal, in setting forward the
wholesome word of God's grace, as a light shining in darkness, could
not so lie hid, but at last, A.D. 1551, certain were sent from the
forenamed city of Laus Pompeia to lay hands upon him, who brought him
to the bishop's palace; where he was kept in bands, having under him
only a pad of straw. Although his wife sent unto him a good
featherbed with sheets to lie in, yet the bishop's chaplains and
officers kept it from him, dividing the prey among themselves.

     When the time came that he should be examined, he was thrice
brought before the commissioners, where he rendered reasons and
causes of his faith, answering to their interrogatories with such
evidence of Scripture, and constancy of mind, that he was an
admiration to them that heard him. Albeit not long after, through the
importunate persuasions of his kinsfolk and friends, the other cold
gospellers, laying many considerations before his eyes, he was
brought at length to assent to certain points of the pope's doctrine.
But yet the mercy of God, which began with him, so left him not, but
brought him again to such repentance, and bewailing of his fact, that
he became afterwards (according to the example of Peter, and St.
Cyprian, and others) double-wise more valiant in defence of Christ's
quarrel; neither did he ever desire anything more than occasion to be
offered to recover again by confession, that he had lost before by
denial; affirming, that he never felt more joy of heart than at the
time of his examinations, where he stood thrice to the constant
confession of the truth; and contrary, that he never tasted more
sorrow in all his life, than when he slipped afterwards from the same
by dissimulation:  declaring, moreover, to his brethren, that death
was much more sweet unto him, with testimony of the verity, than life
with the least denial of truth, and loss of a good conscience. Thus
Galeazius, mourning for his fall in prison, after he heard of his
friends that nothing was yet so far past, but that he might recover
himself again, and that his infirmity was not prejudicial, but rather
a furtherance, to God's glory, and admonition to himself to stand
more strongly hereafter, took thereby exceeding comfort; and when
they would have left with him a book of the New Testament for his
comfort, he refused it, saying, that he had in his heart whatsoever
Christ there spake to his disciples:  also what happened both to
Christ and himself, and to his apostles, for confessing the word of
truth.

     Furthermore, so comfortable was he after that, that they who
talked with him continued all the day without meat or drink, and
would also have tarried all the night following, if they might have
been suffered.

     As Galeazius thus continued in the prison, looking for some
occasion to recover himself again from his fall, it followed in short
time that the inquisitors and priests repaired to him again in the
prison, supposing that he would confirm now that which before he had
granted to them; and required him so to do. Galeazius, denying all
that he had granted to them before, returned again to the defence of
his former doctrine with much more boldness of spirit, confessing
Christ, as he did before, and detesting images, affirming and proving
that God only is to be worshipped, and that in spirit and verity: 
also to be no more mediators but Christ alone, and that he only and
sufficiently, by his suffering, hath taken away the sins of the whole
world; and that all they which depart hence in this faith, are
ascertained of everlasting life; they which do not, are under
everlasting damnation; with such other like matter, which was
repugnant utterly to the pope's proceedings. With this confession
made, as his mind was greatly refreshed, so the adversaries went away
as much appalled; who, at last, perceiving that he in no case could
be revoked, caused him to be committed to the secular judge to be
burned.

     Thus Galeazius, early in the morning being brought out of
prison to the market-place, there was left standing bound to the
stake till noon, as a gazing-stock for all men to look upon. In the
which mean time many came about him, exhorting him to recant, and not
so to cast away his life, whereas with ten words speaking he might
save it. And if he cared not for his life, nor for his country where
he should live, nor for his goods and possessions, which should be
confiscated, yet he should somewhat respect his wife whom he loved so
well, and his young children; at least he should consider his own
soul. This counsel gave they, which more esteemed the commodities of
this present life, than any true soul's health in the life to come.
But to conclude, nothing could stir the settled mind of this valiant
martyr; wherefore fire was commanded at last to be put to the dry
wood about him, wherewith he was shortly consumed, without any noise
or crying, saving only these words heard in the middle of the flame,
"Lord Jesu! "This was A.D. 1551, November 24.

     Touching the story of this blessed martyr, this by the way is
to be given for a memorandum, that a little before this Galeazius
should be burned, there was a controversy between the mayor of the
city, and the bishop's clergy, for the expenses of the wood that
should go to his burning. He, hearing thereof, sent word to both the
parties to agree, for he himself, of his own goods, would see the
cost of that matter discharged.

     Another note, moreover, here is to be added, that while
Galeazius was in captivity, certain of the papists, perceiving that
Galeazius had great goods and possessions, practised with his wife,
under colour to release her husband, that she should lay out a sum of
money to be sent to the wife of the chief lord of Milan, called
Ferrarus Gonzaga, to the end that she should treat both with her
husband, and with the senate, for Galeazius's life; which money when
they had thus juggled unto their hands, Galeazius notwithstanding was
burned; and so was the silly woman robbed and defeated, both of her
husband, and also of her money.

D. Johannes Mollius, a Grey Friar; also a certain weaver of Perugia;
at Rome, A.D. 1553. Persecuted by the following parties:  Cornelius, a
professor of Bologna; Cardinal Campeius, and Cardinal del Campo:  also
by Bonaventure, a general; six cardinals, and Pope Julius the Third.

     Johannes Mollius Montilcinus, being but twelve years old, with
his brother Augustine, was set of his parents in the house of the
Grey Friars, where he in short time, having a fresh wit, far excelled
his fellows in all tongues and liberal sciences. So growing up to the
age of eighteen, he was ordained priest, and sang his first mass.
After that he was sent to Ferrara to study, where he so profited in
the space of six years, that he was assigned, by Vigerius, general of
that order, to be doctor, and then reader in divinity; who then, with
his sophistry, opposed himself as an utter enemy against the gospel.
From thence he went to Breschia, and the next year following to
Milan, where he read or professed openly. Again, from thence he was
taken by Franciscus Sfortia, and brought to the university of Pavia,
there openly to profess philosophy, where he remained four years.
After that he was called to the university of Bologna, by Laurentius 
Spatha, general of that order, where he was occupied in reading the
books of Aristotle De Anima. In the mean time God wrought in his soul
such light of his word, and of true religion, that he, waxing weary
of professing philosophy, began secretly to expound the Epistle of
St. Paul to the Romans to a few; which being known, his auditors
increased so fast, that he was compelled to read openly in the
temple. Where, as the number of his audience daily augmented, so the
eager fervency of their minds so mightily increased withal, that
every man almost came with his pen and ink to write, and great
diligence was bestowed how to come betimes to take up the first
places, where they might best hear; which was about A.D. 1538. There
was the same time, at Bologna, one Cornelius, an arrogant babbler,
who, envying the doings of Johannes, took upon him, at the request of
Cardinal Campeius, to expound the said Epistle of St. Paul, confuting
and disproving the explanation of the said Johannes, and extolling
the pope with all his traditions. Contrary, Johannes extolled and
commended only Christ and his merits to the people. But the purpose
of Cornelius came to small effect. For the auditors which first came
unto him, began by little to fall from him; and the concourse of the
other man's auditors more and more increased.

     Which when Cornelius perceived, he persuaded Campeius, that
unless he provided that man to be despatched, the estimation of the
Church of Rome would thereby greatly decay. But when they could not
openly bring their purpose about, secretly this way was devised, that
Cornelius and Johannes should come to open disputation; which
disputation endured till three o'clock after midnight. At length,
when neither party could agree, Johannes was bid to return home to
his house, who, as he was come down the lower steps where the place
was straitest, so that his friends could not come to rescue him,
(although by drawing their swords they declared their good wills,)
was there taken and laid fast in prison. When the day came, such
tumult and stir was in the whole city, that Cornelius was driven to
hide himself; also Campeius the cardinal, and the bishop there, were
both contemned of the students. The next day the bishop of Bologna
sent his chancellor to Johannes in the prison, to signify unto him,
that either he must recant, or else burn. But he, being of a bold and
cheerful spirit, would in no wise be brought to recant. This one
thing grieved him, that he should be condemned, his cause being not
heard.

     In the mean season, Laurentius Spatha, above-mentioned, being
general of that order, in most speedy wise posted up to Rome, and
there so practised with the cardinal St. Crucis, the proctor in the
court of Rome for the Grey Friars, that the pope wrote down his
letters to Campeius, that he should deliver the said John out of
prison; so that he, notwithstanding, within three months after,
should personally appear at Rome. Thus, the thirtieth day of his
imprisonment, he was delivered:  who, but for the coming of the pope's
letters, had been burned within three days after. Moreover, with the
said Mollius, Cornelius also was cited to make his appearance
likewise at Rome, and there was detained in prison by the cardinal
St. Crucis, till his cause should be decided. The friends of Mollius
gave him counsel not to go to Rome, and offered him money to go to
Germany; but he would not, saying, that the gospel must also be
preached at Rome. After he was come to Rome, and appeared before Pope
Paul the Third, humbly he desired, that the cause, being so weighty,
might come in public hearing; but that could not be obtained. Then
was he commanded to write his mind in articles, and to bring his
proofs; which he diligently performed, treating of original sin,
justification by faith, freewill, purgatory, and other such like;
proving the said articles by the authority of the Scripture, and of
ancient fathers; and so exhibited the same to the bishop of Rome.
Upon this, certain cardinals and bishops were assigned to have the
cause in hearing; who disputed with him three days, and could not
refel what he had proved. At last answer was made unto him thus:  That
it was truth which he affirmed, nevertheless the same was not meet
for this present time; for that it could not be taught or published
without the detriment of the apostolic see; wherefore he should
abstain hereafter from the Epistles of St. Paul, and so return again
safe to Bologna, and there profess philosophy. Thus as he was
returned to Bologna, and all men there were desirous to know of his
case, how he sped at Rome, openly in the pulpit he declared all
things in order as they were done, and gave God thanks.

     Herewith Campeius, being more offended than before, obtained of
the pope, that the general of the order should remove the said John
Mollius from Bologna, and place him some other where. So Mollius from
thence was sent to Naples, and there was appointed reader and
preacher in the monastery of St. Laurence. But Peter, the viceroy
there, not abiding his doctrine, so nearly sought his death, that he
had much ado to escape with life; and so, departing from thence, he
went wandering into Italy, from place to place, preaching Christ
wheresoever he came. Not long after this, when Cardinal Campeius was
dead, he was called again unto Bologna, by a good abbot named De
Grassis, A.D. 1543, where he renewed again the reading of St. Paul's
Epistles after a secret sort, as he did before; but that could not be
long undiscovered. Whereupon, by means of Cardinal de Capo, and by
Bonaventure the general, he was apprehended the second time, and
brought to Faventia, and laid there in a filthy and stinking prison,
where he continued four years, no man having leave once to come to
him. During which time of his endurance, he wrote a commentary upon
the books of Moses; but that labour, by the malignity of the
adversaries, was suppressed. At length, through the intercession of
the Earl Petilianus, and of the aforesaid good abbot De Grassis, he
was again delivered, and sent to Ravenna, where he made his abode a
few months with the abbot of St. Vitalem, and there again taught the
gospel of Christ as before; and whensoever he spake of the name of
Jesus, his eyes dropped tears, for he was fraught with a mighty
fervency of God's Holy Spirit.

     In process of time, when this abbot was dead, his sureties
began to be weary of their bond, and so was he again now the third
time reduced into prison by the pope's legates. There were then four
men of great authority, who, being stirred up of God, had pity upon
him, and bailed him out of prison; of whom, one of the said sureties
took the said Mollius home, to instruct his children in the doctrine
of religion and good letters. Furthermore, at the fame of this man,
such a concourse of people came to see him, that the adversaries
began to consult with themselves to kill him, lest his doctrine
should disperse further abroad, to the detriment of the Church of
Rome:  whereupon commandment was sent to the pope's legate to lay
hands upon him, and to send him up fast bound to Rome, where again,
now the fourth time, he was imprisoned in the castle of Rome, and
there continued eighteen months, being greatly assaulted, sometimes
with flattering promises, sometimes with terrible threats, to give
over his opinion:  but his building could not be shaken, for it was
grounded upon a sure rock. Thus Dr. Mollius, being constant in the
defence of Christ's gospel, was brought, with certain other men,
(which were also apprehended for religion,) into the temple of St.
Mary, called De Minerva, on the fifth day of September, A.D. 1553;
either there to revoke, or to be burned. There sat upon them six
cardinals in high seats, besides the judge, before whom preached a
Dominic Friar, which, cruelly inveighing against the poor prisoners,
incensed the cardinals, with all the vehemency he might, to their
condemnation. The poor men stood holding a burning taper in their
hands, of whom some for fear of death revolted:  but this Doctor
Mollius, with a weaver of Perugia, remained constant. Then Mollius
began an earnest sermon in the Italian tongue, wherein he confirmed
the articles of the faith by the sacred Scriptures, declaring also
that the pope was not the successor of Peter, but antichrist, and
that his sectaries do figure the whore of Babylon. Moreover, he cited
them up to the tribunal seat of Christ, and threw away the burning
taper from him:  whereupon they, being replenished with anger,
condemned him with the weaver to the fire, and commanded them to be
had away. So were they carried incontinent to the camp or field,
called Florianum, where they remained cheerful and constant. First,
the weaver was hanged. Mollius then, willing the hangman to execute
his office likewise upon him, began to exhort the people to beware of
idolatry, and to have no other saviours but Christ alone; for he only
is the mediator between God and man. And so was he also hanged,
commending his soul to God, and afterwards laid in the fire and
burned. The people having divers judgments upon him, some said he
died a heretic, some said he was a good man.

Two monks of the house of St. Austin in Rome, A.D. 1554; having being
impeached by the senate of Milan.

     Furthermore, in the same city of Rome, and about the same time,
in the monastery of St. Austin, were found two monks in their cells,
with their tongues and their heads cut off, only for rebuking the
immoderate and outrageous excess of the cardinals, as witnesseth
Manlius. Such was the cruelty then of the malignant adversaries.

Francis Gamba, at Como. Persecuted in the diocese, and by the senate
of Milan, A.D. 1554.

     Francis Gamba, born in the city of Breschia, in Lombardy, after
he had received the knowledge of the gospel, went to Geneva, to
confer about certain necessary affairs with them that were wise and
learned in that church, which was about the time when the Lord's
supper there was administered at Pentecost; who there also at the
same time did communicate with them. Afterwards, on his return home,
as he was passing over the lake of Como, he was taken and brought to
Como, and there committed to ward. During the time of which
imprisonment, divers and sundry, as well nobles as others, with
doctors also, especially priests and monks, resorted unto him,
labouring by all manner of means, and most fair promises, to reduce
him from his opinions, which seemed to some but fantasies coming of
some humour. To some they seemed uncatholic or heretical. But he,
constantly disputing with them by the manifest Scriptures, declared
the opinions which he defended, not to be any vain speculations or
imaginary fantasies of man's doting brain, but the pure verity of
God, and the evident doctrine of Jesus Christ, expressed in his word,
necessary for all men to believe, and also to maintain unto death: 
and therefore for his part, rather than he would be found false to
Christ and his word, he was there ready, not to deny, but to stand
to, Christ's gospel, to the effusion of his blood.

     Thus when he could in no wise be reclaimed from the doctrine of
truth, letters came from the senate of Milan, that he should be
executed with death; which execution, as they of Como were about to
prepare, in the mean while came other letters from Geneva, written by
the emperor's ambassador, and other nobles of Milan, by the which his
death was delayed for a time, till at length other letters were sent
again from the senate of Milan, requiring execution of the sentence.
Nevertheless, through intercession of his friends, one week's respite
more was granted him, to prove whether he might be won again to the
pope's church; that is to say, lost from God. Thus he, being mightily
and long assailed both by friends, and by enemies terrified, yet by
no persuasions would be expugned, but gave thanks to God, that he was
made worthy to suffer the rebukes of this world, and cruel death, for
the testimony of his Son; and so went he cheerfully unto his death.
Then came certain Franciscan Friars to him to hear his confession,
which he refused. Also they brought in their hands a cross for him to
behold, to keep him from desperation at the feeling of the fire; but
his mind, he said, was so replenished with joy and comfort in Christ,
that he needed neither their cross nor them. After this, as he was
declaring many comfortable things to the people, of the fruition of
those heavenly joys above which God hath prepared for his, because he
should speak no more to the people, his tongue was bored through; and
so immediately being tied to the stake, there he was strangled till
he was dead; every man there giving testimony, who saw his constancy,
that he died a good man.

Pomponius Algerius, at Rome. Persecuted by Pope Paul the Fourth, and
the magistrates of Venice, A.D. 1555.

     Pomponius Algerius, born in Capua, a young man of great
learning, was student in the university of Padua, where he, not being
able to conceal and keep close the verity of Christ's gospel, which
he learned by the heavenly teaching of God's grace, ceased not, both
by doctrine and example of life, to inform as many as he could in the
same doctrine, and to bring them to Christ. For the which he was
accused of heresy to Pope Paul the Fourth, who, sending immediately
to the magistrates of Venice, caused him to be apprehended at Padua,
and carried to Venice, where he was long detained in prison and
bonds, till at last the pope commanded the magistrates there to send
him up bound unto Rome, which the Venetians eftsoons accomplished.
After he was brought to Rome, manifold persuasions and allurements
were essayed to remove the virtuous and blessed young man from his
sentence:  but when no worldly persuasions could prevail against the
operation of God's Spirit in him, then was he adjudged to be burned
alive; which death most constantly he sustained, to the great
admiration of all that beheld him.

     Being in prison at Venice, he wrote an epistle to the afflicted
saints; which for the notable sweetness and most wonderful
consolation contained in the same, in showing forth the mighty
operation of God's holy power working in his afflicted saints that
suffer for his sake, I have thought good and expedient to
communicate, as a principal monument amongst all other martyrs'
letters, not only with the other letters which shall be inserted
hereafter (the Lord willing) in the end of the book, but also in this
present place to be read, to the intent that both they which be, or
shall be hereafter, in affliction, may take consolation; and also
they that yet follow the trade of this present world, in comparing
the joys and commodities thereof with these joys here expressed, may
learn and consider with themselves, what difference there is between
them both, and thereby may learn to dispose themselves in such sort,
as may be to their edification, and perpetual felicity of their
souls. The copy of the letter, first written in Latin, we have
translated into English, the tenor whereof here ensueth: 

A comfortable letter of Pomponius Algerius an Italian.

     "To his most dearly beloved brethren and fellow servants in
Christ, which are departed out of Babylon into Mount Sion; grace,
peace, and health, from God our Father, by Jesus Christ our Lord and
Saviour!

     "To mitigate your sorrow which you take for me, I cannot but
impart unto you some portion of my delectations and joys, which I
feel and find, to the intent you with me may rejoice and sing before
the Lord, giving thanks unto him. I shall utter that which no man
will believe when I shall declare it. I have found a nest of honey
and honey-comb in the entrails of a lion. Who will ever believe that
I shall say? or what man will ever think in the deep dark dungeon to
find a paradise of pleasure? in the place of sorrow and death, to
dwell in tranquillity and hope of life? in a cave infernal, to be
found joy of soul? and where other men do weep, there to be
rejoicing? where others do shake and tremble, there strength and
boldness to be plenty? Who will ever think, or who will believe this?
in such a woeful state, such delectation? in a place so desolate,
such society of good men? in strait bands and cold irons, such rest
to be had? All these things the sweet hand of the Lord, my sweet
brethren! doth minister unto me. Behold, he that that was once far
from me, now is present with me; whom once scarce I could feel, now I
see more apparently; whom once I saw afar off, now I behold near at
hand; whom once I hungered for, the same now approacheth and reacheth
his hand unto me. He doth comfort me, and heapeth me up with
gladness; he driveth away all bitterness; he ministereth strength and
courage; he healeth me, refresheth, advanceth, and comforteth me. Oh
how good is the Lord, who suffereth not his servants to be tempted
above their strength! Oh how easy and sweet is his yoke! Is there any
like unto the Highest, who receiveth the afflicted, healeth the
wounded, and nourisheth them? Is there any like unto him? Learn, ye
well-beloved! how amiable the Lord is, how meek and merciful he is,
which visiteth his servants in temptations, neither disdaineth he to
keep company with us in such vile and stinking caves. Will the blind
and incredulous world, think you, believe this? or rather will it not
say thus:  No, thou wilt never be able to abide long the burning heat,
the cold snow, and the pinching hardness of that place, the manifold
miseries, and other grievances innumerable. The rebukes and frowning
faces of men, how wilt thou suffer? Post thou not consider and
revolve in thy mind thy pleasant country, the riches of the world,
thy kinsfolk, the delicate pleasures and honours of this life? dost
thou forget the solace of thy sciences, and the fruit of all thy
labours? Wilt thou thus lose all thy labours which thou hast hitherto
sustained? so many nights watched? thy painful travails, and all thy
laudable enterprises, wherein thou hast been exercised continually
even from thy childhood? Finally, fearest thou not death, which
hangeth over thee, and that for no crime committed? Oh what a fool
art thou, which for one word speaking mayst salve all this, and wilt
not! What a rude and unmannerly thing is this, not to be entreated at
the instant petitions and desires of such, so many and so mighty, so
just, so virtuous, so prudent and gracious senators, and such noble
personages, &c.

     "But now to answer:  Let this blind world hearken to this again,
What heat can there be more burning, than that fire which is prepared
for thee hereafter? and likewise what snow can be more cold than thy
heart which is in darkness, and hath no light? What thing is more
hard, and sharp, or crooked, than this present life which here we
lead? what thing more odious and hateful than this world here
present? And let these worldly men here answer me, What country can
we have more sweet than the heavenly country above? what treasures
more rich or precious than everlasting life? And who be our kinsmen,
but they which hear the word of God? Where be greater riches, or
dignities more honourable, than in heaven? And as touching the
sciences, let this foolish world consider, be they not ordained to
learn to know God, whom unless we do know, all our labours, our night
watchings, our studies, and all our enterprises serve to no use or
purpose; all is but lost labour.

     "Furthermore, let the miserable worldly man answer me, What
remedy or safe refuge can there be unto him, if he lack God, who is
the life and medicine of all men? and how can he be said to fly from
death, when he himself is already dead in sin? If Christ be the way,
verity, and life, how can there be any life then without Christ? The
sultry heat of the prison to me is coldness; the cold winter to me is
a fresh spring-time in the Lord. He that feareth not to be burned in
the fire, how will he fear the heat of weather? or what careth be for
the pinching frost, who burneth with the love of the Lord? The place
is sharp and tedious to them that be guilty, but to the innocent and
guiltless it is mellifluous. Here droppeth the delectable dew; here
floweth the pleasant nectar; here runneth the sweet milk; here is
plenty of all good things. And although the place itself be desert
and barren, yet to me it seemeth a large walk, and a valley of
pleasure; here to me is the better and more noble part of the world.
Let the miserable worldling say and confess, if there be any plot,
pasture, or meadow so delightful to the mind of man, as here. Here I
see kings, princes, cities, and people; here I see wars, where some
be overthrown, some be victors, some thrust down, some lifted up.
Here is the Mount Sion; here I am already in heaven itself; here
standeth first Christ Jesus in the front. About him stand the old
fathers, prophets, and evangelists, and apostles, and all the
servants of God:  of whom some do embrace and cherish me, some exhort
me, some open the sacraments unto me, some comfort me, other some
singing about me. And how then shall I be thought to be alone, among
so many, and such as these be? the beholding of whom to me is both
solace and example:  for here I see some crucified, some slain, some
stoned, some cut asunder and some quartered, some roasted, some
broiled, some put in hot cauldrons, some having their eyes bored
through, some their tongues cut out, some their skin plucked over
their heads, some their hands and feet chopped off, some put in kilns
and furnaces, some cast down headlong and given to the beasts and
fowls of the air to feed upon:  it would ask a long time if I should
recite all.

     "To be short, divers I see with divers and sundry torments
excruciate; yet, notwithstanding, all living, and all safe. One
plaster, one salve, cureth all their wounds:  which also gives to them
strength and life, so that I sustain all these transitory anguishes
and small afflictions with a quiet mind, having a greater hope laid
up in heaven. Neither do I fear mine adversaries which here persecute
me and oppress me; for He that dwelleth in the heaven shall laugh
them to scorn, and the Lord shall deride them. I fear not thousands
of people which compass me about. The Lord my God shall deliver me,
my hope, my supporter, my comforter, who exalteth my head. He shall
smite all them that stand up against me without cause, and shall dash
the teeth and jaws of sinners asunder; for he only is all blessedness
and majesty. The rebukes for Christ's cause make us jocund; for so it
is written, If ye be rebuked and scorned for the name of Christ,
happy be you; for the glory and Spirit of God resteth upon you, 1
Pet. iv. Be you therefore certified, that our rebukes which are laid
upon us, redound to the shame and harm of the rebukers. In this world
there is no mansion firm to me; and therefore I travel up to the New
Jerusalem which is in heaven, and which offereth itself unto me
without paying any fine or income. Behold, I have entered already on
my journey, where my house standeth for me prepared, and where I
shall have riches, kinsfolks, delights, honours never failing. As for
these earthly things here present, they are transitory shadows,
vanishing vapours, and ruinous walls. Briefly, all is but very vanity
of vanities, where hope and the substance of eternity to come are
wanting; which the merciful goodness of the Lord hath given as
companions to accompany me, and to comfort me:  and now do the same
begin to work and to bring forth fruits in me. I have travailed
hitherto, laboured and sweat early and late, watching day and night,
and now my travails begin to come to effect. Days and hours have I
bestowed upon my studies. Behold, the true countenance of God is
sealed upon me; the Lord hath given mirth in my heart; and therefore
in the same will I lay me down in peace and rest, Psal. iv. And who
then shall dare to blame this our age consumed, or say that our years
be cut off? What man can now cavil that these our labours are lost,
which have followed and found out the Lord and Maker of this world,
and which have changed death for life? My portion is the Lord, saith
my soul, and therefore I will seek and wait for him. Now then, if to
die in the Lord be not to die, but to live most joyfully, where is
this wretched worldly rebel, which blameth us of folly, for giving
away our lives to death? Oh how delectable is this death to me, to
taste the Lord's cup, which is an assured pledge of true salvation!
for so hath the Lord himself forewarned us, saying, The same that
they have done to me, they will also do unto you. Wherefore let the
doltish world, with its blind worldlings, (who in the bright sunshine
yet go stumbling in darkness, being as blind as beetles,) cease thus
unwisely to carp against us for our rash suffering, as they count it: 
to whom thus we answer again with the holy apostle, Neither
tribulation, nor anguish, nor hunger, nor nakedness, nor jeopardy,
nor persecution, nor sword, shall be able ever to separate us from
the love of Christ. We are slain all the day long; we are made like
sheep ordained to the shambles, Rom. viii. Thus do we resemble Christ
our Head, who said, that the disciple cannot be above his master, nor
the servant above his lord. The same Lord hath also commanded that
every one shall take up his cross and follow him, Luke ix. Rejoice,
rejoice, my dear brethren and fellow servants! and be of good
comfort, when ye fall into sundry temptations. Let your patience be
perfect on all parts; for so is it foreshowed us before, and is
written, that they that shall kill you, shall think to do God good
service. Therefore afflictions and death be as tokens and sacraments
of our election and life to come. Let us then be glad and sing to the
Lord, when we, being clear from all just accusation, are persecuted
and given to death:  for better it is, that we in doing well do
suffer, if it so be the will of the Lord, than doing evil, 1 Pet.
iii. We have for our example Christ and the prophets, who spake in
the name of the Lord, whom the children of iniquity did quell and 
murder; and now we bless and magnify them that then suffered. Let us
be glad and joyous in our innocency and uprightness. The Lord shall
reward them that persecute us; let us refer all revengement to him.

     "I am accused of foolishness, for that I do not shrink from the
true doctrine and knowledge of God, and do not rid myself out of
these troubles, when with one word I may. Oh the blindness of man!
who seeth not the sun shining, neither remembereth the Lord's words.
Consider therefore what he saith, You are the light of the world. A
city builded on the hill cannot be hid; neither do men light a
candle, and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it
may shine, and give light to them in the house. And in another place
he saith, You shall be led before kings and rulers; fear ye not them
that kill the body, but him which killeth both body and soul.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before
my Father which is in heaven; and he that denieth me before men, him
will I also deny before my heavenly Father. Wherefore seeing the
words of the Lord be so plain, how, or by what authority, will this
wise counsellor then approve this his counsel which he doth give? God
forbid that I should relinquish the commandments of God, and follow
the counsels of men; for it is written, Blessed is the man that hath
not gone in the ways of sinners, and hath not stood in the counsel of
the ungodly, and hath not set in the chair of pestilence, Psalm i.
God forbid that I should deny Christ, where I ought to confess him. I
will not set more by my life, than by my soul; neither will I
exchange the life to come for this world here present. Oh how
foolishly speaketh he which argueth me of foolishness!

     "Neither do I take it to be a thing so uncomely, or unseeming
for me, not to obey in this matter the requests of those so
honourable, just, prudent, virtuous, and noble senators, whose
desires (he saith) were enough to command me:  for so are we taught of 
the apostles, that we ought to obey God before men. After that we
have served and done our duty first unto God, then are we bound next
to obey the potentates of this world; whom I wish to be perfect
before the Lord. They are honourable; but yet are they to be made
more perfect in the Lord:  they are just; but yet Christ, the seat of
justice, is lacking in them:  they are wise; but where is in them the
beginning of wisdom, that is, the fear of the Lord? they are called
virtuous; but yet I wish them more absolute in Christian charity: 
they are good and gracious; but yet I miss in them the foundation of
goodness, which is the Lord God, in whom dwelleth all goodness and
grace:  they are honourable; yet have they not received the Lord of
glory, which is our Saviour, most honourable and glorious.
Understand, ye kings, and learn, you that judge the earth. Serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice in him with trembling. Hearken to doctrine,
and get knowledge, lest you fall into God's displeasure, and so
perish out of the way of righteousness. What fret you, what fume you,
O Gentiles? O you people! why cast you in your brains the cogitations
of vanity? You kings of the earth, and you princes, why conspire you
so together against Christ, and against his Holy One? Psalm ii. How
long will you seek after lies, and hate the truth? Turn you to the
Lord, and harden not your hearts:  for this you must needs confess,
that they that persecute the Lord's servants, do persecute the Lord
himself:  for so he saith himself, Whatsoever men shall do to you, I
will count it to be done not as unto you, but to myself.

     "And now let this carnal, politic counsellor and disputer of
this world tell, wherein have they to blame me, if in my examinations
I have not answered so after their mind and affection as they
required of me? seeing it is not ourselves that speak, but the Lord
that speaketh in us, as he himself doth forewitness, saying, When ye
shall be brought before rulers and magistrates, it is not you
yourselves that speak, but the Spirit of my Father that shall be in
you, Matt. x. Wherefore if the Lord be true and faithful of his word,
as it is most certain, then is there no blame in me:  for he gave the
words that I did speak; and who was I, that could resist his will? If
any shall reprehend the things that I said, let him then quarrel with
the Lord, whom it pleased to work so in me. And if the Lord be not to
be blamed, neither am I herein to be accused, who did that I purposed
not, and that I forethought not of. The things which there I did
utter and express, if they were otherwise than well, let them show
it, and then will I say, that they were my words, and not the Lord's.
But if they were good and approved, and such as cannot justly be
accused, then must it needs be granted, spite of their teeth, that
they proceeded of the Lord; and then who be they that shall accuse
me? a people of prudence? or who shall condemn me? just judges? And
though they so do, yet, nevertheless, the word shall not be
frustrated, neither shall the gospel be foolish, or therefore decay;
but rather the kingdom of God shall the more prosper and flourish
unto the Israelites, and shall pass the sooner unto the elect of
Christ Jesus:  and they who shall so do, shall prove the grievous
judgment of God; neither shall they escape without punishment, that
be persecutors and murderers of the just. My well-beloved! lift up
your eyes, and consider the counsels of God. He showed unto us of 
late an image of his plague, which was to our correction:  and if we
shall not receive him, he will draw out his sword, and strike with
sword, pestilence, and famine, the nation that shall rise against
Christ.

     "These have I written to your comfort. Dear brethren! pray for
me. I kiss in my heart, with a holy kiss, my good masters, Sylvius,
Pergula, Justus; also Fidel Rocke, and him that beareth the name of
Lelia, whom I know, although being absent. Item, the governor of the
university, Syndicus, and all others whose names be written in the
hook of life. Farewell, all my fellow servants of God! fare ye well
in the Lord, and pray for me continually.

     "From the delectable orchard of Leonine prison, the twelfth of
the calends of August, A.D. 1555."

     It is written of one Thebrotus, that when he had read the book
of Plato, De Immortalitate Animæ, he was so moved and persuaded
therewith, that he cast himself down headlong from a high wall, to be
rid out of this present life. If those heathen philosophers, having
no word of God, nor promise of any resurrection and life to come,
could so soon be persuaded, by reading the works of Plato, to contemn
this world and life here present; how much more is it to be required
in Christians, instructed with so many evidences and promises of
God's most perfect word, that they should learn to cast off the
carnal desires and affections of this miserable peregrination; and
that for a double respect, not only in seeing, reading, and
understanding so many examples of the miseries of this wicked world;
but also much more in considering and pondering the heavenly joys and
consolations of the other world, remaining for us hereafter to come;
for a more full evidence whereof, I thought good to give out this
present letter of Algerius above prefixed, for a taste of the same,
and a lively testimony for all true Christians to read and consider.
Now let us proceed further (the Lord willing) in our table of Italian
martyrs.

Johannes Aloysius, at Rome, and Jacobus Bovellus at Messina.
Persecuted by Pope Pius the Fourth, A.D. 1559.

     Of Johannes Aloysius we find mention made in a letter of Simon
Florellus; which Aloysius was sent down from Geneva to the parts of
Calabria, there to be their minister; who afterwards was sent for up
to Rome, and there suffered.

     Jacobus Bovellus was likewise sent from Geneva to the said
parts of Calabria, with Aloysius; who also, being sent for up to
Rome, was sent down to the city of Messina, and there was martyred,
A.D. 1559.

Divers that suffered in the kingdom of Naples, A.D. 1560.
Illustration:  Naples

     After Pope Julius the Third, came Marcellus the Second. After
him succeeded Pope Paul the Fourth. This Paul being dead, followed
Pope Pius the Fourth, who, being advanced to that room, began hot
persecution in all the territories of the Church of Rome, against
them which were suspected for Lutherans; whereupon ensued great
troubleand persecution in the kingdom of Naples, in such cruel sort,
that many noble men, with their wives and others, are reported there
to be slain.

Eighty-eight martyrs in one day, with one butcherly knife, slain like
sheep.

Sixteen hundred others also, condemned at Calabria, A.D. 1560.
Illustration:  Martyrs Slain with a Knife

     In Calabria, likewise, the same time, suffered a blessed number
of Christ's well-beloved saints, both old and young, put together in
one house, to the number of eighty-eight persons; all which, one
after another, were taken out of the house, and so being laid upon
the butcher's stall, like the sheep in the shambles, with one bloody
knife were all killed in order:  a spectacle most tragical for all
posterity to remember, and almost incredible to believe. Wherefore,
for the more credit of the matter, lest we should seem either light
of credit, to believe that is not true, or rashly to commit to pen
things without due proof and authority, we have here annexed a piece
of an epistle written by Master Simon Florellus, preacher of God's
word at the city of Clavenna, among the Rhetians, unto a certain
friend of his named Gulielmus Gratalorus, an Italian, and doctor of
physic in the university of Basil. Which Gratalorus translated the
same into the Latin tongue, and it is to be found in the 11th book of
Pantaleon, p. 337, the English whereof is this as followeth: 

The end of a certain letter of Simon Florellus, written in Italian,
concerning a lamentable slaughter of eighty-eight Christian saints in
the parts of Calabria.

     "As concerning news I have nothing to write, but only that I
send you a copy of certain letters, imprinted either at Rome or at
Venice, concerning the martyrdom or persecution in two several towns
of Calabria, eight Italian miles from the borders of Cosenza, the one
called St. Sixtus, within two miles of Montalto, under the seigniory
of the duke of Montalto; the other called Guardia, situate upon the
sea-coast, and twelve miles from St. Sixtus:  which two towns are
utterly destroyed, and eight hundred of the inhabitants there, or, as
some write from the city of Rome, no less than a full thousand. He
that wrote the letter, was servant to Ascanius Carracciolus. The
country and people there, I well know to have taken the first
original of their good doctrine and honest life from the Waldenses;
for before my departure from Geneva, at their re. quest, I sent them
two schoolmasters, and two preachers. The last year the two preachers
were martyred; the one at Rome, named Johannes Aloysius Pascalis, a
citizen of Cunio; the other at Messina, named James Bovell; both of
Piedmont. This year the residue of that godly fellowship were
martyred in the same place. I trust this good seed sown in Italy,
will bring forth good and plentiful fruit."

     Now followeth the copy of the letter sent from Montalto, a town
in Calabria, eight miles distant from Cosenza, bearing date the
eleventh of June, 1560. The writer of this letter, as ye may
perceive, was one of them that call themselves catholics, and
followers of the pope. The words of the letter be these, as here
follow.

Here followeth the copy of a letter sent from Montalto in Calabria,
by a Romanist, to a certain friend of his in Rome, containing news of
the persecution of Christ's people in Calabria, by the new pope, Pius
the Fourth, A.D. 1550.

     "Hitherto, most noble lord! have I certified you, what here
daily hath been done about these heretics. Now cometh next to signify
unto your Lordship the horrible judgment begun this present day,
being the eleventh of June, to be executed very early in the morning
against the Lutherans; which when I think upon, I verily quake and
tremble. And truly the manner of their putting to death was to be
compared to the slaughter of calves and sheep; for they, being all
thrust up in one house together, as in a sheep-fold, the executioner
cometh in, and amongst them taketh one, and blindfoldeth him with a
muffler about his eyes, and so leadeth him forth to a larger place
near adjoining, where he commandeth him to kneel down; which being so
done, he cutteth his throat, and leaving him half dead, and taking
his butcher's knife and muffler all of gore-blood, (which the
Italians call benda,) cometh again to the rest, and so leading one
after another, he despatched them all, which were to the number of
eighty-eight. This spectacle to behold how doleful and horrible it
was, I leave to your Lordship's judgment; for to write of it, I
myself cannot but weep:  neither was there any of the beholders there
present, which seeing one to die, could abide to behold the death of
another. But certes so humbly and patiently they went to death, as is
almost incredible to believe. Some of them, as they were in dying,
affirmed, that they believed even as we do:  notwithstanding the most
part of them died in the same their obstinate opinions. All the aged
persons went to death more cheerfully; the younger were more
timorous. I tremble and shake even to remember how the executioner
held his bloody knife between his teeth, with the bloody muffler in
his hand, and his arms all in gore-blood up to the elbows, going to
the fold, and taking every one of them, one after another, by the
hand, and so despatching them all no otherwise than doth a butcher
kill his calves and sheep.

     "It is moreover appointed (and the carts be come already) that
all those so put to death should be quartered, and so be conveyed in
the carts to the hithermost parts of Calabria, where they will be
hanged upon poles in the highways and other places, even to the
confines of the same country. Unless the pope's Holiness and the lord
viceroy of Naples shall give in commandment to the lord marquis of
Buccianus, governor of the said province, to stay his hand, and go no
further, he will proceed with the rack and torture, examining all
other, and so increase the number in such sort, that he will nigh
despatch them all.

     "This day it is also determined, that a hundred of the more
ancient women should appear to be examined and racked, and after to
be put to death, that the mixture may be perfect, for so many men so
many women:  and thus have you what I can say of this justice. Now is
it about two o'clock in the afternoon:  shortly we shall hear what
some of them said when they went to execution. There be certain of
them so obstinate, that they will not look upon the crucifix, nor be
confessed to the priest; and they shall be burned alive.

     "The heretics that be apprehended and condemned, are to the
number of sixteen hundred, but as yet no more but these aforesaid
eighty-eight are already executed. This people have their original of
the valley named Angrogne, near to Subaudia, and in Calabria are
called Ultramontani. In the kingdom of Naples there are four other
places of the same people, of whom whether they live well or no, as
yet we know not; for they are but simple people, ignorant, without
learning, wood-gatherers, and husbandmen:  but as I hear, much devout
and religious, giving themselves to die for religion's sake.

     "From Montalto, the eleventh of June."

     And thus much writeth this Romanist.

     Here moreover is to be noted, that the aforesaid Marquis
Buccianus above specified, had a son or brother, unto whom the said
new pope (Pius the Fourth, belike) is reported to have promised a
cardinalship at Rome, if all the Lutherans were extirpated and rooted
out in that province. And like enough that the same was the cause of
his butcherly persecution and effusion of Christian blood, in the
said country of Calabria, beyond Naples, in Italy.

     Besides these godly Italian martyrs in this table above
contained, many others also have suffered in the same country of
Italy, of whom some before have been specified, some peradventure
omitted. But many more there be, whose names we know not; whereof as
soon as knowledge may be given unto us, we purpose, God willing, to
impart the same, loving reader! unto thee.



161. THE WALDENSIAN MARTYRS IN PROVENCE

     Now in the mean time it followeth, (according to my promise
made before,) next after this lamentable slaughter of Calabria, here
to insert also the tragical persecution and horrible murder of the
faithful flock of Christ, inhabiting in Merindol in France, and in
the towns adjacent near unto the same, in the time of Francis the
First, the French king. The furious cruelty of this miserable
persecution, although it cannot be set forth too much at large, yet
because we will not weary too much the reader with the full length
thereof, we have so contracted the same, especially the principal
effect thereof we have comprehended in such sort, that as we on the
one part have avoided prolixity, so on the other, we have omitted
nothing which might seem unworthy to be forgotten. The story here
followeth.

A notable history of the persecution and destruction of the people of
Merindol and Cabriers, in the country of Provence: 

Where not a few persons, but whole villages and townships, with the
most part of all the aforesaid country, both men, women, and
children, were put to all kinds of cruelty, and suffered martyrdom
for the profession of the gospel.

     They that write of the beginning of this people, say, that
about two hundred years ago, A.D. 1360, they came out of the country
of Piedmont to inhabit in Provence, in certain villages destroyed by
wars, and other desert places:  wherein they used such labour and
diligence, that they had abundance of corn, wine, oils, honey,
almonds, with other fruits and commodities of the earth, and much
cattle. Before they came thither, Merindol was a barren desert, and
not inhabited:  but these good people, (in whom God always had
reserved some little seed of piety,) being dispersed and separated
from the society of men, were compelled to dwell with beasts in that
waste and wild desert, which, notwithstanding, through the blessing
of God, and their great labour and travail, became exceeding
fruitful. Notwithstanding, the world in the mean time so detested and
abhorred them, and with all shameful rebukes and contumelies railed
against them in such despiteful manner, that it seemed they were not
worthy that the earth should bear them:  for they of a long
continuance and custom had refused the bishop of Rome's authority,
and observed ever a more perfect kind of doctrine than others,
delivered unto them from the father to the son, ever since the year
of our Lord 1200.

     For this cause they were often accused and complained of to the
king, as contemners and despisers of the magistrates, and rebels: 
wherefore they were called by divers names, according to the
countries and places where they dwelt. For in the country about
Lyons, they were called the Poor People of Lyons; in the borders of
Sarmatia, and Livonia, and other countries towards the north, they
were called Lollards; in Flanders and Artois, Turrelupines, of a
desert where wolves did haunt. In Dauphine, with great despite, they
were called Chagnards, because they lived in places open to the sun,
and without house or harbour. But most commonly they were called
Waldois, of Waldo, who first instructed them in the word of God;
which name continued until the name of Lutherans came up, which above
all others was most hated and abhorred.

     Notwithstanding, in all these most spiteful contumelies and
slanders, the people dwelling at the foot of the Alps, and also in
Merindol and Cabriers, and the quarters thereabouts, always lived so
godly, so uprightly, and so justly, that in all their life and
conversation there appeared to be in them a great fear of God. That
little light of true knowledge which God had given them, they
laboured by all means to kindle and increase daily more and more,
sparing no charges, whether it were to procure books of the Holy
Scriptures, or to instruct such as were of the best and most towardly
wits in Iearning and godliness; or else to send them into other
countries, yea, even to the farthest parts of the earth, where they
had heard that any light of the gospel began to shine.

     For in the year 1530, understanding that the gospel was
preached in certain towns of Germany and Switzerland, they sent
thither two learned men, that is, Georgius Maurellus, born in
Dauphine, a godly preacher of their own, and whom they had of their
charges brought up in learning, and Petrus Latomus, a Burgundian, to
confer with the wise and learned ministers of the churches there in
the doctrine of the gospel, and to know the whole form and manner
which those churches used in the service and worshipping of God:  and
particularly to have their advice also upon certain points which they
were not resolved in. These two, after great conference had with the
chiefest in the church of God, namely with Œcolampadius at Basil; at
Strasburg, with Bucer and Capito; and at Berne, with Bartholdus
Hallerus, as they were returning through Burgundy homeward, Petrus
Latomus was taken at Dijon, and cast into prison; Maurellus escaped,
and returned alone to Merindol, with the books and letters which he
brought with him from the churches of Germany; and declared to his
brethren all the points of his commission, and opened unto them how
many and great errors they were in, into the which their old
ministers, whom they call Barbes, (that is to say, uncles,) had
brought them, leading them from the right way of true religion.

     When the people heard this, they were moved with such a zeal to
have their churches reformed, that they sent for the most ancient
brethren, and the chiefest in knowledge and experience of all
Calabria and Apulia, to consult with them touching the reformation of
the church. This matter was so handled, that it stirred up the
bishops, priests, and monks, in all Provence, with great rage against
them. Amongst others, there was one cruel wretch called John de Roma,
a monk, who, obtaining a commission to examine those that were
suspected to be of the Waldois or Lutheran profession, forthwith
ceased not to afflict the faithful with all kinds of cruelty that he
could devise or imagine. Amongst other most horrible torments, this
was one which he most delighted in, and most commonly practised; he
filled boots with boiling grease, and put them upon their legs, tying
them backward to a form, with their legs hanging down over a small
fire; and so he examined them. Thus he tormented very many, and in
the end most cruelly put them to death.

     The first whom he thus tormented, were Michelottus Serra and W.
Melius, with a number more. Wherefore Francis the French king, being
informed of the strange and outrageous cruelty of this hellish monk,
sent letters to the court of parliament of Provence, that forthwith
he should be apprehended, and by form of process, and order of law,
he should be condemned, and advertisement sent unto him with all
speed of his condemnation. The monk, being advertised hereof by his
friends, conveyed himself to Avignon, where he thought to enjoy the
spoilings, which he, like a notorious thief, had gotten by fraud and
extortion from the poor Christians:  but shortly after, he which had
so shamefully spoiled others, was spoiled of all together, by his own
household servants; whereupon shortly after he fell sick of a most
horrible disease, strange and unknown to any physician. So extreme
were the pains and torments wherewith he was continually vexed in all
his body, that no ointment, no fomentation, nor any thing else, could
ease him one minute of an hour:  neither was there any man that could
tarry near about him, nor yet would any one of his own friends come
near to him, so great was the stench that came from him. For the
which cause he was carried from the Jacobins to an hospital, there to
be kept; but the stench and infection so increased, that no man there
durst come near him:  no, nor he himself was able to abide the
horrible stench that issued from his body, full of ulcers and sores,
and swarming with vermin, and so rotten, that the flesh fell away
from the bones by piecemeal.

     While he was in these torments and anguish, he cried out
oftentimes in great rage, "Oh! who will deliver me? who will kill and
rid me out of these intolerable pains, which I know I suffer for the
evils and oppressions that I have done to the poor men?" And he
himself went about divers times to destroy himself, but he had not
the power. In these horrible torments and anguish, and fearful
despair, this blasphemer and most cruel homicide most miserably ended
his unhappy days and cursed life, as a spectacle to all persecutors,
receiving a just reward of his cruelty by the just judgment of God.
When he was dead, there was no man that would come near him to bury
him; but a young novice, newly come to his order, instead of a more
honourable sepulture, caught hold with a hook upon his stinking
carrion, and drew him into a hole hard by, which was made for him.

     After the death of this cruel monster, the bishop of Aix, by
his official Perionet, continued the persecution, and put a great
multitude of them in prison, of whom some by force of torments
revolted from the truth; the others which continued constant, after
he had condemned them of heresy, were put into the hands of the judge
ordinary, who at that time was one Meiranus, a notable cruel
persecutor, who, without any form of process or order of law, such as
the official had pronounced to be heretics, he put to death with most
cruel torments; but shortly after he received a just reward of his
cruelty in like manner.

     After the death of the good president Cusinetus, the lord of
Revest, being chief president of the parliament of Aix, put many of
the faithful to death; who afterwards, being put out of his office,
returned to his house of Revest, where he was stricken with such a
horrible sickness, that, for the fury and madness which he was in,
his wife, or any that were about him, durst not come near him; and so
he, dying in his fury and rage, was justly plagued for his unmerciful
and cruel dealing.

     After him succeeded Bartholomew Chassanee, likewise a pestilent
persecutor, whom God at length struck with a fearful and sudden
death. In the time of this tyrant, those of Merindol, in the persons
of ten, were cited personally to appear before the king's attorney.
But they, hearing that the court had determined to burn them without
any further process or order of law, durst not appear at the day
appointed. For which cause the court awarded a cruel sentence against
Merindol, and condemned all the inhabitants to be burned, both men
and women, sparing none, no, not the little children and infants; the
town to be razed, and their houses beaten down to the ground; also
the trees to be cut down, as well olive-trees as all others, and
nothing to be left, to the intent it should never be inhabited again,
but remain as a desert or wilderness.

     This bloody arrest or decree seemed so strange and wonderful,
that in every place throughout all Provence there was great reasoning
and disputation concerning the same, especially among the advocates,
and men of learning and understanding; insomuch that many durst
boldly and openly say, that they greatly marvelled how that court of
parliament could be so mad, or so bewitched, to give out such an
arrest, so manifestly injurious and unjust, and contrary to all right
and reason, yea, to all sense of humanity; also contrary to the
solemn oath which all such as are received to office in courts of
parliament, are accustomed to make; that is to say, to judge justly
and uprightly, according to the law of God, and the just ordinances
and laws of the realm, so that God thereby might be honoured, and
every man's right regarded, without respect of persons.

     Some of the advocates or lawyers, defending the said arrest to
be just and right, said, that in the case of Lutheranism, the judges
are not bound to observe either right or reason, law or ordinance;
and that the judges cannot fail or do amiss, whatsoever judgment they
do give, so that it tend to the ruin and extirpation of all such as
are suspected to be Lutherans.

     To this the other lawyers and learned men answered, that upon
their sayings it would ensue, that the judges should now altogether
follow the same manner and form, in proceeding against the Christians
accused to be Lutherans, which the gospel witnesseth that the
priests, scribes, and Pharisees, in pursuing and persecuting, and
finally condemning, our Lord Jesus Christ.

     By these and such other like talks, the said arrest was
published throughout the country, and there was no assembly or
banquet where it was not disputed or talked of:  and namely, within
twelve days after the arrest was given out, there was a great banquet
in the town of Aix; at which banquet were present M. Bartholomew
Chassanee, president, and many other councillors and other noble
personages and men of authority. There was also the archbishop of
Arles, and the bishop of Aix, with divers ladies and gentlewomen,
amongst whom was one which was commonly reported to be the bishop of
Aix's concubine. They were scarce well sat at the table, but she
began thus to talk:  "My lord president! will you not execute the
arrest which is given out of late against the Lutherans of Merindol?"
The president answered nothing, feigning that he heard her not. Then
a certain gentleman asked of her, what arrest that was? She recited
it in manner and form as it was given out, forgetting nothing, as if
she had a long time studied to commit the same to memory:  whereunto
they that were at the banquet gave diligent ear, without any word
speaking, until she had ended her tale.

     Then the lord of Alenc, a man fearing God, and of great
understanding, said unto her, "Gentlewoman! you have learned this
tale either of some that would have it so, or else it is given out by
some parliament of women." Then the lord of Senas, an ancient
councillor, said unto him; "No, no, my lord of Alenc! it is no tale
which you have heard this gentlewoman tell; for it is an arrest given
out by a whole senate:  and you ought not thus to speak, except you
would call the court of Provence a parliament of women." Then the
lord of Alenc began to excuse himself, with protestation that he
would not speak any thing to blemish the authority of that sovereign
court; notwithstanding, he could not believe all that which the said
gentlewoman had told, that is to say, that all the inhabitants of
Merindol were condemned to die by the arrest of the said court of
parliament of Provence, and especially the women, and little children
and infants; and the town to be razed for the fault of ten or twelve
persons, which did not appear before the said court at the day
appointed. And the Lord Beauvieu also answered, that he believed not
the said court to have given out any such arrest; for that (said he)
were a thing most unreasonable, and such as the very Turks, and the
most tyrants in the world, would judge to be a thing most detestable: 
and said further, that he had known a long time many of Merindol, who
seemed unto him to be men of great honesty:  and my lord president
(said he) can certify us well what is done in this matter, for we
ought not to give credit unto women's tales. Then the gentlewoman who
had rehearsed the arrest, stayed not to hear the president's answer,
but suddenly looking upon the bishop of Aix, said, "I should greatly
have marvelled, if there had been none in all this company who would
defend these wicked men." And lifting up her eyes to heaven, in a
great womanly chafe and fume, she said, "Would to God that all the
Lutherans who are in Provence, yea, and in all France, had horns
growing on their foreheads;then we should see a goodly many of
horns!" To whom the Lord Beauvieu suddenly answered, saying, "Would
to God all priests' harlots should chatter like pies!" Then said the
gentlewoman, "Ah, my Lord Beauvieu! you ought not so to speak against
our holy mother the church, for that there was never dog that barked
against the crucifix, but he waxed mad;" whereat the bishop of Aix
laughed, and clapping the gentlewoman on the shoulder, said, "By my
holy orders, my minion! well said; I con you thank. She hath talked 
well unto you, my Lord Beauvieu! remember well the lesson which she
hath given you." Here the Lord Beauvieu, being wholly moved with
anger, said, "I care neither for her school nor yours, for it would
be long before a man should learn of either of you either any honesty
or honour. For if I should say, that the most part of the bishops and
priests are abominable adulterers, blind idolaters, deceivers,
thieves, seducers, I should not speak against the holy church, but
against a heap and flock of wolves, dogs, and filthy swine. In
speaking these things I would think a man not to be mad at all,
except he be mad for speaking of the truth."

     Then the archbishop in a great fury answered, "My Lord
Beauvieu! you speak very evil, and you must give account, when time
and place serve, of this your talk, which you have here uttered
against the churchmen." "I would," said the Lord Beauvieu, "that it
were to do even this present day, and I would bind myself to prove
more abuses and naughtiness in priests than I have yet spoken." Then
said the president Chassanee, "My Lord Beauvieu! let us leave off
this talk, and live as our fathers have done, and maintain their
honour." Then said he in great anger, "I am no priest's son, to
maintain their wickedness and abuse: " and afterward he said, "I am
well content to honour all true pastors of the church, and will not
blame them that show good example in their doctrine and living; but I
demand of you, my Lord of Arles! and you, my Lord of Aix! when our
Lord Christ Jesus called the priests, deceiving hypocrites, blind
seducers, robbers, and thieves, did he them any outrage or wrong?"
And they answered, "No; for the most part of them were such men."
Then said the Lord Beauvieu, "Even so it is with the bishops and
priests whom I have spoken of, for they are such kind of men, or
rather worse:  and I so abhor their filthy and abominable life, that I
dare not speak the one half of that which I know; and therefore in
speaking the truth, to cool the babbling of a harlot, I do them no
injury."

     The Monsieur de Senas, an ancient councillor, said, "Let us
leave off this contentious talk, for we are here assembled and come
together to make good cheer." And afterwards he said, "M. de
Beauvieu! for the love and amity which I do bear unto you, I will
advertise you of three things, which, if you will do, you shall find
great ease therein. The first is, that you, neither by word nor deed,
aid or assist those which you hear to be Lutherans. Secondly, that
you do not intermeddle openly to reprove ladies and gentlewomen for
their pastime and pleasures. Thirdly, that you do never speak against
the life and living of priests, how wicked soever it be, according to
this saying, Do not touch mine anointed."

     To whom M. de Beauvieu answered, "As touching the first point,
I know no Lutherans, neither what is meant by this word Lutheranism,
except you do call them Lutherans, who profess the doctrine of the
gospel; neither yet will I ever allow any arrest which shall be given
out to death against men, whose cause hath not been heard, especially
against women and young infants:  and I am assured, that there is no
court of parliament in all France, which will approve or allow any 
such arrest. And whereas you say, that I should not meddle to reprove
ladies and gentlewomen, if I knew any kinswoman of mine, which would
abandon herself unto a priest or clerk, yea, albeit he were a
cardinal or bishop, I would not do her so much honour as to rebuke
her for it, but at least I would cut off her nose. And as touching
priests, as I am contented not to meddle with their business, so
likewise I will not that they meddle with mine hereafter, or come
from henceforth within mine house; for as many as I shall find or
take there, I will set their crowns so near their shoulders, that
they shall need no more to wear any hoods about their necks." The
like also said the president Chassanee.

     Then the bishop of Aix's sweetheart, which had begun the
quarrel, said, "I shall not be in quiet, except I speak yet one word
more unto M. de Beauvieu." "Do you think," said she unto him, "that
all the cardinals, bishops, abbots, priests, and all those holy
religious men, which go oftentimes to gentlemen's houses, and haunt
the castles and palaces of princes and noblemen, that they go thither
to commit wickedness? Also you must not think evil of all those
ladies and gentlewomen that go to bishops' houses of devotion, and to
reveal those whom they know to be Lutherans, as it was commanded in
the pulpit upon pain of excommunication. If so be you will maintain
those words, I will not cease to accuse you of crime, and also of
treason both to God and man; for here be those in this company, who
shall make you give an account thereof." She had not so soon ended
her talk, but M. Beauvieu said unto her, "Avaunt, O Herodias! thou
filthy and impudent harlot! is it thy part to open thy mouth to talk
in this company? Dost thou well understand and know what treason to
God and man meaneth? Is it not sufficient for thee to be as thou art,
but thou must solicit others to shed innocent blood?" With these
words the gentlewoman was somewhat amazed. All men thought that this
talk had been at an end, and every man began to invent some merry
communication, that the former matter should be no more talked of.

     At the last the gentlewoman, advising herself, and thinking
that she was too much injured, to be said that she went about to shed
the innocent blood, she brake off all their talk, and with a loud
voice said, "Monsieur Beauvieu! if I were a man, as I am a woman, I
would offer you the combat, to prove that I am no such manner of
woman as you say I am, that I desire to shed innocent blood. Do you
call the blood of these wicked men of Merindol, innocent blood? True
it is, that I desire and offer with my whole power, that these
naughty packs of Merindol, and such-like as they are, should be slain
and destroyed, from the greatest even unto the least. And for to see
the beginning of this work, I have employed all my credit, and all my
friends, and do not spare neither body nor goods to work the ruin and
destruction of these people, and to rase out and to deface their
memory from amongst men. Do you then, Monsieur Beauvieu! call the
slaughter of these Lutherans, the effusion of innocent blood? And say
you what you will, I will not refrain for no man living, to go either
by day or by night unto the houses of bishops, in all honesty and
honour, for the devotion which I bear unto our holy mother the
church, and also I will receive into my house all religious men, to
consult and devise the means how to put these Lutherans to death."
But as Monsieur Beauvieu took no more regard unto her talk, so
likewise all that were at the table dispraised her, and were weary of
her prating.

     Then there was a certain young gentleman, which, merrily
jesting, said unto her, "Gentlewoman! it must needs be that these
poor people, unto whom you do wish this cruel death, have done you
some great displeasure." Then said she, "I may well take an oath,
that I never knew one of these wretched people, neither (that I wot
of) ever saw any of them; and I had rather to meet ten devils than
one of those naughty knaves, for their opinions are so detestable,
that happy and blessed are they which never heard tell of them. And I
was not then well advised at what time by curiosity, I, seeing the
bishop of Aix so much troubled and angry that he could not eat nor
drink, did desire him and constrain him to tell me the cause thereof.
Then he, perceiving that I would not he well contented if he should
not tell me, declared unto me some part of the cause, that is to say,
that there were certain heretics, who spake against our holy mother
the church, and among other errors they maintained, yea, to death,
that all bishops, priests, and pastors, ought to be married, or else
they should be basely handled:  and hearing this I was marvellously
offended, and ever since I did hate them to the death. And also it
was enjoined unto me by penance, that I should endeavour with all my
power to put these heretics to death." After these frivolous talks,
there was great trouble and debate amongst them, and many
threatenings, which were too long here to describe.

     Then the president Chassanee and the councillors parted aside,
and the gentlemen went on the other part. The archbishop of Arles,
the bishop of Aix, and divers abbots, priors, and others, assembled
themselves together, to consult how this arrest might be executed
with all speed, intending to raise a new persecution, greater than
that of John, the Jacobin monk of Rome:  "for otherwise," said they,
"our state and honour is like to decay; we shall be reproved,
contemned, and derided of all men. And if none should thus vaunt and
set themselves against us but these peasants, and such like, it were
but a small matter; but many doctors of divinity and men of the
religious order, divers senators and advocates, many wise and well
learned men, also a great part of the nobility, (if we may so say,)
and that of great renown, yea, even of the chiefest peers in all
Europe, begin to contemn and despise us, counting us to be no true
pastors of the church; so that except we see to this mischief, and
provide for remedy betimes, it is greatly to be feared, lest not only
we shall be compelled to forsake our dignities, possessions, and
livings, which we now wealthily enjoy; but also the church, being
spoiled of her pastors and guides, shall hereafter come to miserable
ruin, and utter desolation. This matter therefore now requireth great
diligence and circumspection, and that with all celerity."

     Then the archbishop of Arles, not forgetting his Spanish
subtleties and policies, gave his advice as followeth: 

     "Against the nobility we must, said he, take heed that we
attempt nothing rashly, but rather we must seek all the means we can
how to please them; for they are our shield, our fortress, and
defence. And albeit we know that many of them do both speak and think
evil of us, and that they are of these new gospellers, yet may we not
reprove them, or exasperate them, in any case; but seeing they are
too much bent against us already, we must rather seek how to win
them, and to make them our friends again by gifts and presents:  and
by this policy we shall live in safety under their protection. But if
we enterprise any thing against them, sure we are to gain nothing
thereby, as we are by experience already sufficiently taught."

     The bishop of Aix then answered,--

     "It is well said, but I can show you a good remedy for this
disease; we must go about with all our endeavour, and power, and
policy, and all the friends we can make, sparing no charges, but
spending goods, wealth, and treasure, to make such a slaughter of the
Merindolians and rustical peasants, that none shall be so bold
hereafter, whatsoever they be, yea, although they be of the blood
royal, once to open their mouths against us, or the ecclesiastical
state. And to bring this matter to pass, we have no better way than
to withdraw ourselves to Avignon, in the which city we shall find
many bishops, abbots, and other famous men, which will with us employ
their whole endeavour to maintain and uphold the majesty of our holy
mother the church."

     This counsel was well liked of them all. Whereupon the said
archbishop of Arles, and the bishop of Aix, went with all speed to
Avignon, there to assemble out of hand the bishops and other men of
authority and credit, to treat of this matter. In this pestilent
conspiracy, the bishop of Aix, a stout champion, and a great defender
of the traditions of men, taking upon him to be the chief orator,
began in a manner as followeth: 

     "O ye fathers and brethren! ye are not ignorant that a great
tempest is raised up against the little bark of Christ Jesus, now in
great danger and ready to perish. The storm cometh from the north,
whereof all these troubles proceed. The seas rage, the waters rush in
on every side, the winds blow and beat upon our house, and we,
without speedy remedy, are like to sustain shipwreck and loss of all
together. For oblations cease, pilgrimage and devotion waxeth cold,
charity is clean gone, our estimation and authority is debased, our
jurisdiction decayed, and the ordinances of the church despised. And
wherefore are we set and ordained over nations and kingdoms, but to
root out and destroy, to subvert and overthrow, whatsoever is against
our holy mother the church? Wherefore let us now awake, let us stand
stoutly in the right of our own possession, that we may root out from
the memory of men for ever the whole rout of the wicked Lutherans: 
those foxes (I say) which destroy the vineyard of the Lord; those
great whales which go about to drown the little bark of the Son of
God. We have already well begun, and have procured a terrible arrest
against these cursed heretics of Merindol:  now then resteth no more,
but only the same to be put in execution. Let us therefore employ our
whole endeavour, that nothing happen which may let or hinder that we
have so happily begun; and let us take good heed that our gold and
silver do not witness against us at the day of judgment, if we refuse
to bestow the same, that we may make so good a sacrifice unto God.
And for my part I offer to wage and furnish of my own costs and
charges, a hundred men well horsed, with all other furniture to them
belonging; and that so long, until the utter destruction and
subversion of these wretched and cursed caitiffs be fully performed
and finished."

     This oration pleased the whole multitude, saving one doctor of
divinity, a friar Jacobin, named Bassinet, who then answered again
with this oration.

     "This is a weighty matter," said he, "and of great importance;
we must therefore proceed wisely, and in the fear of God, and beware
that we do nothing rashly. For if we seek the death and destruction
of these poor and miserable people wrongfully, when the king and the
nobility shall hear of such a horrible slaughter, we shall be in
great danger lest they do to us, as we read in the Scriptures was
done to the priests of Baal. For my part I must say, and unfeignedly
confess, that I have too rashly and lightly signed many processes
against those which have been accused of heretical doctrine:  but now
I do protest before God, which seeth and knoweth the hearts of men,
that seeing the lamentable end and effect of mine assignments, I have
had no quietness in my conscience, considering that the secular
judges, at the report of the judgment and sentence given by me and
other doctors my companions, have condemned all those unto most cruel
death, whom we have judged to be heretics. And the cause why in
conscience I am thus disquieted, is this; that now of late, since I
have given myself more diligently to the reading and contemplation of
the Holy Scriptures, I have perceived that the most part of those
articles, which they that are called Lutherans do maintain, are so
conformable and agreeing to the Scriptures, that for my part I can no
longer gainsay them, except I should even wilfully and maliciously
resist and strive against the holy ordinances of God. Albeit,
hitherto, to maintain the honour of our holy mother the church, and
of our holy father the pope, and of our order, I have consented to
the opinions and doings of other doctors, as well through ignorance,
as also because I would not seem to attempt any thing against the
will and pleasure of the prelates and vicars general:  but now it
seemeth unto me, that we ought not any more to proceed in this
matter, as we have done in time past. It shall besufficient to punish
them with fines, or to banish them which shall speak too
intemperately or rashly against the constitutions of the church, and
of the pope; and such as shall be manifestly convicted by the Holy
Scriptures to be blapshemous or obstinate heretics, to be condemned
to death according to the enormity of their crimes or errors, or else
to perpetual prison. And this my advice and counsel I desire you to
take in good part."

     With this counsel of Bassinet all the company were offended,
but especially the bishop of Aix, who, lifting up his voice above all
the rest, said thus unto him; "O thou man of little faith! whereof
art thou in doubt? dost thou repent thee of that thou hast well done?
Thou hast told here a tale, that smelleth of faggots and brimstone.
Is there any difference, thinkest thou, between heresies and
blasphemies spoken and maintained against the Holy Scriptures, and
opinions holden against our holy mother the church, and contrary to
our holy father the pope, a most undoubted and true god on earth? Art
thou a master in Israel, and knowest not these things?" Then said the
bishop of Arles, "Could any man treat better of the little bark of
Christ Jesus, than my lord of Aix hath done?"

     Then stood up Bassinet again, and made this oration: 

     "It is true that my lord, the bishop of Aix, hath very well set
out the manners and state of the clergy, and hath aptly reproved the
vices and heresies of this present time:  and therefore, so soon as
mention was made of the ship of Christ Jesus, it came into my mind
first of all, of the high bishop of Jerusalem, the priests, the
doctors of the law, the scribes and Pharisees, which sometime had the
governance of this ship, being ordained pastors in the church of God: 
but when they forsook the law of God, and served him with men's
inventions and traditions, he destroyed those hypocrites in his great
indignation; and having compassion and pity upon the people which
were like sheep without a shepherd, he sent diligent fishers to fish
for men, faithful workmen into his harvest, and labourers into his
vineyard, which shall all bring forth true fruits in their season.
Secondly, considering the purpose and intent of the reverend lord
bishop of Aix, I called to mind the saying of the apostle, 1 Tim.
iv., that in the latter day some shall fall away from the faith,
following after deceitful spirits, and the doctrine of devils. And
the apostle giveth a mark whereby a man shall know them. Likewise our
Lord Jesus Christ saith, Matt. vii., that the false prophets shall
come clothed in sheep-skins, but inwardly they are ravening wolves,
and by their fruits they shall be known. By these two, and divers
such other places, it is easy to understand, who are they that go
about to drown this little bark of Christ. Are they not those which
fill the same with filthy and unclean things, with mire and dirt,
with puddle and stinking water? are they not those which have
forsaken Jesus Christ, the fountain of living water, and have digged
unto themselves pits or cisterns which will hold no water? Truly even
those they are, who vaunt themselves to be the salt of earth, and yet
have no savour at all; which call themselves pastors, and yet are
much less than true pastors, for they minister not unto the sheep the
true pasture and feeding, neither divide and distribute the true
bread of the word of life. And (if I may be hold to speak it) would
it not be at this present as great a wonder to hear a bishop preach,
as to see an ass fly? Are not they accursed of God, who glory and
vaunt themselves to have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would enter, to
come in? They may be known right well by their fruits; for they have
forsaken faith, judgment, and mercy; and there is no honest, clean,
or undefiled thing in them but their habit, their rochet, and their
surplice, and such other. Outwardly they are exceeding neat and trim,
but within they are full of all abomination, rapine, gluttony, filthy
lust, and all manner of uncleanness; they are like painted
sepulchres, which outwardly appear beautiful and fair, but within are
full of filth and corruption. A man shall know (I say) these ravening
wolves by their fruits, which devour the quick and the dead under
pretence of long prayer. And forasmuch as I am enforced to give place
to the truth, and that you call me a master in Israel, I will not be
afraid to prove by the Holy Scriptures, that your great pilot and
patron the pope, and the bishops the mariners, and such others, which
impudently forsake the ship of Christ Jesus, to embark themselves in
pinnaces and brigandines, are pirates and robbers of the sea, false
prophets, deceivers, and not true pastors of the church of Jesus
Christ."

     When Doctor Bassinet had thus freely and boldly uttered his
mind, the whole multitude began to gather about him, and spitefully
railed at him; but the bishop of Aix, above others, raging and crying
out as he had been mad, "Get thee out," said he, from amongst us,
thou wicked apostate! thou art not worthy to be in this company. We
have burned daily a great many which have not so well deserved it as
thou hast. We may now perceive, that there is none more stedfast and
fervent in the faith than the doctors of the canon law; and therefore
it were necessary to be decreed in the next general council, that
none should have to do in matters of religion but they alone:  for
these knaves, and beggarly monks and friars, will bring all to
nought." Then the other doctors of the same order boldly reproved the
bishop of Aix for the injury he had done unto them. After this there
arose a great dissension amongst them, insomuch that there was
nothing at that time determined. After dinner all these reverend
prelates assembled together again, but they suffered neither friar
nor monk to be amongst them, except he were an abbot. In this
assembly they made a general composition, confirmed with an oath,
that every man should endeavour himself that the said arrest of
Merindol should be executed with all expedition, every man offering
to furnish out men of war, according to his ability. The charge
thereof was given to the bishop of Aix, and to the president of the
canons, to solicit the matter, and to persuade by all means possible
the presidents and councillors of the said court of parliament,
without fear or doubt, to execute the said arrest with drums, ensigns
displayed, artillery, and all kind of furniture of war.

     This conspiracy being concluded and determined, the bishop of
Aix departed incontinent from Avignon, to go unto Aix, to perform the
charge which was given to him. Notwithstanding they desired him to
be, the next day after the council was holden, at a banquet which
should be made at the house of the bishop of Rieux. To this banquet
such as were known to be the fairest and most beautiful, women in all
Avignon, were called, to refresh and solace these good prelates,
after the great pains and travail which they had taken for our holy
mother the church. After they had dined, they fell to dancing,
playing at dice, and such other pastimes as are commonly wont to be
frequented at the banquets and feasts of these holy prelates. After
this they walked abroad to solace themselves, and to pass the time
till supper.

     As they passed through the streets, every one leading his
minion upon his arm, they saw a man which sold base images and
pictures, with filthy rhymes and ballads annexed to the same, to move
and stir up the people to whoredom and knavery. All these goodly
pictures were bought up by the bishops, which were as many as a mule
could well carry; and if there were any obscure sentence, or hard to
understand in those rhymes or ballads, the same these learned
prelates did readily expound, and laughed pleasantly thereat. In the
same place, as they walked along, there was a bookseller, which had
set out to sale certain Bibles in French and Latin, with divers other
books; which when the prelates beheld, they were greatly moved
thereat, and said unto him, "Darest thou be so hardy to set out such
merchandise to sell here in this town? dost thou not know that such
books are forbidden?" The bookseller answered, "Is not the Holy Bible
as good as these goodly pictures, which you have bought for these
gentlewomen?" He had scarce spoken these words, but the bishop of Aix
said, "I renounce my part of paradise, if this fellow be not a
Lutheran!" "Let him be taken," said he, "and examined what he is."
And incontinently the bookseller was taken and carried unto prison,
and spitefully handled; for a company of knaves and ruffians, which
waited upon the prelates, began to cry out, "A Lutheran! a Lutheran!
"" To the fire with him! to the fire with him! "And one gave him a
blow with his fist, another pulled him by the hair, and others by the
beard, in such sort that the poor man was all imbrued with blood
before he came to prison.

     The morrow after he was brought before the judges in the
presence of the bishops, where he was examined in this form as
followeth:  "Hast thou not set forth to sale the Bible and the New
Testament in French?" The prisoner answered that he had so done. And
being demanded, whether he understood or knew not, that it was
forbidden throughout all Christendom to print or sell the Bible in
any other language than in Latin? he answered, that he knew the
contrary, and that he had sold many Bibles in the French tongue, with
the emperor's privilege, and many others printed at Lyons; also New
Testaments imprinted by the king's privilege. Furthermore, he said,
that he knew no nation throughout all Christendom, which had not the
Holy Scriptures in their vulgar tongue:  and afterwards, with a bold
courage, thus he spake unto them: 

     "O you inhabitants of Avignon! are you alone in all Christendom
those men who despise and abhor the Testament of the heavenly Father?
Will ye forbid and hide that which Jesus Christ hath commanded to be
revealed and published? Do you not know that our Lord Jesus Christ
gave power unto his apostles to speak all manner of tongues, to this
end, that his holy gospel should be taught unto all creatures in 
every language? And why do you not forbid those books and pictures,
which are full of filthiness and abomination to move and stir up the
people to crimes and to uncleanness, and to provoke God's vengeance
and great indignation upon you all? What greater blasphemy can there
be, than to forbid God's most holy books, which he ordained to
instruct the ignorant, and to reduce and bring again into the way
such as are gone astray? What cruelty is this, to take away from the
poor silly souls their nourishment and sustenance? But, my lords! you
shall give a heavy account, which callsweet sour, and sour sweet, who
maintain abominable and detestable books and pictures, and reject
that which is holy."

     Then the bishop of Aix and the other bishops began to rage, and
gnash their teeth against this poor prisoner. "What need you," said
they, "any more examination? let him be sent straight unto the fire,
without any more words." But the judge Laberius and certain others
were not of that mind, neither found they sufficient cause why to put
him to death; but went about to have him put to his fine, and to make
him confess and acknowledge the bishop of Aix, and others his
companions, to be the true pastors of the church. But the bookseller
answered, that he could do it with a good conscience, forasmuch as he
did see before his eyes, that these bishops maintained filthy books,
and abominable pictures, rejecting and refusing the holy books of
God; and therefore he judged them rather to be the priests of Bacchus
and Venus, than the true pastors of the church of Christ. Whereupon
he was immediately condemned to be burned, and the sentence was
executed the very same day; and for a sign or token of the cause of
his condemnation, he carried two Bibles hanging about his neck, the
one before, and the other behind him:  but this poor man had also the
word of God in his heart, and in his mouth, and ceased not
continually by the way, until that he came to the place of execution,
to exhort and monish the people to read the Holy Scriptures; insomuch
that divers were thereby moved to seek after the truth. The prelates,
seeing a great dissension among the people of Avignon, and that many
murmured and grudged against them for the death of this good man, and
also for the dishonour which they had done unto the holy Testament of
God, minding to put the people in fear, they proceeded the next day
to make a proclamation by the sound of a trumpet throughout the whole
town and country of Venice, that all such as had any books in the
French tongue, treating upon the Holy Scriptures, should bring them
forth, and deliver them into the hands of the commissioners appointed
for that purpose:  contrariwise they which had any such books found
about them, should be put to death.

     Then, after these prelates had taken advice to raise great
persecution in Venice, the bishop of Aix returned to prosecute the
execution of the arrest against Merindol, travailing earnestly with
the president Chassanee to that effect; declaring unto him the good-
will of the prelates of Avignon and Provence, and the great affection
they bare both to him and his, with many fair promises if he would
put the arrest in execution. The president answered him, that it was
no small matter to put the arrest of Merindol in execution; also that
the said arrest was given out more to keep the Lutherans in fear,
which were in great numbers in Provence, than to execute it in
effect, as it was contained in the said arrest. Moreover, he said,
that the arrest of Merindol was not definitive, and that the laws and
statutes of the realm did not permit the execution thereof without
further process. Then said the bishop, "If there be either law or
statute which doth hinder or let you, we carry in our sleeves to
dispense therewithal." The president answered, "It were a great sin
to shed the innocent blood." Then said the bishop, "The blood of them
of Merindol be upon us, and upon our successors." Then said the
president, I am very well assured, that if the arrest of Merindol be
put in execution, the king will not be well pleased to have such
destruction made of his subjects." Then said the bishop, "Although
the king at first do think it evil done, we will so bring it to pass,
that within a short space he shall think it well done:  for we have
the cardinals on our side, and especially the most reverend cardinal
of Tournon, the which will take upon him the defence of our cause;
and we can do him no greater pleasure, than utterly to root out these
Lutherans:  so that if we have any need of his counsel or aid, we
shall be well assured of him. And is not he the principal, the most
excellent and prudent adversary of these Lutherans, that is in all
Christendom?"

     By this and such other like talk the bishop of Aix persuaded
the president and councillors of the court of parliament, to put the
said arrest in execution, and by this means, through the authority of
the said court, the drum was sounded through all Provence, the
captains were prepared with their ensigns displayed, and a great
number of footmen and horsemen began to set forward, and marched out
of the town of Aix in order of battle, well horsed and furnished,
against Merindol, to execute the arrest. The inhabitants of Merindol,
being advertised hereof, and seeing nothing but present death to he
at hand, with great lamentation commended themselves and their cause
unto God by prayer, making themselves ready to be murdered and slain,
as sheep led unto the butchery.

     Whilst they were in this grievous distress, piteously mourning
and lamenting together, the father with the son, the daughter with
the mother, the wife with the husband, suddenly there was news
brought unto them, that the army was retired, and no man knew at that
time how, or by what means; notwithstanding afterwards it was known,
that the lord of Alenc, a wise man, and learned in the Scriptures,
and in the civil law, being moved with great zeal and love of
justice, declared unto the president Chassanee, that he ought not so
to proceed against the inhabitants of Merindol by way of force of
arms, contrary to all form and order of justice, without judgment or
condemnation, or without making any difference between the guilty and
the not guilty. And furthermore he said: 

     "I desire you, my lord president! call to remembrance the
counsel which you have written in your book entitled Catalogus Gloriæ
Mundi, in which book you have treated and brought forth the processes
which were holden against the rats, by the officers of the court and
jurisdiction of the bishop of Autun. For as it happened, there was
almost throughout all the bailiwick of Laussois such a great number
of rats, that they destroyed and devoured all the corn of the
country; whereupon they took counsel to send unto the bishop of
Autun's official, to have the rats excommunicated. Whereupon it was
ordained and decreed by the said official, after he had heard the
plaintiff of the procurator-fiscal, that before he would proceed to
excommunication, they should have admonition and warning according to
the order of justice. For this cause it was ordained, that by the
sound of a trumpet, and open proclamation made throughout all the
streets of the town of Autun, the rats should be cited to appear
within three days; and if they did not appear, then to proceed
against them. The three days were passed, and the procurator came
into the court against the rats, and for lack of appearance obtained
default, by virtue whereof he required that they would proceed to the
excommunication; whereupon it was judicially acknowledged that the
said rats, being absent, should have their advocate appointed them to
hear their defence, forasmuch as the question was for the whole
destruction and banishing of the said rats. And you, my lord
president! being at that time the king's advocate at Autun, were then
chosen to he the advocate to defend the rats; and having taken the
charge upon you in pleading the matter, it was by you there declared,
that the citation was of no effect, for certain causes and reasons by
you there alleged. Then was it decreed that the said rats should be
once again cited throughout the parishes where they were. Then after
the citations were duly served, the procurator came again into the
court as before; and there it was alleged by you, my lord president!
how that the term of appearance given unto the rats was too short,
and that there were so many cats in every town and village which they
should pass through, that they had just cause to be absent.

     "Wherefore, my lord president! you ought not so lightly to
proceed against these poor men, but you ought to look upon the Holy
Scriptures, and there you shall find how you ought to proceed in this
matter. And you, my lord! have alleged many places of the Scripture
concerning the same, as appeareth more at large in your said book;
and by this plea of a matter which seemeth to be but of small
importance, you have obtained great fame and honour, for the upright
declaration of the manner and form how judges ought gravely to
proceed in criminal causes. Then, my lord president! you which have
taught others, will you not also learn by your own books? the which
will manifestly condemn you, if you proceed any further to the
destruction of these poor men of Merindol:  for are they not Christian
men, and ought you not as well to minister right and justice unto
them, as you have done to the rats?"

     By these and such-like demonstrations, the president was
persuaded, and immediately called back his commission which he had
given out, and caused the army to retire, which was already come near
unto Merindol, even within a mile and a half.

     Then the Merindolians, understanding that the army was retired,
gave thanks unto God, comforting one another, with admonition and
exhortation always to have the fear of God before their eyes, to be
obedient unto his holy commandments, subject to his most holy will,
and every man to submit himself unto his providence; patiently
attending and looking for the hope of the blessed, that is to say,
the true life and the everlasting riches, having always before their
eyes, for example, our Lord Jesus Christ, the very Son of God, who
hath entered into his glory by many tribulations. Thus the
Merindolians prepared themselves to endure and abide all the
afflictions that it should please God to lay upon them; and such was
their answer to all those that either pitied, or else sought their
destruction:  whereupon the bruit and noise was so great, as well of
the arrest, as of the enterprise of the execution, and also of the
patience and constancy of the Merindolians, that it was not hidden or
kept secret from King Francis the First, a king of noble courage and
great judgment; who gave commandment unto the noble and virtuous
lord, M. de Langeay, which then was his lieutenant in Turin, a city
in Piedmont, that he should diligently inquire and search out the
truth of all this matter. Whereupon the said M. de Langeay sent unto
Provence two men of fame and estimation, giving them in charge to
bring unto him the copy of the arrest, and diligently to inquire out
all that followed and ensued thereupon; and likewise to make diligent
inquisition of the life and manners of the said Merindolians and
others, which were persecuted in the country of Provence.

     These deputies brought the copy of the arrest, and of all that
happened thereupon, unto the said M. de Langeay, declaring unto him
the great injuries, pollings, extortions, exactions, tyrannies, and
cruelties, which the judges, as well secular as ecclesiastical, used
against them of Merindol, and others. As touching the behaviour and
disposition of those which were persecuted, they reported, that the
most part of the men of Provence affirmed them to be men given to
great labour and travail; and that about two hundred years past (as
it is reported) they came out of the country of Piedmont to dwell in
Provence, and took to tillage, and to inhabit many hamlets and
villages destroyed by the wars, and other desert and waste places;
which they had so well occupied, that now there was great store of
wines, oils, honey, and cattle, wherewith strangers were greatly
relieved and holpen. Besides that, before they came into the country
to dwell, the place of Merindol was taxed but at four crowns, which
before the last destruction paid yearly unto the lord, for taxes and
tallages, above three hundred and fifty crowns, beside other charges.

     The like was also reported of Lormarin, and divers other places
of Provence; whereas there was nothing but robbery before they came
to inhabit there, so that none could pass that way but in great
danger. Moreover, they of the country of Provence affirmed, that the
inhabitants of Merindol, and the others that were persecuted, were
peaceable and quiet people, beloved of all their neighbours, men of
good behaviour, constant in keeping of their promise, and paying of
their debts without traversing or pleading of the law:  that they were
also charitable men, giving alms, relieving the poor, and suffered
none amongst them to lack, or be in necessity. Also they gave alms to
strangers, and to the poor passengers, harbouring, nourishing, and
helping them in all their necessities, according to their power.
Moreover, that they were known by this, throughout all the country of
Provence, that they would not swear, or name the devil, nor easily be
brought to take an oath, except it were in judgment, or making some
solemn covenant. They were also known by this, that they could never
be moved nor provoked to talk of any dishonest matters; but in what
company soever they came, where they heard any wanton talk, swearing,
or blasphemy, to the dishonour of God, they straightway departed out
of that company. Also they said, that they never saw them go unto
their business, but first they made their prayers. The said people of
Provence furthermore affirmed, that when they came to any fairs or
markets, or came to their cities by any occasion, they never in a
manner were seen in their churches; and if they were; when they
prayed they turned away their faces from the images, and neither
offered candles to them, nor kissed their feet; neither would they
worship the relics of saints, nor once look upon them. And moreover,
if they passed by any cross or image of the crucifix, or any other
saint by the way, as they went, they would do no reverence unto them.
Also the priests did testify, that they never caused them to say any
masses, neither dirges, neither yet De profundis, neither would they
take any holy water; and if it were carried home unto their houses,
they would not say once, "God a' mercy!" yea, they seemed utterly to
abhor it. To go on pilgrimage, to make vows to saints, to buy pardons
or remission of sins with money, yea, though it might be gotten for a
halfpenny, they thought it not lawful. Likewise when it thundered or
lightened, they would not cross themselves, but casting up their eyes
unto heaven, fetched deep sighs. Some of them would kneel down and
pray, without blessing themselves with the sign of the cross, or
taking of holy water. Also they were never seen to offer, or cast
into the bason, any thing for the maintenance of lights,
brotherhoods, churches, or to give any offering either for the quick
or the dead. But if any were in affliction or poverty, those they
relieved gladly, and thought nothing too much.

     This was the whole tenor of the report made unto Monsieur de
Langeay, touching the life and behaviour of the inhabitants of
Merindol, and the other who were persecuted; also as touching the
arrest, and that which ensued thereupon. Of all those things the said
Monsieur de Langeay, according to the charge that was given him,
advertised the king, who, understanding these things, as a good
prince, moved with mercy and pity, sent letters of grace and pardon,
not only for those which were condemned for lack of appearance, but
also for all the rest of the country of Provence, which were accused
and suspected in like case; expressly charging and commanding the
said parliament, that they should not hereafter proceed so rigorously
as they had done before, against this people; but if there were any
that could be found or proved, by sufficient information, to have
swerved from the Christian religion, that then he should have good
demonstration made unto him by the word of God, both out of the Old
and New Testament:  and so, as well by the gentleness, as by the
rigour of the same, he should be reduced again unto the church of
Christ. Declaring also, that the king's pleasure was, that all such
as should be convicted of heresy in manner aforesaid, should abjure;
forbidding also all manner of persons, of what estate or condition
soever they were, to attempt any thing against them of Merindol, or
others that were persecuted, by any other manner of means, or to
molest or trouble them in person or goods:  revoking and disannulling
all manner of sentences and condemnations of what judges soever they
were, and commanding to set at liberty all prisoners which either
were accused or suspected of Lutheranism.

     By virtue of these letters they were now permitted to declare
their cause, and to say what they could in defence thereof; whereupon
they made a Confession of their faith, the effect whereof you shall
see in the end of the story. This Confession was presented first to
the court of parliament; and afterwards being declared more at large,
with articles also annexed thereunto, it was delivered to the bishop
of Cavaillon, who required the same. Also to Cardinal Sadolet, bishop
of Carpentras, with the like articles, and also a supplication to
this effect: 

     That the inhabitants of Cabriers, in the country of Venice,
most humbly desired the cardinal, that he would vouchsafe to receive
and read the Confession and declaration of their faith and doctrine,
in the which they, and also their fathers before them, had been of a
long time instructed and taught, which they were persuaded to be
agreeable to the doctrine contained in the Old and New Testament. And
because he was learned in the Holy Scriptures, they desired him that
he would mark such articles as he thought to be against the
Scriptures; and if he should make it to appear unto them, that there
was any thing contrary to the same, they would not only submit
themselves to abjuration, but also to suffer such punishment as
should he adjudged unto them, even to the loss, not only of all that
they had, but also of their lives. And moreover, if there were any
judge in all the country of Venice, which, by good and sufficient
information, should be able to charge them that they had holden any
erroneous doctrine, or maintained any other religion than was
contained in the articles of their Confession, they desired him that
he would communicate the same unto them; and with all obedience they
offered themselves to whatsoever should be thought just and
reasonable.

     Upon this request Cardinal Sadolet answered by his letters
written by his secretary, and signed with his own hand, the tenor
whereof here ensueth: 

     "I have seen your request, and have read the articles of your
Confession, wherein there is much matter contained; and do not
understand that you are accused for any other doctrine, but for the
very same which you have confessed. It is most true, that many have
reported divers things of you worthy of reproof, which, after
diligent inquiry made, we have found to be nothing else but false
reports and slanders. As touching the rest of your articles, it
seemeth unto me, that there are many words therein which might well
be changed without prejudice unto your Confession:  and likewise it
seemeth to me, that it is not necessary that you should speak so
manifestly against the pastors of the church. For my part, I desire
your welfare, and would be sorry that you should be so spoiled or
destroyed, as they do pretend. And to the end you shall the better
understand my amity and friendship towards you, shortly I will be at
my house by Cabriers, whither ye may resort unto me either in greater
or smaller numbers, as you will, and return safely without any hurt
or damage; and there I will advertise you of all things that I think
meet for your profit and health."

     About this time, which was A.D. 1542, the vice-legate of
Avignon assembled a great number of men of war, at the suit of the
bishop of Cavaillon, to destroy Cabriers. When the army was come
within a mile of Cabriers, the Cardinal Sadolet went with speed unto
the vice-legate, and showed him the request of the inhabitants of
Cabriers, with the articles of their Confession, and the offers that
they made; so that for that present the army retired, without any
hurt or damage done unto the inhabitants of Cabriers. After this, the
Cardinal Sadolet went unto Rome; but before his departure he sent for
divers of Cabriers, and certain farmers of his own, whom he knew to
be of the number of those which were called Lutherans, and told them
that he would have them in remembrance as soon as he came unto Rome,
and communicate their articles and Confession unto the cardinals,
trusting to find a mean to have some good reformation, that God
should be thereby glorified, and all Christendom brought to unity and
concord; at least, nothing at all doubting but that the foulest
abuses should be corrected and amended:  advertising them in the mean
time to be wise and circumspect, to watch and pray, for that they had
many enemies. With this oration of Cardinal Sadolet, they of Cabriers
were greatly comforted, trusting that at the suit of Cardinal Sadolet
they should have answer of their Confession:  but at his return, they
understood that he found all things so corrupt at Rome, that there
was no hope of any reformation there to be had, but rather mortal war
against all such as would not live according to the ordinances of the
Church of Rome. Likewise said the treasurer of Carpentras, who albeit
he paid out money to furnish soldiers that were hired for the
destruction of Cabriers, notwithstanding he did aid them secretly all
that he might. Howbeit he could not do it so secretly, but that it
came to the knowledge of the legate; whereupon he was constrained to
withdraw himself.

     On the other part, the bishops of Aix and Cavaillon pursued
still the execution of the arrest of Merindol. Then it was ordained
by the court of parliament, that, according to the king's letters,
John Durand, councillor of the court of parliament, with a secretary,
and the bishop of Cavaillon, with a doctor of divinity, should go
unto Merindol, and there declare unto the inhabitants the errors and
heresies which they knew to be contained in their Confession, and
make them apparent by good and sufficient information; and having so
convicted them by the word of God, they should make them to renounce
and abjure the said heresies:  and if the Merindolians did refuse to
abjure, then they should make relation thereof, that the court might
appoint how they should further proceed. After this decree was made,
the bishop of Cavaillon would not tarry until the time which was
appointed by the court for the execution of this matter; but he
himself, with a doctor of divinity, came to Merindol, to make them to
abjure. Unto whom the Merindolians answered, that he enterprised
against the authority of parliament, and that it was against his
commission so to do. Notwithstanding he was very earnest with them
that they should abjure, and promised them, if they would so do, to
take them under his wings and protection, even as the hen doth her
chickens, and that they should be no more robbed or spoiled. Then
they required that he would declare unto them what they should
abjure. The bishop answered, that the matter needed no disputation,
and that he required but only a general abjuration of all errors,
which would be no damage or prejudice to them; for he himself would
not stick to make the like abjuration. The Merindolians answered him
again, that they would do nothing contrary to the decree and
ordinance of the court, or the king's letters, wherein he commanded
that first the errors should be declared unto them, whereof they were
accused:  wherefore they were resolved to understand what those errors
and heresies were, that being informed thereof by the word of God,
they might satisfy the king's letters; otherwise it were but
hypocrisy and dissimulation to do as he required them. And if he
could make it so appear unto them by good and sufficient information,
that they had holden any errors and heresies, or should be convicted
thereupon by the word of God, they would willingly abjure; or if in
their Confession there were any word contrary to the Scriptures, they
would revoke the same. Contrariwise, if it were not made manifest
unto them, that they had holden any heresies, but that they had
always lived according to the doctrine of the gospel, and that their
Confession was grounded upon the same, then they ought by no means to
move or constrain them to abjure any errors which they held not; and
that it were plainly against all equity and justice so to do.

     Then the bishop of Cavaillon was marvellously angry, and would
hear no word spoken of any demonstration to be made by the word of
God, but, in a fury, cursed, and gave him to the devil that first
invented that means. Then the doctor of divinity, whom the bishop
brought thither, demanded what articles they were that were presented
by the inhabitants of Merindol, for the bishop of Cavaillon had not
yet showed them unto him. Then the bishop of Cavaillon delivered the
doctor the Confession, which, after he had read, the bishop of
Cavaillon said, "What! will you any more witness or declaration? this
is full of heresy." Then they of Merindol demanded, "In what point?"
whereupon the bishop knew not what to answer. Then the doctor
demanded to have time to look upon the articles of the Confession,
and to consider whether they were against the Scriptures or no. Thus
the bishop departed, being very sore agrieved that he could not bring
his purpose to pass.

     After eight days the bishop sent for this doctor, to understand
how he might order himself to make their heresies appear which were
in the said Confession:  whereunto the doctor answered, that he was
never so much abashed; for when he had beholden the articles of the
Confession, and the authorities of the Scriptures that were there
alleged for the confirmation thereof, he had found that those
articles were wholly agreeable and according to the Holy Scriptures;
and that he had not learned so much in the Scriptures all the days of
his life, as he had in those eight days, in looking upon those
articles, and the authorities therein alleged.

     Shortly after the bishop of Cavaillon came unto Merindol, and
calling before him the children both great and small, gave them
money, and commanded them with fair words to learn the Pater-noster
and the Creed in Latin. The most part of them answered, that they
knew the Pater-noster and the Creed already in Latin, but they could
give no reason of that which they spake, but only in the vulgar
tongue. The bishop answered, that it was not necessary that they
should be so cunning, but that it was sufficient that they knew it in
Latin; and that it was not requisite for their salvation, to
understand or to expound the articles of their faith; for there were
many bishops, curates, yea, and doctors of divinity, whom it would
trouble to expound the Paternoster and the Creed. Here the bailiff of
Merindol, named Andrew Maynard, asked, to what purpose it would serve
to say the Pater-noster and the Creed, and not to understand the
same? for in so doing they should but mock and deride God. Then said
the bishop unto him, "Do you understand what is signified by these
words, I believe in God?" The bailiff answered, "I should think
myself very miserable, if I did not understand it:  "and then he began
orderly to give an account of his faith. Then said the bishop, "I
would not have thought there had been such great doctors in
Merindol." The bailiff answered, "The least of the inhabitants of
Merindol can do it yet more readily than I; but I pray you, question
with one or two of these young children, that you may understand
whether they be well taught or no." But the bishop either knew not
how to question with them, or at least he would not.

     Then one, named Pieron Roy, said, "Sir! one of these children
may question with another, if you think it so good; "and the bishop
was contented. Then one of the children began to question with his
fellows with such grace and gravity, as if he had been a
schoolmaster; and the children one after another answered so unto the
purpose, that it was marvellous to hear:  for it was done in the
presence of many, among whom there were four religious men, that came
lately out of Paris, of whom one said unto the bishop, "I must needs
confess that I have often been at the common schools of Sarbonne in
Paris, where I have heard the disputations of the divines; but yet I
never learned so much as I have done by hearing these young
children." Then said William Armant, "Did you never read that which
is written in Matthew xi., where it is said, O Father! Lord of heaven
and earth! I render thanks unto thee, that thou hast bidden these
things from the sage and wise men of the world, and hast revealed
them unto young infants:  but behold, O Father! such was thy good will
and pleasure." Then every man marvelled at the ready and witty
answers of the children of Merindol.

     When the bishop saw he could not thus prevail, he tried another
way, and went about, by fair and flattering words, to bring his
purpose to pass. Wherefore, causing the strangers to go apart, he
said that he now perceived they were not so evil as many thought them
to be:  notwithstanding, for the contentation of them which were their
persecutors, it was necessary that they should make some small
abjuration, which only the bailiff, with two officers, might make
generally in his presence, in the name of all the rest, without any
notary to record the same in writing; and in so doing they should be
loved and favoured of all men, and even of those who now persecuted
them:  and that they should sustain no infamy thereby, for there
should be no report thereof made, but only to the pope, and to the
high court of parliament of Provence:  and also if any man, in time to
come, would turn the same to their reproach, or allege it against
them to their hurt or damage, they might utterly deny it, and say
they made no abjuration at all, because there were no records made
thereof, or witnesses to prove the same. For this purpose he desired
them to talk together, to the end there might be an end made in this
matter without any further business.

     The bailiff, and the two officers, with divers other ancients
of the town, answered, that they were fully resolved not to consent
to any abjuration, howsoever it were to be done; except (that which
was always their exception) they could make it appear unto them by
the word of God, that they had holden or maintained any heresy;
marvelling much that he would go about to persuade them to lie to God
and to the world. And albeit that all men by nature are liars, yet
they had learned by the word of God, that they ought diligently to
take heed of lying in any matter, were it never so small. Also, that
they ought diligently to take heed that their children did not
accustom to use themselves to lie, and therefore punished them very 
sharply, when they took them with any lie, even as if they had
committed any robbery; for the devil is a liar, and the father of
lies. Here the bishop rose up in great anger and indignation, and so
departed.

     Within a while after, the bishop of Aix solicited Master John
Durand, councillor of the court of the parliament of Provence, to
execute the commission which was given him; that is, to go unto the
place of Merindol, together with the secretary of the said court, and
there, in the presence of the bishop of Cavaillon, accompanied with a
doctor of divinity, to declare the errors and heresies which the
bishops pretended the inhabitants of Merindol to be infected and
entangled withal; and, according to their duty, to make it appear by
the word of God; and so, being convicted, to make them abjure and
renounce the said heresies. Whereupon the said councillor Durand
certified the day that he would be present at Merindol, to the end
and purpose that none of the inhabitants should be absent.

     At the day appointed, the said councillor Durand, the bishop of
Cavaillon, a doctor of divinity, and a secretary, came unto Merindol,
where were also present divers gentlemen, and men of understanding of
all sorts, to see this commission executed. Then they of Merindol
were advertised that they should not appear all at once, but that
they should keep themselves apart, and appear as they should be
called, in such orderand number as should be appointed unto them.
After that Durand, the bishop of Cavaillon, the doctor of divinity,
and the secretary, were set in place where justice was accustomed to
be kept, there were called forth Andrew Maynard, the bailiff of
Merindol; Jenon Romaine, and Micheline Maynard, syndics; John Cabrie,
and John Palenc, ancients of Merindol; and John Bruneral, under-
bailiff. After they had presented themselves with all due reverence,
the councillor Durand spake thus unto them: 

     "You are not ignorant, that by the arrest given out by the high
court of Provence, you were all condemned to be burned, both men,
women, and children; your houses also to be beaten down, and your
town to be razed and made desolate, &c., as is more largely contained
in the said arrest. Notwithstanding, it hath pleased the king, our
most gracious prince, to send his letters unto the said court,
commanding that the said arrest should not so vigorously proceed
against you:  but if it could by sufficient information be proved,
that you, or any of you, had swerved from the true religion,
demonstration should be made thereof unto you by the word of God,
whereby you might be reduced again to the flock of Christ. Wherefore
it was determined in the said court of parliament, that the bishop of
Cavaillon, with a doctor of divinity, should in my presence declare
unto you the errors and heresies wherewith they say you are infected;
and after good demonstration made by the word of God, you should
publicly and solemnly renounce and abjure the said heresies; and in
so doing, should obtain the grace and pardon contained in the king's
letters:  wherefore show yourselves this day, that you be obedient
unto God, the king, and the magistrates."

     When he had thus spoken, "What answer you," said he, "to that
which I have propounded?"

     Then Andrew Maynard, the bailiff, desired that they would grant
them an advocate to answer according to the instructions which they
would give him, forasmuch as they were men unlearned, and knew not
how to answer as in such a case was requisite. The councillor
answered, that he would hear their answer neither by advocate nor by
writing, but would hear them answer in their own persons: 
notwithstanding, he would give them leave to go apart, and talk
together, but not to ask any counsel, but only among themselves; and
then to answer one after another. Upon this determination, the
bailiff and the two syndics, with other two ancient men, talked
together awhile, and determined that the two syndics should speak
first, and after them the bailiff, then the two ancient men; every
man according as God should give him grace and by and by they
presented themselves; whereat the councillor Durand was greatly
abashed, to see that they had decreed and determined so speedily.
Then Michelin Maynard began to answer, desiring the councillor and
the bishop, with the other assistants, to pardon him, if that he
answered over rudely, having regard that they were poor, rude, and
ignorant men. His answer here followeth.

     "We are greatly bound to give God thanks, that besides his
other benefits bestowed upon us, he hath now delivered us from these
great assaults, and that it hath pleased him to touch the heart of
our noble king, that our cause might be treated with justice, and not
by violence. In like manner are we also bound to pray for our noble
king, which following the example of Samuel and Daniel, hath not
disdained to look upon the cause of his poor subjects. Also we render
thanks unto the lords of the parliament, in that it hath pleased them
to minister justice according to the king's commandment. Finally, we
thank you, my lord Durand, commissioner in this present cause, that
it hath pleased you, in so few words, to declare unto us the manner
and order how we ought to proceed. And for my part, I greatly desire
to understand and know the heresies and errors whereof I am accused;
and where they shall make it appear unto me that I have holden any
errors or heresies, I am contented to amend the same, as it shall be
ordained and provided by you."

     After him answered Jenon Romaine, the other syndic, a very
ancient father, approving all that which his fellow before had said,
giving God thanks that in his time, even in his latter days, he had
seen and heard such good news, that the cause of religion should be
decided and debated by the Holy Scriptures, and that he had often
heard ancient men say, that they could never obtain of the judges, in
all their persecution, to have their cause debated in such sort.

     Then Andrew Maynard the bailiff answered, saying, that God had
given to these two syndics the grace to answer so well, that it was
not necessary for him to say or add any more thereunto;
notwithstanding, it seemed good that their answers were put in
writing, which was not done by the secretary, who had done nothing
else but mock and jeer at all that had been said:  wherefore he
required the commissioner to look unto the matter.

     Then the commissioner was very angry, and sharply rebuked his
secretary, commanding him to sit nearer and to write their answers
word for word; and be himself, with a singular memory, repeated their
answers, and oftentimes asked if it were not so. The said answers
being thus put in writing, the commissioner asked the bailiff if he
had any more to answer, saying, that he had done him great pleasure
to show him his secretary's fault, willing him to speak boldly, what
he thought good for the defence of their cause. Then the bailiff
said, "Forasmuch as it hath pleased you to give me audience and
liberty to speak my mind freely, I say moreover, that it seemeth unto
me, that there is no due form of process in this judgment; for there
is no party here that doth accuse us. If we had an accuser present,
which, according to the rule of the Scripture, either should prove by
good demonstration out of the Old and New Testament that whereof we
are accused, or, if he were not able, should suffer punishment due
unto such as are heretics, I think he would be as greatly troubled to
maintain his accusations, as we to answer unto the same."

     After the bailiff had made this answer, John Palenc, one of the
ancients of Merindol, said, that he approved all that had been said
by the syndics, and that he was able to say no more than bad been
said by them before. The commissioner said unto him:  "You are, I see,
a very ancient man, and you have not lived so long, but that you have
something to answer for your part in defence of your cause." And the 
said Palenc answered, "Seeing it is your pleasure that I should say
something, it seemeth unto me impossible that (say what we can) we
should have either victory or advantage; for our judges be our
enemies."

     Then John Bruneral, under-bailiff of Merindol, answered thus: 

     "That he would very fain know the authority of the councillor
Durand, commissioner in this cause, forasmuch as the said councillor
had given them to understand, that he had authority of the high court
to make them abjure their errors, which should be found by good and
sufficient information, and to give them (so doing) the pardon
contained in the king's letters, and quit them of all punishment and
condemnation. But the said commissioner did not give them to
understand, that if they could not be found, by good and sufficient
information, that they were in error, he had any power or authority
to quit and absolve them of the said sentence and condemnation: 
wherefore it seemed that it should be more advantage for the said
Merindolians, if it should appear that they were heretics, than to be
found to live according to the doctrine of the gospel. For this cause
he required, that it would please the said commissioner to make
declaration thereof; concluding, that if it did not appear, by good
and sufficient information against them, that they had swerved from
the faith, or if there were no accuser that would come forth against
them, they ought to be fully absolved, without being any more
troubled, either in body or goods."

     These things were thus in debating from seven of the clock in
the morning until eleven. Then the commissioners dismissed them till
after dinner. At one o'clock in the afternoon, they were called for
again, and demanded whether they would say any thing else touching
that which was propounded in the morning by the said commissioner.
They answered, "No." Then said the commissioner, "What do you
conclude for your defence?" the two syndics answered, "We conclude,
that it would please you to declare unto us the errors and heresies
whereof we are accused." Then the commissioner asked the bishop of
Cavaillon, what informations he had against them. The bishop spake
unto him in his ear, and would not answer aloud. This talk in the ear
continued almost half an hour, that the commissioner and all others
that stood thereby were weary thereof. In the end, the commissioner
said unto them, that the bishop of Cavaillon had told him, that it
was not needful to make it apparent by information, for such was the
common report. Hereunto they answered, that they required the causes
and reasons alleged by the bishop of Cavaillon against them should be
put in writing. The bishop was earnest to the contrary, and would
have nothing that either he said or alleged to be put in writing.
Then John Bruneral required the commissioner that at least he would
put in writing, that the bishop would speak nothing against them that
they could understand; and that he would not speak before the
commissioner but only in his ear. The bishop, on the contrary part,
insisted that he would not be named in the process. There was great
disputation upon this matter, and continued long.

     Then the commissioner asked the Merindolians if they had the
articles of their Confession, which they had presented to the high
court of parliament. Then they required that their Confession might
be read, that by the reading thereof, they might understand whether
it were the doctrine which they held, and the Confession which they
had presented, or no. Then the Confession was read publicly before
them, which they did allow and acknowledge to be theirs. This done,
the commissioner asked the doctor, if he did find in the said
Confession any heretical opinions, whereof he could make
demonstration by the word of God, either out of the Old or New
Testament. Then spake the doctor in Latin a good while. After he had
made an end, Andrew Maynard, the bailiff, desired the commissioner,
according as he had propounded, to make the errors and heresies that
they were accused of apparent unto them by good information, or at
the least to mark those articles of their Confession which the bishop
and the doctor pretended to be heretical; requiring him also to put
in register the refusal as well of the bishop as of the doctor, of
whom the one spake in his ear, and the other in Latin, so that they
of Merindol could not understand one word. Then the commissioner
promised them to put in writing all that should make for their cause.
And moreover he said, that it was not needful to call the rest of the
Merindolians, if there were no more to be said to them, than had been
said to those which were already called. And this is the sum of all
that was done in the afternoon.

     Many which came thither to hear these disputations, supposing
they should have heard some goodly demonstrations, were greatly
abashed to see the bishop and the doctor so confounded; which thing
afterwards turned to the great benefit of many, for hereby they were
moved to require copies of the Confession of their faith, by means
whereof they were converted and embraced the truth; and especially
three doctors, who went about divers times to dissuade the
Merindolians from their faith, whose ministry God afterwards used in
the preaching of his gospel. One of them was Dr. Combaudi, prior of
St. Maximin, afterwards a preacher in the territory of the lords of
Berne:  another was Dr. Somati, who was also a preacher in the
bailiwick of Tournon:  the other was Dr. Heraudi, pastor and minister
in the county of Neufchatel.

     After this, the inhabitants of Merindol were in rest and
quietness for a space, insomuch that every man feared to go about to
trouble them, seeing those who persecuted them did receive nothing
but shame and confusion; as it did manifestly appear, not only by the
sudden death of the president Chassanee, but also of many others of
the chiefest councillors of the parliament of Provence; whose
horrible end terrified many, but especially the strange and fearful
example of that bloody tyrant John de Roma, set out as a spectacle to
all persecutors; whereof we have spoken before.

     Thus the Lord, repressing the rage of the adversaries for a
time, stayed the violence and execution of that cruel sentence or
arrest given out by the parliament of Provence against the
Merindolians, until John Minerius, an exceeding bloody tyrant, began
a new persecution. This Minerius, being lord of Opede near to
Merindol, first began to vex the poor Christians by pilling and
polling, by oppression and extortion, getting from them what he could
to enlarge his seigniory or lordship, which before was very base. For
this cause he put five or six of his own tenants into a cistern under
the ground, and closing it up, there he kept them till they died for
hunger, pretending that they were Lutherans and Waldois, to have
their goods and possessions. By this and such other practices, this
wretch was advanced in short space to great wealth and dignity; and
so at length became not only the chief president of the high court of
parliament, but also the king's lieutenant-general in the country of
Provence, in the absence of the Lord Grignan, then being at the 
council of Worms in Germany. Now therefore, seeing no opportunity to
be lacking to accomplish his devilish enterprise, he employed all his
power, riches, and authority, not only to confirm and to revive that
cruel arrest given out before by the court of parliament, but also,
as a right minister of Satan, he exceedingly increased the cruelty
thereof, which was already so great, that it seemed there could
nothing more be added thereunto. And to bring this mischief to pass,
he forged a most impudent lie, giving the king to understand, that
they of Merindol and all the country near about, to the number of
twelve or fifteen thousand, were in the field in armour, with their
ensigns displayed, intending to take the town of Marseilles, and make
it one of the cantons of the Switzers. And to stay this enterprise,
he said it was necessary to execute the arrest manu militari:  and by
this means he obtained the king's letters patent, through the help of
the cardinal of Tournon, commanding the sentence to be executed
against the Merindolians, notwithstanding that the king had before
revoked the said sentence, and given strait commandment that it
should in no wise be executed; as is before mentioned.

     After this he gathered all the king's army, which was then in
Provence ready to go against the Englishmen, and took up all besides,
that were able to bear armour, in the chiefest towns of Provence, and
joined them with the army which the pope's legate had levied for that
purpose in Avignon, and all the country of Venice, and employed the
same to the destruction of Merindol, Cabriers, and other towns and
villages to the number of two and twenty, giving commission to his
soldiers to spoil, ransack, burn, and to destroy all together, and to
kill man, woman, and child without all mercy, sparing none:  no
otherwise than the infidels and cruel Turks have dealt with the
Christians, as before in the story of the Turks you may read. For as
the papists and Turks are alike in their religion; so are the said
papists like, or rather exceed them, in all kinds of cruelty that can
be devised. But this arch-tyrant, before he came to Merindol,
ransacked and burnt certain towns, namely, La Roche, St. Stephens,
Ville Laure, Lormarin, La Motte, Cabriers, St. Martin, Pipin, and
other places more, notwithstanding that the arrest extended but only
to Merindol, where the most of the poor inhabitants were slain and
murdered without any resistance; women and maidens ravished; women
with child, and little infants born and to be born, were also most
cruelly murdered; the paps of many women cut off, who gave suck to
their children, which looking for suck at their mother's breast,
being dead before, died also for hunger. There was never such cruelty
and tyranny seen before.
Illustration:  Martyrs Dragged to the gallows

     The Merindolians, seeing all on a flaming fire round about
them, left their houses, and fled into the woods, and remained that
night at the village Sanfales, and thereabouts, in wonderful fear and
perplexity; for the bishop of Cavaillon, deputy to the bishop of
Rome's legate, had appointed certain captains to go and slay them.
The next day they went a little further, hiding themselves in woods,
for there was danger on every side; and Minerius had commanded, under
pain of death, that no man should aid them by any means, but that
they should be slain without pity or mercy, wheresoever they were
found. The same proclamation was of force also in the bishop of
Rome's dominions thereby; and it was said, that the bishops of that
country did find a great part of the army. Wherefore they went a
tedious and painful journey, carrying their children upon their
shoulders, and in their arms, and in their swaddling-clothes; and
many of them also being great with child, were constrained so to do.
And when they were come to the place appointed, thither were already
resorted a great number which had lost their goods, and saved
themselves by flight.
Illustration:  A Martyr Dragged and Whipped

     Not long after it was showed them how that Minerius was coming
with all his power to give the charge upon them. This was in the
evening, and because they should go through rough and cumbersome
places, and hard to pass by, they all thought it most expedient for
their safeguard, to leave behind them all the women and children,
with a few others, and among them also certain ministers of the
church:  the residue were appointed to go to the town of Muzi. And
this did they, upon hope that the enemy would show mercy to the
multitude of women and children being destitute of all succour. No
tongue can express what sorrow, what tears, what sighing, what
lamentation there was at that woeful departing, when they were
compelled to be thus separated asunder, the husband from his dear
wife, the father from his sweet babes and tender infants, the one
never like to see the other again alive. Notwithstanding, after the
ministers had ended their ordinary sermons, with evening prayers and
exhortations, the men departed that night, to avoid a greater
inconvenience.

     When they had gone all the night long, and had passed over the
great hill of Libron, they might see many villages and farms set on
fire. Minerius, in the mean time, had divided his army into two
parts, marching himself with the one towards the town of Merindol;
and having knowledge by espial whither the Merindolians were fled, he
sendeth the other part to set upon them, and to show their accustomed
cruelty upon them. Yet before they came to the place where they were,
some of Minerius' army, either of good will, or moved with pity,
privily conveyed themselves away, and came unto them, to give them
warning that their enemies were coming:  and one, from the top of a
high rock, where he thought that the Merindolians were underneath,
cast down two stones, and afterwards, although he could not see them,
he called unto them that they should immediately fly from thence. But
the enemies suddenly came upon them, and finding them all assembled
together at prayers, spoiled them of all that they had, pulling off
their garments from their backs:  some they abused, some they whipped
and scourged, and some they sold away like cattle, practising what
cruelty and villany soever they could devise against them. The women
were in number about five hundred.

     In the mean time Minerius cane to Merindol, where he found none
but a young man named Maurice Blanc, who had yielded himself unto a 
soldier, promising him for his ransom two French crowns. Minerius
would have had him away by force, but it was answered that the
soldier ought not to lose his prisoner. Minerius therefore, paying
the two crowns himself, took the young man, and caused him to be tied
unto an olive-tree, and shot through with harquebusses, and most
cruelly martyred. Many gentlemen which accompanied Minerius against
their wills, seeing this cruel spectacle, were moved with great
compassion, and could not forbear tears; for albeit this young man
was not yet very well instructed, neither had before dwelt at
Merindol, yet in all his torments, having always his eyes lifted up
to heaven, with a loud voice he ceased not still to call upon God;
and the last words that he spake were these:  "Lord God! these men
take away my life full of misery, but thou wilt give unto me life
everlasting by thy Son Jesus Christ, to whom be glory." So was
Merindol, without any resistance, valiantly taken, ransacked, burned,
razed, and laid even with the ground. And albeit there was no man to
resist, yet this valiant captain of Opede, armed from top to toe,
trembled for fear, and was seen to change his colour very much.

     When he had destroyed Merindol, he laid siege to Cabriers, and
battered it with his ordnance; but when he could not win it by force,
he, with the lord of the town, and Poulin his chief captain,
persuaded with the inhabitants to open their gates, solemnly
promising, that if they would so do, they would lay down their
armour, and also that their cause should be heard in judgment with
all equity and justice, and no violence or injury should be showed
against them. Upon this they opened their gates, and let in Minerius,
with his captains, and all his army. But the tyrant, when he was once
entered, falsified his promise, and raged like a beast. For first of
all he picked out about thirty men, causing them to be bound, and
carried into a meadow near to the town, and there to be miserably cut 
and hewn in pieces of his soldiers.

     Then, because he would leave no kind of cruelty unattempted, he
also exercised his fury and outrage upon the poor silly women, and
caused forty of them to be taken, of whom divers were great with
child, and put them into a barn full of straw and hay, and caused it
to be set on fire at four corners; and when the silly women, running
to the great window where the hay is wont to be cast into the barn,
would have leaped out, they were kept in with pikes and halberds.
Then there was a soldier, which, moved with pity at the crying out
and lamentation of the women, opened a door to let them out; but as
they were coming out, the tyrant caused them to be slain and cut in
pieces, and the children yet unborn they trod under their feet. Many
were fled into the wine-cellar of the castle, and many hid themselves
in caves, whereof some were carried into the meadow, and there,
stripped naked, were slain:  others were bound two and two together,
and carried into the hall of the castle, where they were slain by the
captains, rejoicing in their bloody butchery and horrible slaughter.

     That done, this tyrant, more cruel than ever was Herod,
commanded Captain John de Gay, with a band of ruffians, to go into
the church (where was a great number of women, children, and young
infants) to kill all that he found there; which the captain refused
at first to do, saying, that were a cruelty unused among men of war: 
whereat Minerius being displeased, charged him, upon pain of
rebellion, and disobedience to the king, to do as he commanded him.
The captain, fearing what might ensue, entered with his men, and
destroyed them all, sparing neither young nor old.

     In this mean while certain soldiers went to ransack the houses
for the spoil, where they found many poor men that had there hidden
themselves in cellars, and other privy places, flying upon them, and
crying out, "Kill! kill!" The other soldiers that were without the
town, killed all that they could meet with. The number of those that
were so unmercifully murdered, was about a thousand persons, men,
women, and children. The infants that escaped their fury, were
baptized again of their enemies.

     In token of this jolly victory, the pope's officers caused a
pillar to be erected in the said place of Cabriers, on the which was
engraven the year and the day of the taking and sacking of this town,
by John Minerius, lord of Opede, and chief president of the
parliament of Provence; for a memorial for ever of that barbarous
cruelty, the like whereof was never yet heard of. Whereupon we, with
all our posterity, have to understand what be the reasons and
arguments wherewith the antichrist of Rome is wont to uphold the
impious seat of his abomination; who now is come to such excess and
profundity of all kinds of iniquity, that all justice, equity, and
verity being set aside, he seeketh the defence of his cause by no
other thing than only by force and violence, terror and oppression,
and shedding of blood.

     In this mean while the inhabitants of Merindol, and other
places thereabout, were among the mountains and rocks, in great
necessity of victuals, and much affliction; who had procured certain
men who were in some favour and authority with Minerius, to make
request for them unto him, that they might depart safely whither it
should please God to lead them, with their wives and children,
although they had no more but their shirts to cover them. Whereunto
Minerius made this answer:  "I know what I have to do; not one of them
shall escape my hands; I will send them to dwell in hell among the
devils."

     After this there was a power sent unto Costua, which likewise
they overcame, and committed there great slaughter. Many of the
inhabitants fled away, and ran into an orchard, where the soldiers
vilely ill-used the women and maidens; and when they had kept them
there enclosed a day and a night, they handled them so cruelly, that
some of the women with child, and maidens, died shortly after. It
were impossible to comprehend all the lamentable and sorrowful
examples of this cruel persecution against the Merindolians, and
their fellows, insomuch that no kind of cruel tyranny was
unpractised; for they which escaped by woods, and went wandering by
mountains, were taken and set in galleys, or else were slain
outright.

     Many which did hide themselves in rocks and dark caves, some
were famished with hunger, some were smothered with fire and smoke
put unto them:  all which may more fully be understood by the records
of the court, and by the pleas between them and their adversaries in
the high consistory of the court of Paris, where, all the doors being
set open, and in the public hearing of the people, the cause of this
trouble and persecution was shortly after solemnly debated between
two great lawyers; the one called Aubrius, which accused Minerius the
president, committed to prison; and the other called Robert, the
defendant who was against him. The cause why this matter of Merindol
was brought in plea and judgment to be decided by the law was this: 

     Henry the Second, the French king, who newly succeeded Francis
his father above-mentioned, con-sidering how this cruel and infamous
persecution against his own subjects and people was greatly misliked
of other princes, and also objected both against him and his father
as a note of shameful tyranny, by the emperor himself, Charles the
Fifth, and that in the public council of all the states in Germany,
for so murdering and spoiling his own natural subjects, without all
reason and mercy; he therefore, to the intent to purge and clear
himself thereof, caused the said matter to be brought into the court,
and there to be decided by order of justice, A.D. 1547.

     Which cause, after it was pleaded to and fro in public
audience, no less than fifty times, and yet in the end could not be
determined, so it brake off and was passed over; and at length
Minerius, being loosed out of prison, was restored to his liberty and
possessions again, upon this condition and promise made unto the
cardinal, Charles of Lorraine, that he should banish and expel these
new Christians (terming so the true professors of the gospel) out of
all Provence.

     Thus Minerius, being restored, returned again into Provence,
where he began again to attempt greater tyranny than before. Neither
did his raging fury cease to proceed, before the just judgment of
God, lighting upon him, brought him by a horrible disease unto the
torments of death, which he most justly had deserved. For he, being
struck with a strange kind of bleeding in manner of a bloody flux,
and not being able to obtain other relief, thus by little and little
his entrails within him rotted:  and when no remedy could be found for
this terrible disease, and his entrails now began to be eaten of
worms, a certain famous surgeon, named La Motte, which dwelt at
Arles, a man no less godly than expert in his science, was called
for, who, after he had cured him of this difficulty of relieving
himself, and therefore was in great estimation with him, before he
would proceed further to search the other parts of his putrefied
body, and to search out the inward cause of his malady, he desired 
that they which were present in the chamber with Minerius, would
depart a little aside. Which being done, he began to exhort Minerius
with earnest words, saying, how the time now required that he should
ask forgiveness of God by Christ, for his enormous crimes and
cruelty, in shedding so much innocent blood; and declaring the same
to be the cause of this so strange profusion of blood coming from
him.

     These words being heard, so pierced the impure conscience of
this miserable wretch, that he was therewith troubled more than with
the agony of his disease; insomuch that he cried out to lay hand upon
the surgeon as a heretic. La Motte hearing this, eftsoons conveyed
himself out of sight, and returned again to Arles. Notwithstanding it
was not long but he was sent for again, being entreated by his
friends, and promised most firmly, that his coming should be without
any peril or danger:  and so, with much ado, he returned again to
Minerius, what time all now was past remedy. And so Minerius, raging
and casting out most horrible and blaspheming words, and feeling a
fire which burnt him from the navel upwards, with extreme stench of
the lower parts, finished his wretched life. Whereby we have
notoriously to understand, that God, through his mighty arm, at
length confoundeth such persecutors of his innocent and faithful
servants, and bringeth them to nought; to whom be praise and glory
for ever!

     Moreover, besides this justice of God showed upon Minerius,
here also is not to be forgotten which followed likewise upon certain
of the others who were the chief doers in this persecution under
Minerius aforesaid; namely, Louis de Vaine, brother-in-law to the
said president, and also the brother and the son-in-law to Peter
Durant, master-butcher in the town of Aix; the which three did slay
one another, upon a certain strife that fell among them. And upon the
same day the judge of Aix, who accompanied Minerius in the same
persecution, as he returned homeward, going over the river of
Durance, was drowned.

Notes upon the history of Merindol, above recited.

     Thus hast thou heard, loving reader! the terrible troubles and
slaughters committed by the bishops and cardinals, against these
faithful men of Merindol, which, for the heinous tyranny, and example
of the fact most unmerciful, may be comparable with any of the first
persecutions in the primitive church, done either by Decius, or
Dioclesian.

     Now, touching the said story and people of Merindol, briefly by
the way is to be noted, that this was not the first time that these
men of this country were vexed; neither was it of late years that the
doctrine and profession of them began. For (as by the course of time,
and by ancient records, it may appear) these inhabitants of Provence,
and other coasts bordering about the confines of France and Piedmont,
had their continuance of ancient time, and received their doctrine
first from the Waldenses, or Albigenses, which were (as some say)
about A.D. 1170; or (as others do reckon) about A.D. 1216; whereof
thou hast, gentle reader! sufficiently to understand, reading before.

     These Waldenses, otherwise called Pauperes de Lugduno,
beginning of one Peter Waldo, citizen of Lyons, as is before showed,
by violence of persecution being driven out of Lyons, were dispersed
abroad in divers countries, of whom some fled to Marseilles, some to
Germany, some to Sarmatia, Livonia, Bohemia, Calabria, and Apulia.
Divers strayed to the countries of France, especially about Provence
and Piedmont, of whom came these Merindolians above-mentioned, and
the Angrognians, with others, of whom now it followeth likewise (God
willing) to discourse. They which were in the country of Toulouse, of
the place where they frequented, where called Albii, or Albigenses.
Against the which Albigenses, Friar Dominic was a great doer,
labouring and preaching against them ten years together, and caused
many of them to be burned; for the which he was highly accepted and
rewarded in the apostolical court, and at length, by Pope Honorius
the Third, was made patriarch of the black guard of the Dominic
Friars.

     These Albigenses, against the pope of Rome, had set up to
themselves a bishop of their own, named Bartholomæus, remaining about
the coasts of Croatia and Dalmatia, as appeareth by a letter of one
of the pope's cardinals above specified. For the which cause the see
of Rome took great indignation against the said Albigenses, and
caused all their faithful catholics, and the obedientaries to their
church, to rise up in armour, and to take the sign of the holy cross
upon them, to fight against them, A.D. 1206; by reason whereof great
multitudes of them were pitifully murdered, not only of them about
Toulouse and Avignon in France, (as is afore to be seen,) but also in
all quarters miserable slaughters and burnings of them long
continued, from the reign of Frederic the Second, emperor, almost to
this present time, through the instigation of the Roman popes.

     Paulus Æmilius, the French chronicler, in his sixth book,
writing of these Pauperes de Lugduno, and Humiliati, and dividing
these two orders from the Albigenses, reporteth that the two former
orders were rejected of Pope Lucius the Third, and in their place
other two orders were approved, to wit, the order of the Dominic
Friars, and of the Franciscans:  which seemeth not to be true,
forasmuch as this Pope Lucius was twenty years before Innocent the
Third; and yet not in the time of Pope Innocent was the order of the
Dominic Friars approved, but in the time of Pope Honorius the Third,
who was forty years after Pope Lucius. Again, Bernard of Lutzenberg,
in his Catalogus Hæ reticorum, affirmeth, that these Pauperes de
Lugduno, or Waldenses, began first A.D. 1218; which if it be true,
then must the other report of Æmilius be false, writing that the sect
of Pauperes de Lugduno, to be refused by Pope Lucius the Third, who
was long before this, A.D. 1181.

     Amongst other authors who write of those Waldenses, John
Sleidan, treating of their continuance and doctrine, thus writeth of
them. "There be," saith he, "in the French province, a people called
Waldois. These, of an ancient trade and custom among them, do not
acknowledge the bishop of Rome, and ever have used a manner of
doctrine somewhat more pure than the rest; but especially since the
coming of Luther, they have increased in more knowledge and
perfection of judgment:  wherefore they have been oftentimes
complained of to the king, as though they contemned the magistrate,
and would move rebellion, with other such matter falsely surmised
against them, more of despite and malice, than of any just cause of
truth. There be of them certain towns and villages, among which
Merindol is one. Against these Merindolians sentence was given five
years past, at Aix, being the high tribunal-seat or judgment-place of
Provence, that all should be destroyed without respect of age or
person, in such sort as that the houses being plucked down, the
village should be made plain, even with the ground; the trees also
should be cut down, and the place altogether made desolate and
desert. Albeit, though it were thus pronounced, yet was it not then
put in execution, by the means of certain that persuaded the king to
the contrary, namely, one William Belay, who was at the same time the
king's lieutenant in Piedmont. But at the last, on the twelfth of
April, A.D. 1545, John Minerius, president of the council of Aix,
calling the senate, read the king's letters, commanding them to
execute the sentence given," &c.

     Moreover, concerning the Confession and the doctrine of the
said Merindolians, received of ancient time from their forefathers
the Waldenses, thus it followeth in the said book and place of John
Sleidan.

     "At last," saith Sleidan, (after he had described what great
cruelty was showed against them,)" when the report hereof was bruited
in Germany, it offended the minds of many; and indeed the Switzers,
who were then of a contrary religion to the pope, entreated the king
that he would show mercy to such as were fled."

     Whereunto the said King Francis made answer in this wise;
pretending that he had just cause to do as he did:  inferring
moreover, that they ought not to be careful what he did within his
dominions, or how he punished his offenders, more than he was about
their affairs, &c. Thus hard was the king against them,
notwithstanding (saith Sleidan) that he, the year before, had 
received from the said his subjects of Merindol, a Confession of
their faith and doctrine.

     "The articles whereof were, that they, according to the
Christian faith, confessed first, God the Father, Creator of all
things:  the Son, the only Mediator and Advocate of mankind:  the Holy
Spirit, the Comfortor and Instructor of all truth.

     "They confessed also the church, which they acknowledged to be
the fellowship of God's elect, whereof Jesus Christ is Head. The
ministers also of the church they did allow, wishing that such which
did not their duty should be removed.

     "And as touching magistrates, they granted likewise the same to
be ordained of God to defend the good, and to punish the
transgressors. And how they owe to him, not love only, but also
tribute and custom, and no man herein to be excepted, even by the
example of Christ, who paid tribute himself, &c.

     "Likewise of baptism, they confessed the same to be a visible
and an outward sign, that representeth to us the renewing of the
spirit, and mortification of the members.

     "Furthermore, as touching the Lord's supper, they said and
confessed the same to be a thanksgiving, and a memorial of the
benefit received through Christ.

     "Matrimony they affirmed to be holy; and instituted of God, and
to be inhibited to no man.

     "That good works are to be observed and exercised of all men,
as Holy Scripture teacheth.

     "That false doctrine, which leadeth men away from the true
worship of God, ought to be eschewed.

     "Briefly and finally, the order and rule of their faith they
confessed to be the Old and New Testament; protesting that they
believed all such things as are contained in the Apostoles Creed: 
desiring moreover the king to give credit to this their declaration
of their faith; so that whatsoever was informed to him to the
contrary, was not true, and that they would well prove, if they might
be heard."

     And thus much concerning the doctrine and confession of the
Merindolians out of Sleidan, and also concerning their descent and
offspring from the Waldenses.



162. THE WALDENSIANS OF PIEDMONT

The history of the persecutions and wars against the people called
Waldenses or Waldois, in the valleys of Angrogne, Lucerne, St.
Martin, Perouse, and others, in the country of Piedmont, from A.D.
1555, to A.D. 1561.

The martyrs of the valley of Angrogne, the martyrs of the valley of
Lucerne, the martyrs of St. Martin, the martyrs of Perouse, and
others. Persecuted by the parliament of Turin; the president of St.
Julian; Jacomel, a monk and inquisitor; Monsieur de la Trinity; the
gentlemen of the valleys; Charles Truchet, Boniface Truchet; the
collateral of Corbis; the collateral de Ecclesia; the duke of Savoy;
monks of Pignerol; and by many others more, enemies of God, and
ministers of Satan.
Illustration:  Pignerol

     We proceed now further in the persecution of these Waldois, or
Waldenses:  you have heard hitherto, first how they, dividing
themselves into divers countries, some fled to Provence and to
Toulouse, of whom sufficient hath been said. Some went to Piedmont,
and the valley of Angrogne, of whom it followeth now to treat, God
willing.

     Thus these good men, by long persecution, being driven from
place to place, were grievously in all places afflicted, but yet
could never be utterly destroyed, nor yet compelled to yield to the
superstitious and false religion of the Church of Rome:  but ever
abstained from their corruption and idolatry, as much as was
possible, and gave themselves to the word of God, as a rule both
truly to serve him, and to direct their lives accordingly.

     They had many books of the Old and New Testament translated
into their language. Their ministers instructed them secretly, to
avoid the fury of their enemies which could not abide the light;
albeit they did not instruct them with such purity as was requisite.
They lived in great simplicity, and with the sweat of their brows.
They were quiet and peaceable among their neighbours, abstaining from
blasphemy, and from profaning of the name of God by oaths, and such
other impiety; from lewd games, dancing, filthy songs, and other
vices and dissolute life, and conformed their life wholly to the rule
of God's word. Their principal care was always, that God might be
rightly served, and his word truly preached; insomuch that in our
time, when it pleased God to set forth the light of his gospel more
clearly, they never spared any thing to establish the true and pure
ministry of the word of God and his sacraments. Which was the cause
that Satan with his ministers did so persecute them of late more
cruelly than ever he did before, as manifestly appeareth by the
bloody and horrible persecutions which have been, not only in
Provence, against those of Merindol and Cabriers, also against them
of Prague and Calabria, (as the histories afore written do
sufficiently declare,) but also against them in the country of
Piedmont, remaining in the valley of Angrogne, and of Lucerne, and
also in the valley of St. Martin and Perouse, in the said country of
Piedmont. Which people of a long time were persecuted by the papists,
and especially within these few years they have been vexed in such
sort, and so diversely, that it seemeth almost incredible:  and yet
hath God always miraculously delivered them, as hereafter shall
ensue.

     Albeit the people of Angrogne had before this time certain to
preach the word of God, and minister the sacraments unto them
privately; yet in the year of our Lord 1555, in the beginning of the
month of August, the gospel was openly preached in Angrogne. The
ministers and the people intended at first to keep themselves still
as secret as they might; but there was such concourse of people from
all parts, that they were compelled to preach openly abroad. For this
cause they built them a church in the midst of Angrogne, where
assemblies were made, and sermons preached. It happened about that
time, that one John Martin, of Briqueras, a mile from Angrogne, which
vaunted every where that he would slit the minister's nose of
Angrogne, was assaulted by a wolf which bit off his nose, so that he
died thereof mad. This was commonly known to all the towns
thereabout.

     At this season the French king held these aforesaid valleys,
and they were under the jurisdiction of the parliament of Turin. In
the end of the December following, news was brought, that it was
ordained by the said parliament, that certain horsemen and footmen
should be sent to spoil and destroy Angrogne. Whereupon some which
pretended great friendship to this people, counselled them not to go
forward with their enterprise, but to forbear for a while, and to
wait for better opportunity. But they, notwithstanding, calling upon
God, determined with one accord constantly to persist in their
religion, and in hope and silence to abide the good pleasure of God: 
so that this enterprise against Angrogne was soon dashed. The same
time they began also openly to preach in Lucerne.

     In the month of March, A.D. 1556, the ministers of the valley
of St. Martin preached openly. At that time certain gentlemen of the
valley of St. Martin took a good man named Bartholomew, a bookbinder,
prisoner, as he passed by the said valley, the which was sent by and
by to Turin; and there, with a marvellous constancy, after he had
made a good confession of his faith, he suffered death; insomuch that
divers of the parliament were astonished and appalled at his
constancy. Yet they of the said parliament, being sore incensed
against the Waldois, sent one, named the president of St. Julian,
associating unto him one called De Ecclesia and others, for to hinder
their enterprise. These coming first to the valley of Perouse, where 
as yet no preachers were, but they were accustomed to resort to the
sermons of Angrogne, very much troubled and feared the poor people
there.

     From thence they went to the valley of St. Martin, and remained
there a good while, tormenting the poor people, and threatening their
utter ruin and destruction. After that they came to Lucerne,
troubling and vexing the people there in like manner. From thence
they went to Angrogne, accompanied by many gentlemen, and a great
rabble of priests of the said country:  but by the way, the president
inquired for one dwelling at St. Jean, near to Angrogne, and examined
him, whether he had not baptized his child at Angrogne, and wherefore
he had so done? The poor simple man answered, that he had baptized
his child at Angrogne, because baptism was there administered
according to the institution of Christ. Then the president, in a
great rage, commanded him in the king's name to baptize his child
again, or else he should be burnt. The poor man desired the president
that he might be suffered to make his prayer to God, before he should
make answer thereunto:  which after he had done in the hall, before
all the company there present, he required the president that he
would write, and sign the same with his own hand, that he would
discharge him before God, of the danger of that offence, if he should
baptize his child again, and that he would take the peril upon him
and his. The president, hearing this, was so confounded, that he
spake not one word a good while after. Then said he, in a great fury,
"Away, thou villain! out of my sight;" and after that he was never
called any more.

     After they were come to Angrogne, the president, having visited
the two temples, caused a monk to preach in the one, the people being
there assembled; who pretended nothing else, but only to exhort them
to return to the obedience of the see of Rome. The monk, with the
president, and all his retinue, kneeled down twice, and called upon
the Virgin Mary; but the ministers and all the people stood still,
and would not kneel, making no sign or token of reverence. As soon as
the monk had ended his sermon, the people requested instantly, that
their minister might also be suffered to preach, affirming that the
said monk had spoken many things which were not according to the word
of God:  but the president would not grant their request. After that,
the said president admonished them, in the name of the king and the
parliament of Turin, that they should return to the obedience of the
pope, upon pain of loss of goods and life, and utter destruction of
their town. And withal he recited unto them the piteous discomfiture
of their brethren and friends, which had been done before in Merindol
and Cabriers, and other places in the country of Provence. The
ministers and the people answered, that they were determined to live
according to the word of God, and that they would obey the king and
all their superiors in all things, so that God were not thereby
displeased and furthermore, if it were showed unto them by the word
of God, that they erred in any point of religion, they were ready to
receive correction, and to be reformed. This talk endured about six
hours together, even until night. In the end, the president said
there should be a disputation appointed for those matters, whereunto
the people gladly agreed; but, after that, there was no more mention
made thereof.

     Here he remained fourteen days, daily practising new devices to
vex and torment them with new proclamations, now calling to him the
syndics and head officers, now severally, and now altogether, that
so, for fear, he might make them to relent:  causing also assemblies
to be made in every parish by such as he appointed, thinking thereby
to divide the people. Notwithstanding, he nothing prevailed with all
that he could do; but still they continued constant:  insomuch that
they, with one accord, presented a brief confession of their faith,
with an answer to certain interrogatories made by the president, in
which they confessed as followeth

     "That the religion wherein both they and their elders had been
long instructed and brought up, was the same which is contained both
in the Old and New Testament, which is also briefly comprised in the
twelve articles of the Christian belief.

     "Also, that they acknowledged the sacraments instituted by
Christ, whereby he distributeth abundantly his graces and great
benefits, his heavenly riches and treasures, to all those which
receive the same with a true and lively faith.

     "Furthermore, that they received the creeds of the four general
councils; that is to say, of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Chalcedon; and also the creed of Athanasius, wherein the mystery of
the Christian faith and religion is plainly and largely set out.

     "Item, The ten commandments expressed in Exodus xx., and
Deuteronomy v., in which the rule of a godly and holy life, and also
the true service which God requireth of us, is briefly comprised:  and
therefore, following this article, they suffered not by any means,
said they, any gross iniquities to reign among them; as unlawful
swearing, perjury, blasphemy, cursing, slandering, dissension,
deceit, wrong dealing, usury, gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom, theft,
murder, sorcery, witchcraft, or such like; but wholly endeavoured
themselves to live in the fear of God, and according to his holy
will.

     "Moreover they acknowledged the superior powers, as princes and
magistrates, to be ordained of God; and that whosoever resisteth the
same, resisteth the ordinance of God; and therefore humbly submitted
themselves to their superiors with all obedience, so that they
commanded nothing against God.

     "Finally, they protested, that they would in no point be
stubborn, but if that their forefathers or they had erred in any one
jot concerning the true religion, the same being proved by the word
of God, they would willingly yield and be reformed."

     The interrogatories were concerning the mass, auricular
confession, baptism, marriage, and burials, according to the
institution of the Church of Rome.

     "To the first they answered, that they received the Lord's
supper, as it was by him instituted, and celebrated by his apostles;
but as touching the mass, except the same might be proved by the word
of God, they would not receive it.

     "To the second, touching auricular confession, they said, that
for their part they confessed themselves daily unto God,
acknowledging themselves before him to be miserable sinners, desiring
of him pardon and forgiveness of their sins, as Christ instructed
his, in the prayer which he taught them; Lord! forgive us our sins.
And as St. John saith; If we confess our sins to God, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And according to that which God himself saith by his
prophet; O Israel! if thou return, return unto me. And again, O
Israel! it is I, it is I which forgiveth thee thy sins. So that,
seeing they ought to return to God alone, and it is he only who
forgiveth sins, therefore they were bound to confess themselves to
God only, and to no other. Also it appeareth, that David, in his
Psalms, and the prophets, and other faithful servants of God, have
confessed themselves both generally and particularly unto God alone: 
yet, if the contrary might be proved by the word of God, they would
(said they) with all humbleness receive the same.

     "Thirdly, As touching baptism, they acknowledged and received
that holy institution of Christ, and administered the same with all
simplicity, as he ordained it in his holy gospel, without any
changing, adding, or diminishing in any point; and that all this they
did in their mother tongue, according to the rule of St. Paul, who
willeth that in the church every thing be done in the mother tongue,
for the edification of our neighbour:  but as for their conjurations,
oiling, and salting, except the same might be proved by the sacred
Scripture, they would not receive them.

     "Fourthly, As touching burials they answered, that they knew
there is a difference between the bodies of the true Christians and
the infidels, forasmuch as the first are the members of Jesus Christ,
temples of the Holy Ghost, and partakers of the glorious resurrection
of the dead; and therefore they accustomed to follow their dead to
the grave reverently, with a sufficient company, and exhortation out
of the word of God; as well to comfort the parents and friends of the
dead, as also to admonish all men diligently to prepare themselves to
die. But as for the using of candles or lights, prayers for the dead,
and ringing of bells, except the same might he proved to be necessary
by the word of God, and that God is not offended therewith, they
would not receive them.

     "Fifthly, As touching obedience to men's traditions, they
received and allowed all those ordinances which (as St. Paul saith)
serve for order, decency, and reverence of the ministry. But as for
other ceremonies which have been brought into the church of God,
either as a part of his divine service, either to merit remission of
sins, or else to bind men's consciences, because they are repugnant
to the word of God, they could by no means receive them.

     "And whereas the commissioners affirmed the said traditions to
have been ordained by councils:  first they answered, that the
greatest part of them were not ordained by councils:  secondly, that
councils were not to be preferred above the word of God, which saith,
If any man, yea, or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you
otherwise than that which hath been received of the Lord Jesus, let
him be accursed. And therefore (said they) if councils have ordained
any thing dissenting from the word of God, they would not receive it.

     "Finally they said, that the councils had made divers notable
decrees concerning the election of bishops and ministers of the
church; concerning ecclesiastical discipline, as well of the clergy
as of the people; also concerning the distribution of the goods and
possessions of the church; and further, that all pastors who were
either whoremongers, drunkards, or offensive in any case, should be
put from their office. Moreover, that whosoever should be present at
the mass of a priest which was a whoremonger, should be
excommunicated:  and many other such things, which were not in any
point observed. And that they omitted to speak of many other things
which were ordained by divers councils, very superstitious, and
contrary to the holy commandments of God, as they would be ready to
prove (said they) if they should have occasion and opportunity
thereunto.

     "Wherefore they required the commissioners, that a disputation
might be had (as by the said president was pretended) publicly, and
in their presence; and then, if it might be proved by the word of
God, that they erred either in doctrine, or in conversation and
manner of living, they were content with all humbleness to be
corrected and reformed, as they had before said:  beseeching them to
consider also that their religion had been observed and kept from
their ancestors, until their time, many hundred years together:  and
yet, for their parts, being convicted by the infallible word of God,
they would not obstinately stand to the defence thereof:  saying
moreover, that they, together with the said lords deputies, confessed
all one God, one Saviour, one Holy Ghost, one law, one baptism, one
hope in heaven; and in sum, they affirmed that their faith and
religion were firmly founded and grounded upon the pure word of God: 
wherefore it is said, that blessed are they which hear the same, and
keep it.

     "To be short, seeing it is permitted to the Turks, Saracens,
and Jews, (which are mortal enemies to our Saviour Christ,) to dwell
peaceably in the fairest cities of Christendom; by good reason they
should be suffered to live in the desolate mountains and valleys,
having their whole religion founded upon the holy gospel, and
worshipping the Lord Jesus; and therefore they most humbly besought
them to have pity and compassion upon them, and to suffer them to
live quietly in their deserts; protesting that they and theirs would
Iive in all fear and reverence of God, with all due subjection and
obedience to their lord and prince, and to his lieutenants and
officers."

     The president, and the rest of the commissioners, perceiving
that they laboured in vain, returned to Turin with the notes of their
proceedings; the which immediately were sent unto the king's court,
and there the matter remained one year before there was any answer
made thereunto. During that time the Waldois lived in great
quietness, as God of his infinite goodness is wont to give some
comfort and refreshing to his poor servants, after long troubles and
afflictions. The number of the faithful so augmented, that throughout
the valleys God's word was purely preached, and his sacraments duly
administered, and no mass was sung in Angrogne, nor in divers other
places. The year after, the president of St. Julian, with his
associates, returned to Pignerol, and sent for thither the chief
rulers of Angrogne, and of the valley of Lucerne, that is, for six of
Angrogne, and for two of every parish besides, and showed unto them,
how that the last year they had presented their Confession, the
which, by a decree made by the parliament of Turin, was sent to the
king's court, and there diligently examined by learned men, and
condemned as heretical. Therefore the king willed and commanded them
to return to the obedience of the Church of Rome, upon pain of loss
both of goods and life:  enjoining them, moreover, to give him a
direct answer within three days.

     From thence he went to Lucerne, and caused the householders,
with great threatenings, to assemble-themselves before certain by him
appointed:  but they, with one assent, persisted in their former
Confession; and lest they should seem stubborn in the defence of any
erroneous doctrine, they desired that their Confession might be sent
to all the universities of Christendom, and if the same in any part
by the word of God were disproved, it should be immediately amended: 
but contrariwise, if that were not done, then they to be no more
disquieted.

     The president, not contented with this, the next morning sent
for six out of Angrogne, by him named, and for two out of every other
parish, the which he and the gentlemen of the country threatened very
sore, and warned twelve of the chief of Angrogne, and certain of the
other parishes, to appear personally at the parliament of Turin, and
to bring before the judges of the said parliament their ministers and
schoolmasters, thinking, if they were once banished the country, that
then their enterprise might soon be brought to an end. To this it was
answered, that they could not, nor ought to obey such a commandment.

     A little while after proclamation was made in every place, that
no man should receive any preacher coming from Geneva, but only such
as were appointed by the archbishop of Turin, and others his
officers, upon pain of confiscation of their goods, and loss of their
lives; and that every one should observe the ceremonies, rites, and
religion, used in the Church of Rome. Furthermore, that if any of the
aforesaid preachers of Geneva came into those quarters, they should
immediately be apprehended, and by no means their abode there by any
one to be concealed, upon the pain aforesaid. And furthermore, the
names of those which should disclose any one of them should be kept
secret; and also, for their accusation, they should have the third
part of the goods confiscated, with a full pardon, if that the said
accusers were any of those which privily did keep or maintain the
said ministers; and that they, and all others which would return to
their mother the church, might freely and safely come and recant
before the said commissioners.

     At the same season the princes of Germany, and certain of the
Switzers, sent unto the French king, desiring him to have pity on the
aforesaid churches; and from that time, until three years after, the
people of the aforesaid valleys were not molested by any of the
king's officers, but yet they were sore vexed by the monks of
Pignerol, and the gentlemen of the valley of St. Martin.

     About that time a minister of Angrogne, named Geffrey Varialla,
born in Piedmont, a virtuous and learned man, and fearing God, went
to visit certain churches in those quarters where he was born, and
coming homeward, was taken at Berga, and from thence led to Turin,
where, after he had made a good confession of his faith, to the
confirmation of many, and to the terror of his adversaries, he most
constantly suffered.

     A few days after, a minister of the valley of Lucerne,
returning to Geneva, was taken prisoner at Susa, and soon after sent
to Turin, and with an invincible constancy made his confession before
those of the parliament, and in the end was condemned to be burnt.
The hangman, at the time of execution, feigned himself to be sick,
and so conveyed himself away; and so likewise another served them,
being appointed by the aforesaid court to execute the poor minister.
It is credibly reported that the hangman who executed certain Germans
a little before, would by no means do this execution:  whereupon the
minister was sent to prison again, where, after long and painful
endurance, seeing the prison door open, he escaped, and returned to
his cure.

     Now four years being past, in such manner as we have hitherto
touched in this story, in the year following, which was A.D. 1559,
there was a peace concluded between the French king and the king of
Spain; whereupon the country of Piedmont (certain towns excepted) was
restored to the duke of Savoy, under whose regiment the aforesaid
churches, and all other faithful people in Piedmont, continued in
great quietness, and were not molested; and the duke himself was
content to suffer them to live in their religion, knowing that he had
no subjects more faithful and obedient than they were. But Satan,
hating all quietness, by his ministers stirred the duke against the
said churches of Piedmont, his own natural subjects. For the pope and
the cardinals, seeing the good inclination of the duke towards this
people, incensed him to do that, which otherwise he would not. The
pope's legate also, which then followed the court, and other that
favoured the Church of Rome, laboured by all means to persuade the
duke that he ought to banish the said Waldois, which maintained not
the pope's religion; alleging, that he could not suffer such a people
to dwell within his dominion, without prejudice and dishonour to the
apostolic see; also that they were a rebellious people against the
holy ordinances and decrees of their holy mother the church; and
briefly, that he might no longer suffer the said people, being so
disobedient and stubborn against the holy father, if he would indeed
show himself a loving and obedient son.

     Such devilish instigations were the cause of these horrible and
furious persecutions, wherewith this poor people of the valleys, and
the country of Piedmont, was so long vexed. And because they foresaw
the great calamities which they were like to suffer, to find some
remedy for the same, (if it were possible,) all the said churches of
Piedmont, with one common consent, wrote to the duke, declaring in
effect, that the only cause why they were so hated, and for the which
he was by their enemies so sore incensed against them, was their
religion, which was no new or light opinion, but that wherein they
and their ancestors had long continued, being wholly grounded upon
the infallible word of God, contained in the Old and New Testament.
Notwithstanding, if it might be proved, by the same word, that they
held any false or erroneous doctrine, they would submit themselves to
be reformed with all obedience.

     But it is not certain whether this advertisement was delivered
unto the duke or no; for it was said that he would not hear of that
religion. But, howsoever it was, in the month of March following,
there was a great persecution raised against the poor Christians
which were at Carignano; amongst whom there were certain godly
persons taken, and burnt within four days after; that is to say, one
named Mathurine, and his wife, and John de Carignano, dwelling in the
valley of Lucerne, taken prisoner as he went to the market at
Pignerol. The woman died with great constancy. The good man, John de
Carignano, had been in prison divers times before for religion, and
was always delivered by God's singular grace and providence. But
seeing himself taken this last time, incontinent he said, he knew
that God had now called him. Both by the way be went, and in prison,
and also at his death, he showed an invincible constancy and
marvellous virtue, as well by the pure confession which he made
touching the doctrine of salvation, as also in suffering with
patience the horrible torments which he endured, both in prison, and
also at his death. Many at that time fled away:  others, being afraid
of that great cruelty, and fearing also man more than God, looking
rather to the earth than to heaven, consented to return to the
obedience of the Church of Rome.

     Within a few days after, these churches of the said Waldois,
that is to say, Le Laughi, Meronne, Meane, and Susa, were wonderfully
assaulted. To recite all the outrage, cruelty, and villany that was
there committed, it were too long:  for brevity's sake we will recite
only certain of the principal and best known. The churches of Meane
and Susa suffered great affliction. Their minister was taken amongst
others. Many fled away, and their houses and goods were ransacked and
spoiled. The minister was a good and faithful servant of God, and
endued with excellent gifts and graces, who, in the end, was put to
most shameful and cruel death. The great patience which he showed in
the midst of the fire, greatly astonished the adversaries. Likewise
the churches of Laughi and Meronne were marvellously tormented and
afflicted; for some were taken and sent to the galleys, other some
consented and yielded to the adversaries, and a great number of them
fled away. It is certainly known, that those who yielded to the
adversaries, were more cruelly handled than the others which
continued constant in the truth; whereby God declareth how greatly he
detesteth all such as play the apostate, and shrink from the truth.

     But for the better understanding of the beginning of this
horrible persecution against the Waldois, here note, that first of
all proclamations were made in every place, that none should resort
to the sermons of the Lutherans, but should live after the custom of
the Church of Rome; upon pain of forfeiture of their goods, and to be
condemned to the galleys for ever, or lose their lives. Three of the
most cruel persons that could be found, were appointed to execute
this commission. The first was one Thomas Jacomel, a monk, and
inquisitor of the Romish faith; a man worthy for such an office, for
he was an apostate, and had renounced the known truth, and persecuted
mortally and maliciously the poor Christians, against his own
conscience, and of set purpose, as his books do sufficiently witness.
He was also a whoremonger, and given over to all other villanies and
filthy living; in the grossest vices he surpassed all his fellows. 
Briefly, he was nothing else but a mis-shapened monster both against
God and nature. Moreover, he so afflicted and tormented the poor
captives of the said Waldois, by spoiling, robbery, and extortion,
that he deserved not only to be hanged, but to be broken upon the
wheel a hundred times, and to suffer as many cruel deaths, if it were
possible; so great, so many, and so horrible, were the crimes that he
had committed.

     The second was the collateral Corbis, who, in the examination
of the prisoners, was very rigorous and cruel; for he only demanded
of them whether they would go to the mass, or be burnt within three
days? and in very deed executed his sayings. But it is certainly
reported, that he, seeing the constancy and hearing the confession of
the poor martyrs, feeling remorse, and being tormented in conscience,
protested that he would never meddle any more.

     The third was the provost de la Justice, a cruel and crafty
wretch, accustomed to apprehend the poor Christians either by night,
or early in the morning, or in the highway going to the market, and
was commonly lodged in the valley of Lucerne, or thereabouts. Thus
the poor people were always as the silly sheep in the wolf's jaws, or
as the sheep which are led unto the slaughter-house.

     At that season one named Charles de Comptes, of the valley of
Lucerne, and one of the lords of Angrogne, wrote to the said
commissioners, to use some lenity towards them of the valley of
Lucerne; by reason whereof they were a while more gently treated than
the rest. At that season the monks of Pignerol, and their associates,
tormented grievously the churches near about them. They took the poor
Christians as they passed by the way, and kept them prisoners within
their abbey; and having assembled a company of ruffians, they sent
them to spoil those of the said churches, and to take prisoners men,
women, and children; and some they so tormented, that they were
compelled to swear to return to the mass; some also they sent to the
galleys, and others they burnt cruelly. They which escaped were
afterwards so sick, that they seemed to have been poisoned. The same
year there were two great earthquakes in Piedmont, and also many
great tempests and horrible thunders.

     The gentlemen of the valley of St. Martin treated their tenants
very cruelly, threatening them, and commanding them to return unto
the mass; also spoiling them of their goods, imprisoning them, and
vexing them by all the means they could. But above all the others
there were two especially, that is to say, Charles Truchet, and
Boniface his brother, who, on the second of April, before day, with a
company of ruffians, spoiled a village of their own subjects, named
Riuclaret; which as soon as the inhabitants of the said village
perceived, they fled into the mountain covered with snow, naked and
without victuals, and there remained until the third night after. In
the morning, certain of his retinue took a minister of the said
valley prisoner, which was come out of Calabria, and was going to
visit the poor people of Riuclaret, and led him prisoner to the
abbey, where, soon after, he was burnt, with one other of the valley
of St. Martin.

     The third night after, they of Pragela, having pity upon the
poor people of Riuclaret, sent about four hundred to discomfit the
company of the Truchets, and to restore those who were fled to their
houses. They were furiously assaulted by the shot of their enemies,
who, notwithstanding, in the end were put to flight, and but one of
the four hundred hurt.

     About the year before, the said Truchet, being accompanied with
a company of ruffians, arrested prisoner the minister of Riuclaret as
he was at his sermon. But the people were so moved by his outrageous
dealing, and especially the women, that they had almost strangled the
said Truchet; and the rest of them were so canvassed that they had no
list to come there again any more. By reason whereof he so vexed them
by processes, that they were compelled to agree with him, and to pay
him sixteen hundred crowns.

     Soon after, the lords of the said valley took another minister
of the same valley, as he was going to preach in a parish a mile from
his house; but the people perceiving that, speedily pursued him and
took him. The enemies, seeing that they were not able to lead him
away, wounded him so sore, that they left him for dead; whereupon,
they so persecuted the poor people, that they were almost destroyed.

     Here is not to be forgotten, that the same night, in which the
company of Truchet was discomfited was so stormy and terrible, and
the gentlemen of that country were so terrified, that they thought
they should have been all destroyed; wherefore they used more
gentleness towards the people than before, except Charles Truchet and
his brother, the which went to the duke, and made grievous complaints
against the Waldois, not only for that which was done and past, but
also persuaded the duke, that they went about to build three
fortresses in the mountains, and also intended to maintain certain
garrisons of strangers, charging them further with divers other
crimes, of the which they were in no point guilty. The duke, being
moved by these false surmises, gave in charge to the said accusers,
that the fortress of the valley of St. Martin, which about twenty
years before was razed by the Frenchmen, should be built again, and
that therein should be placed a perpetual garrison, and that the
people should make so plain and wide the rugged ways, that horsemen
might easily pass:  with divers such other things. And all this to be
done at the costs and charges of those that would not submit
themselves to the obedience of the Roman church.

     This commission being sealed, the gentlemen caused the fortress
to be built again, and put there in a garrison, and proclaimed the
commission. The poor people being thereat amazed, withstood the
commissioners, and sent certain to the duke; and immediately after
the commissoners returned to the duke's court, being at Nice, to
inflame his anger more against them. But God soon prevented this
mischief; for the Truchets, being at Nice, went to sea with divers
noblemen, and immediately they were taken prisoners by the Turks, put
into the galleys, sore beaten with ropes, and so cruelly handled,
that it was commonly reported that they were dead:  and long time
after, denying their nobility, they were sent home, having paid four
hundred crowns for their ransom. Some say, that the duke himself was
almost taken; but it is sure that he fell sick soon after. In the
month of April nextfollowing, the lord of Ranconis was present at a
sermon, in a place near unto Angrogne. The sermon being ended, he
talked with the ministers; and having discoursed as well of the
duke's sickness, as also of his clemency and gentleness, he declared
to them, that the persecution proceeded not of him, and that he meant
not that the commission should have been so rigorously executed.
After that he demanded of them, what way they thought best to appease
the duke's wrath. They answered, that the people ought not to be
moved to seek by any means how to please and appease the duke which
might displease God; but the best way they knew, was the same
wherewith the ancient servants of God used to appease the pagan
princes and emperors, in the time of the great persecutions of the
church; that is to say, to give out and present unto them in writing
the confession of their faith, and defence of the religion which they
professed; trusting that, forasmuch as the fury of divers profane and
ethnic emperors and princes hath been heretofore appeased by such
means, the duke, being endued with such singular virtues as they said
he was, would also be pacified by the like means. And for that cause
the poor people had before sent a supplication, with a confession of
their faith, unto the duke, but they were not certain whether he had
received it or no; wherefore they desired him to present the same
unto the said duke himself:  whereunto he agreed, and promised so to
do. Hereupon they sent three supplications, one to the duke, the
second to the duchess, and the third to the duke's council; wherein
they briefly declared what their religion was, and the points
thereof, which they and their ancestors had of a long time observed,
being wholly,grounded upon the pure word of God; and if by the same .
word it should be proved that they were in error, they would not be
obstinate, but gladly be reformed, and embrace the truth. After this
the persecution seemed to be somewhat assuaged for a little while.

     In the end of June next following, the lord of Ranconis and the
lord of Trinity, came to Angrogne, there to qualify (as they said)
the sore persecution, and caused the chief rulers and ministers to
assemble together, propounding divers points of religion concerning
doctrine, the calling of ministers, the mass, and obedience towards
princes and rulers:  and, furthermore, declared unto them, that their
confession was sent unto Rome by the duke, and daily they looked for
an answer. To all these points the ministers answered. After this
they demanded of the chief rulers, whether if the duke would cause
mass to be sung in their parishes, they would withstand the same or
no? They answered simply, that they would not. Then they demanded of
them, whether if the duke would appoint them preachers, they would
receive them? They answered, that if they preached the word of God
purely, they would hear them. Thirdly, Whether they were content that
in the mean time their ministers should cease? and if they that
should be sent preached not the word of God sincerely, then their
ministers to preach again:  if they would agree to this, they were
promised that the persecution should cease, and that the prisoners
should be restored again. To this question, after they had conferred
with the people, they answered, that they could by no means suffer
that their ministers should forbear preaching.

     The two lords, not contented with this answer, commanded in the
duke's name, that all the ministers who were strangers, should, out
of hand, be banished the country; saying, that the duke would not
suffer them to dwell within his dominion, for that they were his
enemies:  demanding also, whether they would foster and maintain the
prince's enemies within his own land, against his own decree and
express commandment? To this, answer was made by the chief rulers,
that they could by no means banish them, unless they were before
convicted of some heresy or other crime:  for their part they had
always found them to be men of pure and sound doctrine, and also of
godly life and conversation.
Illustration:  The Minister of St. Germain Taken by Night

     This done, immediately proclamations were made, and the
persecution began on every side to be more furious than it was
before. Amongst others, the monks of Pignerol at that time were most
cruel; for they sent out a company of hired ruffians, which daily
spoiled and ransacked houses, and all that they could lay hands on;
and took men, women, and children, and led them captives to the
abbey, where they were most spitefully afflicted and tormented. At
the same time they sent also a band of the said ruffians by night to
the house of the minister of St. Germain, in the valley of Perouse;
being led thither by a traitor that knew the house, and had used to
haunt thither secretly, who knocking at the door, the minister,
knowing his voice, came forth immediately, and perceiving himself to
be betrayed, fled:  but he was soon taken and sore wounded, and yet,
notwithstanding, they pricked him behind with their halberds to make
him hasten his pace. At that time also many they slew, many they
hurt, and many also they brought to the abbey, and there kept them in
prison, and cruelly handled them. The good minister endured sore
imprisonment, and after that a most terrible kind of death, with a
wonderful constancy; for they roasted him by a small fire; and when
half his body was burnt, he confessed and called upon the Lord Jesus
with a loud voice.

     The inquisitor Jacomel, with his monks, and the collateral
Corbis amongst others, showed one practice of most barbarous cruelty
against this poor man; who, when he should be burnt, caused two poor
women of St. Germain (whom they kept in prison) to carry faggots to
the fire, and to speak these words unto their pastor:  "Take this,
thou wicked heretic! in recompense of thy naughty doctrine, which
thou hast taught us." To whom the good minister answered; "Ah, good
women! I have taught you well, but you have learned ill." To be
brief, they so afflicted and tormented those poor people of St.
Germain, and the places thereabout, that after they were spoiled of
their goods and driven from their houses, they were compelled to flee
into the mountain to save their lives. So great was the spoil of
these poor people, that many which before had been men of much
wealth, and with their riches had ministered great succour and
comfort to others, were now brought to such misery, that they were
compelled to crave succour and relief of others.

     Now, forasmuch as the said monks, with their troops of
ruffians, (who were counted to be in number about three hundred,)
made such spoil and havoc in all the country, that no man could there
live in safety, it was demanded of the ministers, whether it was
lawful to defend themselves against the insolence and furious rage of
the said ruffians? The ministers answered, that it was lawful,
warning them in any case, to take heed of bloodshed. This question
being once solved, they of the valley of Lucerne and of Angrogne sent
certain men to them of St. Germain to aid them against the supporters
of these monks.

     In the month of June, the harvest being then in Piedmont,
divers of the Waldois were gone into the country to reap and to make
provision for corn, for very little groweth upon their mountains, who
were all taken prisoners at sundry times and places, not one knowing
of another; but yet God so wrought, that they all escaped out of
prison, as it were by a miracle:  whereat the adversaries were
marvellously astonished. At the same time there were certain others
also, who had sustained long imprisonment, looking for nothing else
but death; and yet they, after a wonderful sort, by God's merciful
providence, were likewise delivered.
Illustration:  The Monks defeated by the Angrognians

     In the month of July, they of Angrogne, being in a morning at
harvest upon the hillside of St. Germain, perceived a company of
soldiers spoiling them of St. Germain; and doubting lest they should
go to Angrogne, they made an outcry. Then the people of Angrogne
assembled together upon the mountain, and some ran to St. Germain
over the hill, and some by the valley. They that went by the valley
met with the spoilers coming from St. Germain, loaden with spoil
which they had gotten, and being but fifty, set upon the others,
amounting to the number of one hundred and twenty men well appointed,
and gave them soon the overthrow. The passage over the bridge being
stopped, the enemies were fain to take the river Cluson, where divers
were sore hurt, many were drowned, and some escaped very hardly; and
such a slaughter was made of them, that the river was dyed with the
blood of them that were wounded and slain but none of the Angrognians
were once hurt. If the said river had been as great as it was wont
commonly to be, there had not one man escaped alive. The noise of the
harquebusses was great, and within less than one hour's space, there
were three or four hundred of the Waldois gathered together upon the
river; and at the same time they had purposed to fetch away their
prisoners who were in the abbey, but they would not do it without the
counsel of their ministers, and so deferred the matter until the next
day:  but their ministers counselled them not to enterprise any such
thing, but to refrain themselves, and so they did. Albeit they
doubted not, but if they had gone incontinent after that discomfiture
unto the abbey, they might have found all open and easily have
entered; for the monks were so sore afraid, that they fled suddenly
to Pignerol, to save their relics and images, which they carried
thither. The rest of the country about were wonderfully afraid, and
rang the bells everywhere.

     The next day following, the commander of St. Anthony de Fossan
came to Angrogne, accompanied with divers gentlemen, saying, that he
was sent by the duke:  and having assembled the chief rulers and
ministers of Angrogne, and of the valley of Lucerne, after he had
declared unto them the cause of his coming, he read their
supplication directed to the duke, which contained their confession,
demanding of them, if it were the same which they had sent to the
duke? They answered, Yea. Then he entered into a disputation of the
mass, in a great heat, deriving the same from the Hebrew word ???
which signified (as he supposed) consecration, and showed that this
word Missa might be found in ancient writers. [Note:  In the primitive
Western Church, the minister, previous to celebrating the eucharist,
dismissed the congregation by these words, Missa est, that is, The
audience is dismissed; and from this the rite that immediately
followed was called Mzssa, whence Missal and Mass. It has no
connexion whatever with the Hebrew.] The ministers answered, that he
ill applied the Hebrew word; and further, that they disputed not of
the word Miss a, but of that which is signified by the same, which he
ought first to prove by the word of God. Briefly, that he could not
prove, either by the word of God, or the ancient fathers, their
private mass, their sacrifice expiatory or propitiatory, their
transubstantiation, their adoration, their application of the same
for the quick and the dead, and such other matters which are
principal parts of the said mass. The commander, having here nothing
to reply, fell into a marvellous choler, railing and raging as if he
had been stark mad, and told them that he was not come to dispute,
but to banish their ministers, and to place others in their rooms, by
the duke's commandment; which he could not, unless their ministers
were first driven out of the country.

     From thence he went to the abbey of Pignerol, where he and
Jacomel caused a number of the poor inhabitants of Campiglon, and of
Fenil, which be of the valley of Lucerne, to be taken prisoners,
spoiling them of their goods, driving away their cattle, and forcing
them to swear and forswear; and in the end ransomed them for great
sums of money. About that time a gentleman of Campiglon agreed with
those who were fled, for thirty crowns to be paid unto him out of
hand, that he would warrant them from any further vexation or
trouble, so that they remained quiet at home. But when he had
received the money, he caused the commander of Fossan with his men to
come by night to his house, and then sent for the poor men, thinking
traitorously to have delivered them into the hands of their mortal
enemy, following therein the decree of the council of Constance,
which is, that no promise is to be kept with heretics. But God,
knowing how to succour his in their necessity, prevented this danger;
for one of them had intelligence of the commander's coming, and so
they all fled. Thereupon they wrote to the lord of Ranconis,
declaring unto him the proceedings of the commander, and that he
neither would nor could show or prove any thing by the word of God,
as he had promised, but threatened them with great wrongs and
injuries, and would not suffer their ministers to reply, or say any
thing for the defence of their cause:  and therefore they desired him
to signify the same to the duke's Grace, to the end that he should
not be offended, if they persisted still in their religion, seeing it
was not proved unto them, by any reason taken out of the Scripture,
that they erred.

     After this, there were many commandments and injunctions given
out through all the country, to banish these poor Waldois, with the
doctrine of the gospel, if it were possible, out of the mountains and
valleys of Piedmont:  but the poor people still desired, that,
according to that which they so often before protested by word and
writing, they might be suffered to serve God purely, according to the
rule prescribed in his word; simply obeying their Lord and prince
always, and in all things. Notwithstanding they were still vexed and
tormented with all the cruelty that could be devised, as partly it is
already declared; but much more you shall perceive by that which
followeth.

     In the end of the October next following, the rumour went that
an army was levying to destroy them; and in very deed there were
certain bands levied, ready to march at an hour's warning.
Furthermore, those malefactors which heretofore were fled or banished
for any offence or crime committed, were called home again, and
pardoned of all together, so that they would take them to their
weapons, and go to destroy the Waldois. The ministers and chief
rulers of the valleys of Lucerne and Angrogne thereupon assembled
together oftentimes, to take advice what, in such an extremity, were
best to do. In the end they determined, that for certain days
following there should be kept a general fast, and the Sunday after,
a communion. Also that they should not defend themselves by force of
arms, but that every one should withdraw himself into the high
mountains, and every one to carry away such goods as he was able to
bear; and if their enemies pursued them thither, then to take such
advice and counsel as it pleased God to give them. This article of
not defending themselves, seemed very strange to the people, being
driven to such an extremity, and the cause being so just:  but yet
every one began to carry their goods and victuals into the mountains;
and for the space of eight days all the ways were filled with comers
and goers to the mountains, like unto ants in summer which provide
for winter. All this did they in this great perplexity and danger,
with a wonderful courage and cheerfulness, praising God, and singing
psalms, and every one comforting another. Briefly, they went with
such joy and alacrity, that you should not have seen any who grudged
to leave their houses, and fair possessions, but were wholly
determined patiently to abide the good pleasure of God, and also to
die if he had so appointed.

     A few days after, certain other ministers, hearing what they of
Angrogne and Lucerne had concluded, wrote unto them, that this
resolution seemed very strange to some, that they ought not to defend
themselves against the violence of their enemies, alleging many
reasons, that in such extremity and necessity it was lawful for them
so to do, especially the quarrel being so just; that is, for the
defence of true religion, and for the preservation of their own
lives, and the lives of their wives and children; knowing that it was
the pope and his ministers who were the cause of all these troubles
and cruel wars, and not the duke, who was stirred up thereunto only
by their instigations:  wherefore they might well and with good
conscience withstand such furious and outrageous violence. For the
proof hereof they also alleged certain examples.

     During this season the lord of Angrogne, named Charles de
Comptes, of Lucerne, laboured earnestly, by all means possible, to
cause them of Angrogne to condescend to the duke's pleasure, and
solicited them to send away their ministers, promising that he would
cause a mass to be sung at Angrogne, and that the people should not
be compelled to be present thereat; hoping that by that means the
duke's wrath would be appeased. The chief of Angrogne thereupon were
assembled and made this answer:  that if the duke would permit them to
choose other ministers, they were content to send away their foreign
ministers and strangers; but as touching the mass, his Highness might
well cause it to be sung in their parishes, but they, for their part,
could not with safe consciences be present at the same, nor yet to
give their consent unto it.

     On the twenty-second of October the said lord of Angrogne went
from Lucerne to Mondovi, where he was then governor for the duke, and
sent for the chief rulers of Angrogne at several times, declaring
unto them the great perils and dangers wherewith they were environed,
the army being already at hand; yet promising them, if they would
submit themselves unto him, he would send immediately to stay the
army. They of Angrogne answered, that they all determined to stand to
that which they, two days before in their assembly, had put in
writing. With this answer he seemed at that time to be content. The
next day the rumour was, that they of Angrogne had submitted
themselves to the duke. On the morrow which was Sunday, you should
have seen nothing but weeping and mourning in Angrogne. The sermon
being ended, the rulers were called before the ministers and the
people, who affirmed, that they wholly cleaved unto their former
writing; and they sent secretly to the notary for the copy of that
which was passed in the council-house at their last assembly before
the lord de Comptes, in which was comprised, that Angrogne had wholly
submitted herself to the good pleasure of the duke. The people,
hearing that, were sore astonished, and protested rather to die than
obey the same. And thereupon it was agreed, that at that very
instant, (albeit it were very late,) certain should be sent to the
lord of Angrogne to signify unto him, that the determination of the
council was falsified, and that it might please him the next morning
to come to Angrogne, to hear the voices of the people; not only of
the men, but also of the women and children. But he himself went not
thither, having intelligence of the uproar, but sent thither the
judge of that place. Then that which had been falsified was duly
corrected; the judge laying all the blame upon the notary.

     During this time the adversaries cried out through all the
country of Piedmont, "To the fire with them!" "To the fire with
them!" The Thursday after, Angrogne, by proclamations and writings
set up in every place, was exposed to fire and sword. On Friday
after, being the second of November, the army approached to the
borders of the valley of Lucerne, and certain horsemen came to a
place called St. Jean, a little beneath Angrogne. Then the people
retired into the mountains. Certain of St. Jean, perceiving that the
horsemen not only spoiled their goods, but also took their fellows
prisoners, set upon them. It is not certain what number of the
enemies were there slain; but suddenly they retired to Bubbiana,
where their camp then was, and not one of them of St. Jean were slain
or hurt. It happened at the same time, that two of the aforesaid
horsemen, being sore amazed, galloped before the rest towards the
army, being ready to march towards Angrogne, crying, "They come! They
come!" at whose cry the whole army were so astonished, that every man
fled his way, and they were all so scattered, that the captains that
day were not able to bring them in order again, and yet no creature
followed them.

     On the Saturday, in the morning, the army mustered in the
meadow-ground of St. Jean, near to Angrogne. They of Angrogne had
sent certain to keep the passages, and stop the army that they should
not enter, if it were possible. In the mean season the people retired
to the meadow of Tour, and little thought of the coming of the army
so soon, or that they would have made such a sudden assault:  for they
were yet carrying of victuals and other stuff, so that few of them
kept the passages. Now they which kept the straits, perceiving that
their enemies prepared themselves to fight, fell down upon their
knees, and made their prayers unto God, that it would please him to
take pity upon them, and not to look upon their sins, but to the
cause which they maintained; to turn the hearts of their enemies, and
so to work, that there might be no effusion of blood; and if it were
his will to take them, with their wives and infants, out of this
world, that be would then mercifully receive them into his kingdom.
In this sort most fervent prayers were made by all those that kept
the passages, with exhortation that they should altogether cry unto
God, and crave his succour and assistance in this great distress. All
this the lord of Trinity and the army did well perceive.

     Their prayers thus ended, suddenly they perceived their enemies
coming towards them through the vines, to win the top of the mountain
of Angrogne. In the mean time the prior of St. Jean, and Jacomel,
were within the temple of Angrogne, and communed with the rulers
touching an agreement. These were sent thither by the lord of Trinity
to keep the people occupied. To be short, the combat began in divers
places, and endured for a long space in the passages of Angrogne. The
poor Waldois, being but few in number, and some of them having but
slings and cross-bows, were sore pressed with the multitude of their
enemies. At length they retired to the top of the mountain, where
they defended themselves until night.
Ilustration:  The Angrognians Defeat the Monks

     When they had found a place where they might withstand their
enemies still pursuing them, they turned themselves, and slew divers
of them, and hurt many. When the evening came, the enemies rested,
and were about to encamp themselves, there to sup and lodge all
night; which thing when the Angrognians perceived, they fell to
prayer, desiring God to assist and succour them, but the enemies
flouted them and laughed them to scorn. Then the poor people devised
to send a drum into a little valley hard by; and as they were making
their prayers unto God, and the drum sounded in the valley, the lord
of Trinity caused his soldiers, which were about to encamp
themselves, to remove thence; which was a great advantage unto the
poor people, which now were sore wearied with travail, all wet with
sweating, and very thirsty; and in great peril, if God had not given
them some little breathing-time. Many of the enemies that day were
slain, and many hurt, of the which very few escaped; insomuch that
they reported that the shot was poisoned, which this poor simple
people never used to do in all these wars. Of the Angrognians that
day there were but three slain, and one hurt, which afterwards was
well healed again. This combat gave great courage to the Waldois, and
sore astonished the adversaries. The same time the army retiring,
burnt many houses, and made great spoil as they went, destroying also 
the wines which were in the presses.

     The said lord of Trinity with his army encamped in a village
beyond Tour, in the valley of Lucerne, at the foot of the hill,
between Angrogne and the other towns of the valley of Lucerne, which
professed the gospel. They of the said village were always sore
against the Waldois, and haters of true religion, and were glad of
this outrage and violence done against the professors thereof:  but
they had their just plague; for they were all destroyed. After this
the said lord of Trinity caused the fortress to be built again, which
the Frenchmen had razed, and placed there a garrison, and after sent
another to the fort of Villars, which is of the valley of Lucerne;
and another he sent to the fortress of Perouse, and a fourth garrison
he placed in the castle of St. Martin. They of Angrogne, (seeing
themselves to be now, as it were, in a sea of troubles,) after they
had recommended themselves unto God by prayer, and committed their
cause unto him, sent to them of Perouse, St. Martin, and of Pragela,
for aid and succour; which sent them all the help they were able.

     The next day following there came letters to Angrogne from the
lord of Trinity, the effect whereof was this: 

     "That he was sorry for that which was done the day before, and
that he came not thither to make war against them, but only to view
if it were a place convenient to build a fort therein to serve the
duke. Furthermore, that his soldiers, seeing the people assembled, as
it were to defy them, upon that occasion only were stirred up to give
assault, and to set upon them. Also that he was sorry that such spoil
was made of their goods, and such hurt done by fire. But if they
would show themselves obedient to the duke, he had good hope that all
should be well, and trusted that some good agreement should be made."

     The Angrognians answered: 

     "That they were marvellously aggrieved to be so assaulted,
spoiled, and tormented, by the subjects of their liege and natural
prince; and as they had oftentimes before offered themselves to be
more faithful and obedient to their sovereign prince the duke, than
any of all the subjects besides, so yet they still offered the same
obedience. Also they most humbly besought him, not to think it
strange if they, being constrained by such extreme necessity,
defended themselves. Finally, as touching their religion, they
affirmed, that it was the pure word of God, even as it was preached
by the prophets and apostles, and the same which their predecessors
had observed for certain hundred years past. Moreover, that the cause
was not concerning the goods of the world, but the honour and glory
of God, the salvation or destruction of the souls both of them and
theirs:  and therefore it were much better for them to die all
together, than to forsake their religion. And yet, if it might be
proved unto them by good demonstration out of the word of God, (not
by force of arms, by blood and fire,) that they were in error, they
would then yield themselves with all obedience; most humbly
beseeching him, and all other the lords of the country of Piedmont,
be their intercessors and advocates to the duke in this-behalf."

     Upon Monday, being the fourth of November, the lord of Trinity
sent his army to Villars, and Tailleret. The lesser company ascended
towards Villars. The people, seeing their enemies approaching, after
they had called upon God with fervent prayer, strongly defended
themselves, and slew many:  many also were hurt, and the rest fled.
The other company ascended towards Tailleret. And although they of
that place were but few in number, and that part of the army the
greater, yet, making their prayers unto God, and commending their
cause unto him, they defended themselves likewise valiantly.

     In the mean season they of Villars, being imboldened by their
late victory, came to assist their neighbours, and being assembled
together, they courageously pursued their enemies, and put them to
flight. In this pursuit it chanced (which here is not to be
forgotten) that this poor people, by an ambush of their enemies which
came another way, were suddenly enclosed on every side, and like to
be destroyed; but yet they all escaped, and not one of them was
slain, only three were hurt, which were soon cured again. On the
enemy's side there were so many slain, that they were laid together
by whole cart-loads. This was the reward of those which were so
desirous to shed innocent blood. The same day the inhabitants of
Sanson, near to Roccapiata, assembled in great numbers together, and
went to a rich man's house of Roccapiata, and spoiled all that he
had. Certain of Roccapiata, in number not past seventeen,
understanding this, set upon them, and soon put them to flight, took
away their drum, and forced them to leave their booty behind them.

     After that the lord of Trinity had received the letters of the
Angrognians, he sent unto them his secretary, named Christoper
Gastaut, (which said himself, that he favoured the verity of the
gospel,) accompanied with a gentleman of the said valley, whose
charge was to cause the chief rulers to send certain to commune with
the said lord of Trinity, saying, that he had good tidings to declare
unto them; and moreover, that he would deliver them a safe-conduct to
come and go. Whereupon they sent four unto him, whom he treated very
courteously, and rehearsed unto them, how the duke, at his departure
from the court, told him, that although the pope, the princes, and
the cities of Italy, yea, his own council, were fully resolved, that
of necessity they of the said religion should be destroyed, yet,
notwithstanding, God otherwise put it in his mind, and that he had
taken counsel of God what he should do in this matter; that is, that
he would use them gently. Furthermore, he declared unto them, that
the duchess bare them good affection, and favoured them very much,
and that she had commended their cause unto the duke, persuading with
him to have regard to that poor people; and that their religion was
ancient and old; with many such other things. Moreover, they had
(said he) great friends in the duke's court, not doubting but if they
would send certain to the court with a supplication, they should
obtain more than they themselves would require; and he, for his part,
would employ himself in their affairs to the uttermost of his power: 
and so he promised that he would retire himself with his army. This
he seemed to speak unfeignedly. The people, desiring but to live
peaceably in their religion, and under the obedience of their prince,
were content to follow his counsel.

     About this season they of Angrogne perceived that a part of the
army ascended the hill of Tailleret, (which is the half way between
Angrogne and those of the valley of Lucerne,) and the other party had
already gotten a way which led to the meadow of Tour, by the which
they of Angrogne might easily have been enclosed. Therefore they sent
certain immediately to keep the way, who soon after encountered with
their enemies and obtained the victory, pursuing and chasing them to
their camp, not without great loss of their men. The number of their
enemies slain, was not known; for their custom was immediately to
carry away those which were slain. Not one of Angrogne perished that
day, nor yet was hurt. But it was feared that this combat would have
hindered the agreement; but the lord of Trinity could well dissemble
this matter, and excused that day's journey, putting the fault upon
them of Tailleret, whom he charged to have slain certain of his men
in the highway, and, amongst others, his barber.

     On Saturday following, being the ninth of November, the said
lord of Trinity sent again for them of Angrogne, to consult with them
touching the agreement, using the like communication as before; and
added thereunto, that in token of true obedience they should carry
their armour into two of the houses of the chief rulers, not fearing
but it should be safe; for it should remain in their own keeping,
and, if need were, they should receive it again. Also, that he on a
Sunday (which was the next day) would cause a mass to be sung within
the temple of St. Laurence, in Angrogne, accompanied with a very few;
and thereby the duke's wrath would be assuaged.

     The next morning he went into the temple, (whereat they were
sore grieved, albeit they could not withstand him,) his army marching
before him; and having caused a mass to be sung, he desired to see
the meadow of Tour, so much spoken of, that thereof he might make a
true report unto the duke; and thither the rulers, with a great troop
of his own men, went:  the residue of his company remained behind, who
spoiled certain houses, and seized the armour which they had
delivered up before; but they found no great store, for the people
had taken away the greatest part thereof. The said lord being entered
into the meadow of Tour, the people began to make a commotion;
whereof he, having intelligence, returned immediately. All that day
he showed himself very courteous to all whom he met.

     The people in this mean time perceived themselves to be in
great danger, and were so moved at the sight of the army, the spoil
of the soldiers, the taking away of their armour; but especially
because the said lord of Trinity had viewed the meadow of Tour,
foreseeing his traitorous meaning and purpose. A few days after, the
said lord of Trinity sent his secretary, Gastaut, to Angrogne, to
talk with them concerning the agreement, and to make a full
resolution thereof; which was read in the assembly by the secretary.
The sum whereof was this:  that the people of Angrogne submitted
themselves to render all honour and reverence to God, according to
his holy word, and all due obedience to the duke their sovereign
prince, to whom they should send certain men to demand pardon of him,
concerning their bearing armour in their extreme necessity, and
humbly to beseech him that he would suffer them to live peaceably in
their religion, which was according to the word of God, not
compelling them to do any thing against their conscience; as it
appeareth more amply in the supplication, which, after this, the
Angrognians made, and caused to be read before the secretary in the
open assembly, and which here ensueth.

     "To the most excellent and worthy prince, the duke of Savoy,
&c., our sovereign lord and natural prince.

     "Most noble and renowned prince! we have sent certain of our
men unto your Highness, to give testimony of our humble, hearty, and
unfeigned obedience unto the same, and with all submission desire
pardon, touching the bearing of armour by certain of our people in
their extreme necessity, and for all other our trespasses, for the
which your sovereign Grace might conceive any offence against us.

     "Secondly, To desire in most humble wise your said Highness, in
the name of our Lord Jesus, that it would please the same, to suffer
us to live with freedom of conscience in our religion, which also is
the religion of our ancestors, observed for certain hundred years
past:  and we are persuaded, that it is the pure gospel of our Lord
Jesus, the only verity, the word of life and salvation, which we
profess. Also, that it may please your most gracious clemency not to
take in ill part, if we, fearing to offend and displease God, cannot
consent upon certain traditions and ordinances of the Church of Rome;
and herein to have pity upon our poor souls, and the souls of our
children, to the end that your Highness be not in any wise charged in
the just judgment of God for the same, where all men must appear to
answer for their doings.

     "On our part, we protest that we will seek nothing but to be
the true servants of God, to serve him according to his holy word;
and also to be true and loyal subjects to your Highness, and more
obedient than any other, being always ready to give our goods, our
bodies, our lives, and the lives of our children, for your noble
Grace, as also our religion teacheth us to do:  only we desire that
our souls may be left at liberty, to serve God according to his holy
word.

     "And we, your poor humble subjects, shall most heartily pray
our God and Father for the good and long prosperity of your Highness,
for the most virtuous lady your wife, and for the noble house of
Savoy."

     To this supplication they of St. Jean, of Roccapiata, of St.
Barthelemi, and of Perouse, with those of the valley of Lucerne, did
agree. For it was concluded, that the agreement made should extend to
all the confederates of the same religion. Whiles they were treating
of this agreement, the lord of Trinity vexed cruelly them of
Tailleret, under this pretence, because they had not presented
themselves to treat of this agreement. He tormented them after this
sort:  first he commanded that all their armour should be brought
before him, and then they, on their knees, should ask him pardon,
because they came not to treat of the agreement with the rest; which
notwithstanding the most part of them did. Then he commanded them to
attend upon him, to enrol all the names of those which would be of
the aforesaid agreement.

     Whereupon, the next morning, the chief of the householders went
to the village named Bouvets, the place appointed thereunto, and when
they had heard a sermon, and called upon God, they began to write
their names. The enrolling of their names not being fully ended, word
was brought that the soldiers had gotten the top of the mountain, and
taken all the passages; whereof they of Tailleret were sore amazed,
and ran with all speed to defend their wives and children. Some they
saved; the most part, with their goods, were in their enemies' hands
already. At this time, with sacking, spoiling, and burning, they did
much mischief.

     After this the lord of Trinity sent word to them which were
fled, that if they would return, he would receive them to mercy. The
poor people for the most part, trusting on his promise, returned to
Bouvets, and yet the next morning the soldiers came thither to
apprehend them and their ministers, and beset the place on every
side. Such as were swift of foot, and could shift best, escaped, but
very hardly:  the rest were all hurt or taken, and yet they all
escaped by a marvellous means; for it happened that there was an old
man which could not run fast, to whom one of the soldiers came with a
naked sword in his hand to have slain him. The old man, seeing the
imminent danger, caught the soldier by the legs, overthrew him, and
drew him by the heels down the hill.

     The soldier cried out, "Help! help! this villain will kill me."
His fellows, hearing him cry, made haste to rescue him; but in the
mean time the old man escaped. The rest, seeing what the old man had
done, took heart of grace, and albeit their armour and weapons were
taken from them, yet with stones and slings they so beat and
discomfited their enemies, that for that present time they carried no
prisoners away.

     The day following, the soldiers, returning to the said
Tailleret, robbed, spoiled, and carried away all that they could
find, and so continued three days together; which was very easy for
them to do, because the poor men, fearing lest they should be charged
with violating the agreement, made no resistance, but retired towards
Villars.

     The fourth day the said lord of Trinity, to torment the poor
Taillerets yet more cruelly, sent his army again, before day, to the
mountain, and into the same place, and because the people of the said
village were retired toward Villars, and scattered about the borders
thereof in the high mountains, the soldiers, not yet satisfied with
spoiling and sacking the rest that they found in the said Tailleret,
ranging about the confines thereof, ravened and made havoc on every
side of whatsoever they could lay hands on, taking prisoners both men
and women, which were loaden with carriage.

     The poor prisoners were cruelly handled. Amongst other there
was one, whose ear a soldier of Mondovis, in a raging fury, bit clean
off, with these words, "I will carry," said he, "the flesh of these
wicked heretics with me into my country." They of Villars also
complained of the great cruelty that was showed unto them, during the
time of the agreement.

     The which when the lord of Trinity understood, to make a show
that he was offended therewith, he came to his soldiers, which were
so weary that they could scarcely go, (not with fighting, but
becausethey were so heavily laden with the spoil, that they were not
able to carry it,) and pretending to be in great choler, some he
beat; and some things also of a small value he caused to be restored,
but all the rest was kept back and carried away. The same day, two
women, the mother and the daughter, were found in a cave in the
mountain, wounded to death by the soldiers, and died immediately
after. So likewise a blind man, a hundred years of age, which was
fled into a cave with his son's daughter, being eighteen years old,
who fed him, was slain by the enemies; and as they would have ill-
used the maiden, she escaped from them, and fell from the top of the
mountain, and died.

     At that time also a great company of women of Tailleret and
Villars were taken as they fled, with their goods, and brought to the
camp, and sent away empty. There was at the same time a certain
soldier, which promised the lord of Trinity to find out the minister
of Tailleret, and to deliver him into his own hands. And to bring his
purpose to pass, he never ceased until he had found him; and after
that he pursued him a long time. But as he was pursuing and chasing
him, certain, at unawares coming out of the mountain, rescued the
poor minister, and killed the soldier with stones.

     But this especially is to be noted, that during these troubles
divers of the papists had sent their daughters into the mountains
unto the Waldois to be kept, fearing lest they should have been ill-
used by the soldiers, being wholly given over as to all cruelty and
ravin, so to all villany and abomination; by whom they were before
threatened to be so abused.

     All this being done, the said lord of Trinity caused the head-
officers and chiefest of the people to assemble together, and
declared unto them, that the maintaining of the army was a great
charge unto the duke, and it was meet that they should bear the one
half of the charges. For this cause he demanded of them twenty
thousand crowns; but, by the means of the secretary Gastaut, who was
promised a hundred crowns for his wine, (that is to say, for a
bribe,) four thousand of those twenty were abated, so that they
granted unto him sixteen thousand, of the which sum the duke released
the one half. Then the lord of Trinity pressed this poor people to
deliver the eight thousand out of hand, to pay the soldiers their
wages, as he said, and so to withdraw his army. The year before, corn
was exceeding dear, for a sack was commonly sold for six crowns, yea,
and some for eight crowns; and also they had very little corn growing
upon their mountains:  wherefore they were now very bare of money. But
they, being in this perplexity, and desiring nothing more than to
live in peace and quietness, went about to sell their cattle to pay
this money:  but the lord of Trinity had given out a commandment, that
none should buy any cattle of the Waldois without his licence. Then
licence was given out to certain to buy great store of cattle, and
that for a small price:  and the common bruit was, that he had part of
the gain. When this money was paid, yet the army notwithstanding
retired not.

     After this the lord of Trinity commanded the Waldois to
surrender up all their armour, to furnish the duke's forts, otherwise
he threatened to send his soldiers among them, and indeed he
constrained many so to do. Then he demanded, moreover, the eight
thousand crowns, which the duke had remitted, and constrained them to
promise the payment thereof. After that he commanded that the
ministers should be sent away, until the matter were determined
before the duke; otherwise he would send his soldiers to dislodge
them out of hand:  whereupon, with one common assent and accord, they
determined that their ministers should withdraw themselves for a
space, until the army were retired; which was not done without
marvellous sighs, lamentation, and tears. At that season there fell
such abundance of snow, that the like had not been seen of a long
time before; so that the people were constrained to make a way, with
great travail and pain, through the top of the mountain of St.
Martin, for their ministers to pass. Now thought the lord of Trinity
so to have enclosed them (he keeping the plain, and the mountains
being covered so thick with snow) that by no means they should have
escaped his hands. But the people caused them to pass the top of the
mountain, and at their departure there flocked out of every quarter
great multitudes to the village of Bobi, and came together in a
secret place there, called Le Puis, not without great grief and
sorrow; for they found them altogether in tears and mourning, that
their ministers should be so taken from them, and they now left as
lambs amongst wolves.
Illustration:  The Protestant Church at Bobi

     The army was advertised that the ministers were assembled
together, and incontinent a great troop of harquebussiers were at
hand, which sought them even to the very top of the mountain,
insomuch that if they had remained there but one hour longer, they
had been all taken. From that time, for certain days after, they did
nothing but range about in all places, seeking for the ministers; and
there was no house, chamber, cave, nor secret corner, into the which
they did not enter, under pretence to seek for the ministers. There
was neither chest, nor any thing else so strong, but they brake it
open, saying that the ministers were hidden therein, and by that
means they took, spoiled, and carried awaywhatsoever they would.

     The lord of Trinity promised oftentimes, that although it were
forbidden to all the ministers to preach, yet the minister of
Angrogne should be excepted; and, furthermore, sent the said minister
word, that if he would demand any thing of the duke, it should be
granted him:  whereupon the said minister made this request, that the
poor people might live peaceably in their religion. A while after, he
sent for the same minister to confer with him privately upon certain
points of religion. The minister went unto him, having thereto the
consent of the people. The lord of Trinity propounded unto him three
points:  the first, concerning the supremacy of the pope; the other,
concerning transubstantiation. Of the which two points the minister
then immediately declared his opinion, and he seemed to agree
thereunto, and required him to put the same in writing. The last
(which was his whole drift) was to persuade the minister to go to the
duke's court, and there he to defend the cause of the people,
alleging certain reasons to persuade him so to do:  whereunto the
minister answered, that he was bound to God and his church, and if it
seemed convenient to the ministers and people that he should go, he
would be content to do the same; and thereof he promised to send him
answer immediately, with the which answer he seemed to be contented.

     Shortly after, the aforesaid lord, not tarrying for an answer,
sent his army to the temple of St. Laurence, in Angrogne, pretending
to sing a mass there, and suddenly the soldiers besieged the
minister's house. The minister, being warned thereof, essayed to
escape. The soldiers attempted nothing by force, but used gentle
persuasions to the contrary, for there were not yet many of them. But
the minister pushed on further, and the soldiers followed him half a
mile, but fearing the people, durst go no further. The minister
withdrew himself into the rocks upon the mountain, accompanied with
five others. The army was by and by at his heels, and sought a good
while in the houses and cottages on every side, cruelly handling the
people whom they took, to make them confess where their minister was;
spoiling their houses, taking some prisoners, and beating other some: 
but yet they could not learn of them where their minister was. At the
length they espied him among the rocks, where they thought to have
enclosed him; and so they pursued him in the rocks all covered with
snow, until it was night, and could not take him. Then they returned
and spoiled his house, and diligently searched out all his books and
writings, and carried them to the lord of Trinity in a sack, who
caused them to be all burned in his presence, supposing (as it well
appeared) that the letters which he had sent to Angrogne, touching
the agreement, should be with the rest burnt:  for he did not the like
in the other ministers' houses. That day they spoiled forty houses in
Angrogne, broke their mills, and carried away all the corn and meal
that they found.

     About midnight the soldiers returned with torchlight to the
minister's house to seek him, and searched every corner. The next
morning commandment was given to the rulers of Angrogne, that within
twenty-four hours they should deliver their minister, or else
Angrogne should be put to the fire and sword. The rulers answered,
that they could not so do, for they knew not where he was, and the
soldiers had chased him over the mountain. After certain days, when
the soldiers had burned houses, spoiled the people, broken their
mills, and done what mischief they could, the army retired.
Notwithstanding the lord of Trinity left garrisons in the aforenamed
fortresses, but all at the cost and charges of the Waldois; the which
garrisons, not contented with their wages, spoiled continually. Upon
a night five soldiers went with torches to a rich man's house of
Angrogne, and spoiled the same. The good man of the house hardly
escaped with life by the top of the house; for there were twelve
pellets shot off at him, whereof one touched his face, and struck his
hat from his head, without any further hurt.
Illustration:  Soldiers Raiding a House by Night

     The rulers of Angrogne, which were gone to the fortress to
carry thither victuals and money, were by the soldiers retained, and,
in despite of them and the people, caused a mass to be sung before
them, and forced them to be present at it; and because they would not
kneel down to it, they were beaten almost to death. The one of them
was sent again for more money; the other, with great peril of his
life, leaped over the walls, and though pursued to Angrogne, escaped.

     Certain days after, a certain company of soldiers came into the
midst of Angrogne, as though they would have passed through, and
called for meat and drink. The poor men brought that they had unto
them in a close court. When they had eaten and drunken, they caused
the women to leave, and then bound fourteen of those who had brought
them victuals, by two and two together, and led them away. Their
wives and children perceiving this, so fiercely pursued them with
stones, that they were fain to let go ten of their prisoners for
haste, and had much ado to save themselves. The other four they led
away to the fortress, of the which two were ransomed:  the other two
were hanged up by the feet and the hands; and having tormented them
almost to death, they released them for a great sum of money. Of
these one died the next night; the other lay sick without hope of
life a long time after, and his flesh fell from his hands and his
feet, and thereof he became lame; and after that his fingers fell off
also.

     In like manner did the other garrisons treat the villages
adjoining unto them.

     The garrison of Tour and that of Villars, being assembled
together at night, went to Tailleret, to the place called Bouvets,
and breaking in at the windows and tops of the houses, breaking open
the doors, sacking and spoiling all that they could lay hands on,
took also fourteen prisoners, and bound them two and two together by
the arms, and so led them to the fortress of Tour; but two which were
escaped, whilst the soldiers were taking others, set upon them which
led the prisoners, and so valiantly assaulted and beat them with
stones, that they forced them to let go twelve of the prisoners, who,
tumbling and rolling themselves down the mountain, having their hands
bound behind their backs, and fastened two and two together by the
arms, were contented rather so to die, than to be carried to the
fortress; and yet in the end they escaped. The other two which were
led to the fortress, were cruelly tormented, and in the end the
captain strangled with his own hands one of them, who young, and but
a child:  the other, who was about was very threescore years of age,
whose name was Odul Gemet, suffered also a strange and cruel death.

     The poor Waldois were yet in great captivity and distress, but
especially because they had not the preaching of God's word amongst
them, as they were wont to have; [Note:  Beza, Sleiden, Drelincourt,
Basnage, Jurien, all concur that the Waldenses preserved the true
faith, and were the remains of the primitive church] and therefore,
taking to them a good courage, they determined to begin preaching
again, albeit secretly, for two principal causes:  the one, for fear
of moving the duke, and hindering the voyage of their messengers,
having yet some hope of good success; the other, that no occasion
might be given to the soldiers of further trouble and outrage; for
that was it which they especially desired. Also they of Angrogne were
fully determined, as soon as their messengers were returned from the
duke, to preach openly, what news soever they brought, were they good
or evil; and furthermore, not to be contributaries to the finding of
the garrison, neither yet to suffer the same to enter into Angrogne.

     The messengers which were sent to the duke, being at Vercelli,
were there detained six weeks, and all that while were cruelly
handled by the popish doctors, and were constrained by force and
violence to promise to return to the mass. Furthermore, they would
have constrained them to promise the same in the behalf of the rest,
but they would not. After they were presented to the duke, the
secretary Gastaut took the supplication of the Waldois out of the
messengers' hands, and delivered another. After they had presented
themselves to the duke, and asked pardon for bearing of armour, they
were constrained also to crave pardon of the pope's legate; which at
the beginning they would in no case do. Now when these messengers
were returned, bringing this woeful news, and the people understood
that there was a new commandment given out, that they should return
to the mass; also that popish preachers were appointed, and ready to
come unto them, and they commanded to go to fetch them and entertain
them accordingly; there was wonderful lamentation, weeping, and
mourning, for this great calamity.

     Hereupon, they of the valley of Lucerne and of Bobi, being
assembled together, by one assent sent two ministers, with certain
others of the people, to the churches of Pragela, (which be in the
country of Dauphine,) to signify unto them the piteous state of the
poor churches of the valleys of Piedmont, to have their counsel and
advice how to prevent the great dangers at hand, if it were possible.
For this cause they all fell to prayer, and after they had long
called upon God, desiring his grace, and the spirit of discretion and
counsel, well to consider of those weighty and urgent affairs
wherewith they were oppressed; in the end it was concluded, that all
the people dwelling in the said valleys and mountains of Piedmont,
and those of Dauphine, should join in a league together. Whereupon
they all promised, by God's grace and assistance, to maintain the
pure preaching of the gospel, and the administration of holy
sacraments; the one to aid and assist the other; and to render all
obedience to their superiors, so far as they were commanded by the
word of God. Moreover, that it should be lawful for none of the said
valleys to promise or conclude any thing touching the estate of
religion, without the consent of the rest of the valleys. And for
more sure confirmation of the said league, certain of the ministers
and elders of the churches of Dauphine were sent to the valley of
Lucerne, to understand if they would give their consent hereunto, and
ratify the same.

     These messengers, the ministers and others of Dauphine, being
arrived in the evening at the village of Bobi, and the people being
there assembled, word was brought that the next day every householder
should appear in the council-house, to know whether they would return
to the mass or no:  and they that would receive the mass, should
quietly enjoy their houses; and they that would not, should be
delivered to the justices, and condemned to be burned, or sent to the
galleys. Wherefore the people were brought to this extremity, either
to die or flee, or else to renounce God. To flee seemed to them best,
if the great snow had not hindered them; wherefore seeing themselves
in such distress, they most gladly consented to the league. After
this they exhorted one another, saying, "Forasmuch as we shall be all
called for to-morrow, to renounce and forsake our God, and revolt
again to idolatry, let us now make solemn protestation, that we will
utterly forsake the false religion of the pope, and that we will live
and die in the maintenance and confession of God's holy word. Let us
all go to-morrow into the temple, to hear the word of God, and after
let us cast down to the ground all the idols and altars." To this
every man agreed, saying, "Let us so do; yea, and that very same hour
in which they have appointed us to be at the council-housel "

     The next day after, they assembled themselves in the church of
Bobi, and as soon as they came into the temple, without any further
delay, they beat down the images, and cast down the altars. After the
sermon they went to Villars to do the like there. By the way they
encountered with a band of soldiers, who were going to spoil a
village named Le Val Guichard, and to take the poor inhabitants
prisoners. The soldiers, seeing them so ill appointed, mocked them,
and discharged their hand-guns upon them, thinking at the first brunt
to have put them to flight:  but they valiantly defended themselves,
and with stones chased them even to the fortress. When they came to
Villars, they beat down their images and altars, and afterwards
besieged the fortress, and demanded the prisoners which were there
detained.

     The same day, the judge of Lucerne, called Podesta, went to the
council-house, to enrol the names of those who would return to the
mass; but seeing what was done, he was sore afraid, and desired the
people to suffer him to return quietly; which they willingly granted
unto him. Divers gentlemen also of the valley came thither with the
judge, to make their poor tenants to forsake God; but seeing the
tumult, they were fain to flee into the castle, where they and the
garrison were besieged ten days together, not without great danger of
their lives. The second day of the siege, the captain of Tour went
with a company of soldiers, thinking to raise the siege; but they
were, by those that kept the passages, either slain or discomfited.
As much was done the third day. The fourth day he returned with three
bands, and with the garrison of Tour, which caused a furious combat,
wherein many of the enemies were slain, and a great number hurt; and
yet of those that besieged the fort, there was not one man hurt.

     In the time of this siege they attempted divers means to take
the said fortress, but without ordnance it was impossible so to do;
wherefore they were now past all hope of winning it. Moreover, the
lord of Trinity, returning with his army, was come to the valley of
Lucerne, and the next day after might easily have raised the siege.
Wherefore when the garrison (not knowing that the lord of Trinity was
so near) desired that they might depart with bag and baggage, they
granted their request. In this siege half of the soldiers were slain,
and many were hurt, as well with harquebusses as with stones. During
this siege, the soldiers for lack of water were constrained to make
their bread with wine, which tormented their stomachs, and caused
great diseases. Here is not to be forgotten, that the soldiers, who a
while before did so cruelly persecute the poor ministers, seeking by
all means possible to destroy them, were now fain to pray them to
save their lives, and to promise them that they should have no hurt,
and also to conduct them safely into a sure place:  neither would they
depart until they had promised them so to do; which the ministers did
promise, and also perform very willingly. Then the soldiers, seeing
themselves much beholden to the ministers so gently dealing with
them, gave them great thanks, and promised them in recompence thereof
all the pleasure that they could show them. The same night the
fortress was razed.

     On the second of February, the lord of Trinity encamped at
Lucerne, and placed a garrison in the priory of St. Jean, a village
of the Waldois between Lucerne . and Angrogne. The next day, in the
morning, the said lord of Trinity sent word unto them of Angrogne,
that if they would not take part with the rest, they should be gently
handled. All the week before, they were solicited by him to consent
to the same, but they would give no answer. The same day they of
Angrogne, and the rest of the valleys, fully agreed and determined to
defend their religion by force, and that the one should aid the
other, and no agreement to be made by any one without the consent of
the rest. About noon the lord of Trinity marched with his army by St.
Jean, to enter into the borders of Angrogne by a place called La
Sonneillette, where they had fought before. The people had made
certain bulwarks of earth and stone not past three feet high, where
they defended themselves valiantly against their enemies, who
assailed them divers ways. When the enemies were so weary that they
could fight no longer, they put fresh soldiers into their places; so
that the combat endured until night, and all that day the army could
not enter into the borders of Angrogne. Many of the enemies were
slain, and a great number hurt; and but two of Angrogne slain, of 
whom one was slain by his own folly, because he was too greedy upon
the spoil. The army, being now well beaten and tired, rested a while,
to make themselves stronger for a further mischief.

     The Friday following, which was the seventh of February, at the
break of the day, the army marched towards Angrogne by five several
places. The people of Angrogne were not yet assembled, and none there
were to resist, but only a few who kept the watch; who, seeing their
enemies coming upon them in so many places, and perceiving that they
went about to enclose them, after they had valiantly fought for a
space, recoiled by little and little to a high place called La Casse,
where the combat was renewed with greater fierceness than before. But
the lord of Trinity, seeing the loss of his men, and above all, that
one of great credit and authority in the duke's court was wounded to
death, blew a retreat, and descended to Angrogne, (the people being
fled to the meadow of Tour,) and there spoiled and burnt all the
wines, victuals, and the rest of the goods that he could find; so
that in a short space he had burned about a thousand houses of
Angrogne.

     And here is not to he forgotten, that they oftentimes set fire
upon the two temples of Angrogne, where the word of God was preached,
but they could never burn them. So did they also to the minister's
house, which notwithstanding remained whole, the houses round about
being all consumed with fire. This day none of Angrogne were slain or
hurt, saving only one that was hurt in his thigh.

     There were in all Angrogne but two, that were enemies to the
word of God, who that same day were slain by the soldiers, not in the
combat, but for their riches which they had about them, as they were
running away. One of them was a very covetous wretch, and had great
store of gold and silver, and would spend nothing, either to help
himself, or succour others, no, not his poor parents. All this was
spoiled by the soldiers, with a hundred or two hundred crowns
besides, which he had about him. Besides these two, there was not one
of Angrogne slain that day. All the rest of the people retired to the
meadow of Tour, the situation whereof we will here declare, for the
better understanding of that which followeth.

     Tour is a little valley upon the borders of Angrogne, environed
about with mountains, two miles in length, but very narrow. On both
sides, and in the midst thereof, there be about two hundred small
houses and cottages; also meadows, pastures for cattle, ground for
tillage, trees, and goodly fountains. On the south side and the north
the mountains are so high, that no man can that way approach unto the
said valley. On the other coasts a man may enter by seven or eight
ways. This place is not more than two miles from Angrogne; the way
thither is very narrow, and ill to pass by, because of the hills
which be on both sides. There is also a river hard by, but very
small; but the banks thereof be very high in many places. The people
had carried thither very few victuals, partly because the way was so
ill, and also through the sudden return of the army.

     In the mean time, the lord of Trinity, after he had now twice
assaulted Angrogne, sent certain to burn Rosa, and to discover the
ways which led to the valley of Lucerne; but the soldiers were driven
back four days together by those who kept the passages:  whereupon he
sent his whole army, whom they valiantly withstood from the morning
till night. Then they of Lucerne sent new aid. During this combat, an
ambushment of soldiers descended from the top of the mountain, by a
place so hard to pass by, that no man would have suspected it. The
poor people, seeing themselves so environed by their enemies, saved
themselves, some running through the midst of their enemies, and
other some into the rocks.

     The enemies, being entered into Rosa, consumed all with fire
and sword. The residue of the people fled by the secret way leading
to the valley of Lucerne, and wandered all that night upon the
mountains full of snow, loaden with their stuff, carrying their
little infants in their arms, and leading the others by the hands,
with great pain and travail. When they of the valley saw them, they
ran unto them, praising God for their deliverance, for they thought
they had been all slain. Albeit this poor people were here in such
great extremity, yet they were joyful, and comforted themselves,
without any lamentation or mourning, except the little poor infants 
which cried out for cold.

     A few days after, the lord of Trinity entered into the valley
of Lucerne by three several ways; that is to say, by Rosa, by the
plain, and by the sides of Tailleret. They which kept the passages,
at first resisted their enemies valiantly, but perceiving that they
were assailed on every side, they retired to Villars, and there
defended themselves awhile:  but because they saw that their enemies
had already passed the plain, and gotten above Villars towards Bobi,
they gave over, and left Villars, and fled into the mountains. The
soldiers, being entered, burned houses, and slew all that they could
find. The poor people which were fled into the mountains, seeing the
village on fire, praised God, and gave him thanks, who had made them
worthy to suffer for his name and for his cause; and also they were
glad to see the village on fire, lest their enemies should encamp
there themselves. Then the soldiers, in great rage, mounted the hills
on every side, pursuing the poor people in great fury; but a few of
them, after they had ardently called upon God, took courage, and beat
back their enemies to Villars. This done, the army retired.

     Few days after, the meadow of Tour was assaulted by three
several ways on the east side. The combat endured a long season,
where divers of the enemies were hurt, and many slain; but none of
this poor people were slain that day, only two were hurt, which were
soon healed again. But to declare the conflicts, assaults,
skirmishes, and alarms, which were at Angrogne and other places
thereabouts, it were too long:  for brevity's sake it shall be
sufficient to touch the most principal, and those which are most
worthy of memory.

     On Saturday, which was the fourteenth day of February, the
people which were in the uppermost part of the meadow of Tour,
perceived that a company of soldiers had ascended up the hill to
Angrogne, and were burning the rest of the houses there. They doubted
that it was a policy of their enemies to draw them thither, and in
the mean time to set on them behind, and so to win the meadow of Tour
from them. Therefore they sent only six harquebussiers against those
soldiers, who, having the higher ground, and not being espied of
their enemies, discharged their guns all together; whereupon
incontinent the soldiers fled, albeit no man pursued them. Whether
they fled of policy, or for fear, it was not known.

     Shortly after, they of the ward of the meadow of Tour, which
were in the watch on the top of the mountain, (because every morning
a sermon was made there, whereunto the people resorted, and they
might see afar off round about them,) espied a troop of soldiers
marching on that side of the hill which is between the east and the 
north, and soon after that, discovered another company, which marched
on the north side towards the said troop. The first were ascended an
hour before the other,and fought on the top of the mountain called
Melese, but they were soon discomfited; and because they could not
run fast by means of the deep snow, and difficulty of the ways, in
fleeing they fell often down upon the ground. Whilst they that
pursued them were earnest in the chase, and had taken from them their
drum, behold there came certain unto them, crying out that the other
troop was entered into the meadow of Tour, by means whereof they gave
over the chase; or else not one of their enemies had escaped, as they
which were there reported for a truth. Not one of Angrogne was slain
or hurt.

     The other troop, which came by the north side, took a high hill
in the top of the mountain, the which seemed to be almost
inaccessible, by reason of the snow and ice which was there. The
chiefest of this company were Ludovic of Monteil, (which had been
before master of the camp in the king's wars,) and Charles Truchet.
When they were come to the top of the hill, they caused seven
soldiers to go down the hill, and to view the way, and to see whether
the troop might descend that way or no. These seven went down almost
to the houses. They sent also others to occupy the rest of the high
places which were near to the foot of the hill and the rocks. In the
mean time the ministers, and the people which were in the midst of
the valley of the meadow, saw all this, and were much discouraged
therewith:  wherefore they fell to prayer, and called upon God
ardently, not without great sighs, lamentation, and tears, even until
night.

     The seven spies which came down to discover the ways, cried
unto their Captain Truchet, "Come down! come down!" "Seignior
Charles! this day Angrogne shall be taken." The others cried to them
again, "Ascend! ascend, and return! or else you shall be slain every
one of you!" Immediately issued out five against these spies, and
took certain, and chased the rest. The first of the five who set upon
them, cast two of them down upon the ground with a fork of fire. Soon
after, eight of Angrogne issued out against the whole troop. Which
was wonderful to see them go with such courage and boldness, to
assail such a multitude, and it seemed that they should have been all
destroyed and hewn in pieces. The first of the eight went a good way
before the others, to discover the enemies, and carried a great
staff, which they call a rancon, and is somewhat bigger than a
halberd:  the others followed by two and two together, with
harquebusses. These eight went from rock to rock, from hill to hill,
about the mountain, and chased their enemies valiantly. Then came
twelve others, the which, joining with the rest, fought with a
wonderful courage, and made great slaughter of their enemies. Soon
after there came from the valley of Lucerne a hundred harquebussiers,
with one of their ministers, according to their manner, who were wont
to send out a minister withal, as well for prayer and exhortation, as
to keep the people in order, that they exceeded not measure, as it
came to pass that day.

     At the length they saw them also coming, who returned from the
discomfiture of the former troop, making a great noise, and having a
drum sounding before them which they had taken from their enemies;
who joined with them of the valley of Lucerne, and having made their
earnest prayer unto God, immediately they came to succour the others
that now were encountering valiantly with their enemies. Then the
enemies, seeing such a company marching against them with such
courage and boldness, after the others had once called upon God,
their hearts were so taken from them, that suddenly they fled, and as
soon as the others began to pray, they began also to flee; but
because they could not well save themselves by running away, they
turned back twice, and fought, and some in the mean time fled.

     He that carried the rancon, and discovered the enemies, was but
a very young and a simple man, and was esteemed to be one that could
do nothing but (as they say in their language) handle la sappe, that
is to say, a hatchet, and kept cattle; and yet he, with those that
followed, so discomfited the enemies, that it was wonderful to
behold. He brake his great rancon with laying load upon them; and
after that he brake also four of their own swords in pursuing them.
There was a boy of eighteen years of age, and of small stature, who
alone slew the lord of Monteil, master of the camp (as is said) to
the king; wherewith the enemies were marvellously astonished and
discouraged. Another simple man, who, a man would have thought, durst
not once have looked Charles Truchet in the face, (because he was a
very big man, strong and puissant, and one of the chiefest captains
of the whole army,) threw down the said Truchet with the stroke of a
stone. Then a young man leaped upon him, and slew him with his own
sword, which was four fingers broad, and cleft his head in pieces.

     This Truchet was one of the principal authors of this war, and
one of the chiefest enemies of true religion, and of the poor
Waldois, that could then be found. It was said also, that he vaunted
and promised before to the said lord of Trinity, that he would
deliver into his hands the meadow of Tour:  but God soon brought his
proud brag to nought; and for his spoiling, pilling, and polling of
the poorpeople, he lay spoiled and naked like a beast in the wild
mountain of Angrogne. Two of the chiefest among them offered to pay a
great sum of crowns for their ransom, but they could not be heard.
They were pursued more than a mile, and were so discomfited, that
they fled without any resistance; and if the night had not let them,
they had pursued them further.

     The minister, when he saw the great effusion of blood, and the
enemies to flee, cried to the people, saying that it was enough, and
exhorted them to give thanks unto God. They which heard him, obeyed,
and fell to prayer; but they that were further off, and heard him
not, chased their enemies till dark night, insomuch that if the rest
had done the like, very few of their enemies had escaped. That day
they spoiled their enemies of a great part of their armour and
munition. So God restored in this combat, and in others, to the poor
Waldois, the armour which the lord of Trinity had taken from them
before. Thanks were given to God in every place; and every man cried,
"Who is he that seeth not that God fighteth for us?" This victory
gave great courage to the poor Waldois, and greatly astonished the
enemies.

     On the eighteenth of February, the lord of Trinity, not
satisfied with burning and destroying the greatest part of Villars,
returned to burn all the little villages round about, which pertain
to the same, and especially to pursue the poor people, who were fled
up into the mountains; and dividing his army into three parts, he
entered by three several ways above mentioned. The two first
companies joined together between Villars and Bobi, having a great
company of horsemen. From thence they went to seek the people which
were in the mountain of Combe, by such a way as they did not suspect,
and where there were no warders to defend the place. Notwithstanding,
the warders which were next, seeing their enemies ascending that way,
speedily ran before them; and calling upon God for his aid and
succour, they set themselves against their enemies:  and albeit they
were but thirty in number, yet they valiantly beat them back twice,
coming out of their bulwarks, that is to say, certain houses which at
that time served them for that purpose, albeit they were not made for
that use. Many of the enemies were slain at those two combats, and
not one of the other side. The lord of Trinity, seeing his men so
fiercely driven back, sent out the greatest part of his army, which
were esteemed to be fifteen hundred men. There came also about a
hundred to succour the warders. The combat was very cruel and fierce.
At length the poor people were assaulted so vehemently, that they
were fain to forsake their bulwarks, losing two of their men. Then
the enemies thought all to be theirs, and blew their trumpets,
triumphing that they had put the people to flight. But the people,
retiring not past a stone's cast, took courage, and crying all
together to the Lord for succour, they turned themselves to the face
of their enemies, and with great force and power they hurled stones
at them with their slings.

     After this the enemies rested themselves awhile, and by and by
after they gave a furious assault; but yet they were again mightily
resisted. Yet once again the enemies rested, and in the mean time the
people fell to prayer, calling upon God all together, with their
faces lifted up towards heaven; which frayed the enemies more than
any thing else. After this, they gave yet another great assault, but
God by the hands of a few drove them back. Yea, God here showed his
great power, even in the little children also, who, fervently calling
upon God, threw stones at their enemies, and gave courage also unto
the men. So did also the women, and the vulgar sort; that is to say,
those who were meet for no feats of war, remaining upon the mountain,
and beholding these furious combats, kneeling upon the ground, and
having their faces lifted up towards heaven, with tears and groanings
they cried, "Lord, help us!" who heard their prayers.

     After that these three assaults were given, there came one unto
them crying, "Be of good courage God hath sent those of Angrogne to
succour us." He meant, that they of Angrogne were fighting for them
in another place, that is to say, towards Tailleret, where the third
part of the army was. The people perceiving that they of Angrogne
were come to that place to succour them, began to cry, "Blessed be
God, who hath sent us succour:  they of Angrogne be here to succour
us! "The enemies hearing this, were astonished, and suddenly blew a
retreat, and retired into the plain.

     That troop that were gone towards Tailleret, divided themselves
into three companies. The first marched by the side of the mountain,
burning many houses, and joined with the main army. The second
company, which was of seven score, marched higher, thinking to take
the people at unawares; but they were by seven men strongly resisted
and driven back. The third company attained the top of the mountain,
thinking to enclose the people; but as God would, they of Angrogne,
who came to succour them, encountered with them, and with great force
put them to flight.

     They of Villars, of whom mention is made before, after they had
refreshed themselves with a little bread and wine, (for the most part
of them had eaten nothing all that day,) chased their enemies till
itwas almost night, so fiercely, that the master of the camp was fain
to send to the lord of Trinity (who was at Tour) for succour, or else
all would have been lost; which he did; and immediately he rode with
all speed to Lucerne to save himself, hearing the alarm which was
given at St. Jean by those of Angrogne, and fearing lest the way
should have been stopped. The army retired with great difficulty,
(notwithstanding the new aid which was sent them,) and with great
loss of their men. One of their captains confessed since, that if
they had been pursued any further, they had fled all that night long.
Since that time they never returned again into the valley of Lucerne.

     On Monday, being the seventeenth of March next following, the
lord of Trinity, to be revenged on those of the meadow of Tour,
assembled all the force that he could make with the gentlemen of the
country; insomuch, that whereas before his army was commonly but four
thousand, it was now between six and seven thousand:  and secretly, in
the night season, he encamped with part of his army in the midst of
Angrogne, from whence the poor inhabitants were fled before. The next
morning, after the sermon and prayers were ended, they perceived the
other part of the army to be encamped at the foot of the mountain of
Angrogne on the east side. Soon after they perceived how both parts
of the army coasted the hill's side, the one towards the other, being
such a multitude, so glittering in their harness, and marching in
such array, that the poor people at first were astonished thereat.
Notwithstanding, the assembly fell down upon their knees three or 
four times, crying, "Help us, O Lord!" beseeching him to have regard
to the glory of his holy name, to stay the effusion of blood, if it
were his good pleasure, and to turn the hearts of their enemies to
the truth of his holy gospel. These two parts of the army joined
together near to the bulwarks of the meadow of Tour, and gave the
assault in three several places. One of the bands mounted secretly by
the rocks, thinking to have enclosed the people in their bulwarks.
But as soon as they that kept the bulwark below had espied them, they
forsook the place, and marched straight towards them; and as they
marched, they met with the aid which was sent unto them, very
luckily, from the valley of Lucerne, and coming as it were from
heaven; who joining together, soon discomfited their enemies with
stones and harquebusses. They pursued them fiercely into the rocks,
and vexed them wonderfully, because the rocks are so steep that no
man can ascend or descend without great pain and difficulty. The
captain of this band was named Bastian, of Vergilia, a man very
expert in the affairs of war. At his going out of his lodging, he
threatened that he would do great and terrible things that day. His
hostess hearing that, said unto him, "Monsieur! if our religion be
better than theirs, you shall have the victory; but if theirs be
better than ours, you shall not prevail." Shortly after the captain
was brought again into his inn, so wounded and so feeble, that he was
not likely to live. Then said his hostess unto him, "Monsieur! it is
now well seen, that their religion is better than ours."

     There was also another band that kept the top of the hill, to
assault the bulwarks from thence. The middlemost bulwark was then
assaulted, in which were very few to defend the same; who, seeing the
number of their enemies, retired back, leaving therein five only to
defend it. There was a huge rock not far from the aforesaid bulwark,
behind the same a great number of the enemies were hid; and anon
there issued out two ensigns, assuring themselves to win the bulwark;
but immediately one of their ensign-bearers was wounded to death,
whereupon many recoiled back; the other set up his ensign upon the
bulwark. They that were within, had neither halberd, nor any other
long weapon, but only one pike, and the same without any iron; which
one of the five took, and threw down the ensign, and manfully beat
back the scalers, and threw them down to the ground. Divers of the
enemies were entered into the bulwark by a door below, and slew one
of the five who kept the middle part of the bulwark. The other four
looked to be destroyed out of hand. Then one of the four chased away
those who had entered below with stones; and the other three, leaving
their hand-guns, defended themselves likewise with great stones:  and
perceiving the band which was on the rocks to flee, they took
courage, and withstood their enemies valiantly, till their companions
were returned from the chase.

     In the mean time, the bulwark which was upon the side of the
mountain was furiously assailed by the one half of the army. Those
that were within, suffered their enemies to approach near to the
bulwark, without any gunshot or other defence; whereat .the enemies
much marvelled:  but when they were even at hand, they fell upon them,
some with throwing of stones, some with rolling down mighty stones,
and some with harquebusses. There was a huge stone rolled down, which
passed throughout the whole army, and slew divers. The soldiers at
that time had won a little cottage near to the said bulwark, which
did much hurt to the poor men; but among them one devised to roll
down a great huge stone against the cottage, which so shook it, and
amazed the soldiers, that they thought they had been all destroyed;
and incontinent they fled, and never would enter into it again.
Illustration:  The Waldois roll a huge stone on their enemies

     Then the soldiers made certain fences of wood, five feet long,
three feet broad, and of the thickness of three boards; but they were
so sore vexed with the shot of the harquebusses, that they were fain
to lay all those fences aside. The miners also made others of earth
for the soldiers. But all these policies of the enemies availed them
nothing; for the slaughter was so great, that in divers places you
might have seen three lying dead, one upon another. God so wrought
with the poor Christians, that the shot of two harquebusses slew four
men. It was said for a certainty, that the shot of a harquebuss came
so near the lord of Trinity's head, that it brake a wand which he
bare in his hand, and made him to retire sixscore paces backward; and
seeing his soldiers in such great numbers murdered and wounded on
every side, he wept bitterly. Then he retired the rest of his army.
That day he thought assuredly to have entered into the meadow of
Tour. Moreover, he was determined, if that day's journey had not
succeeded, to encamp thereby, and the next morning very early to
renew the assault. Many gentlemen and others came thither to see the
discomfiture of the poor Waldois; and likewise those of the plain
looked for nothing but to hear the piteous ruin and desolation of
this poor people. But God disposed it otherwise, for the lord of
Trinity had much ado to save himself and his; and seeing the
mischiefs which they intended to do unto others, were fallen now upon
their own heads, they were wonderfully astonished. They of the plain
also, when they saw the number of the dead bodies and the wounded to
be so great, (for from noon until the evening they ceased not to
carry them away,) were likewise exceedingly dismayed. Albeit they
carried not all away; for there were many that lay near to the
bulwarks, whom the people covered with winding-sheets the next
morning. The soldiers themselves confessed to them of Tour, that if
they had pursued them, they had been all slain, they were so tired,
and clean out of heart.

     Many marvelled why the people did not follow the army, but
especially the soldiers, seeing the great discomfiture which they had
done, and that they had gotten such advantage of them already:  but
this was done for two causes; the one was, because they had already
determined not to follow the army being once retired, to avoid the
effusion of blood, meaning only to defend themselves; the other cause
was, for that they were weary, and had spent all their munition:  for
many of them had shot off about thirty times, and none of them under
twenty, spending great store both of pellets and hail shot. The rest
of the army retired, crying with a loud voice, "God fighteth for
them, and we do them wrong! "

     The next day one of the principal captains of the army
surrendered his charge to the lord of Trinity, saying unto him, that
he would never fight against this people any more; and upon that he
departed. It is a marvellous thing, and worthy of perpetual memory,
that in that combat there were but two of the Waldois slain, and two
hurt. Through the whole country of Piedmont, every man said, "God
fighteth for them." One of the captains confessed, that he had been
at many fierce assaults and combats, and sundry battles well fought,
but yet he never saw soldiers so faint-hearted and amazed; yea, the
soldiers themselves told him, they were so astonished that they could
not strike. Moreover, they said, that this people never shot but they
hurt or killed some of the soldiers. Some others said, that the
ministers by their prayers conjured and bewitched them, that they
could not fight. And indeed wonderful is it, and marvellous are the
judgments of God, that notwithstanding so many combats and conflicts,
so great assaults and adventures, so much and such terrible shot,
continually made against this poor people, yet all in a manner came
to no effect, so mightily God's holy power wrought for his people: 
insomuch that for all the said combats, skirmishes, and so many
conflicts of all the Angrognians, there were but nine only that
miscarried, and the whole number of those that were slain were but
only fourteen persons. Here also is to be noted, not without great
admiration, how few there were, and those also but poor silly
shepherds and neat-herds, to encounter with such a mighty power of so
strong and brave soldiers coming against them with weapons and
armour, being so well furnished and appointed with munition, as they
were in all points accordingly; and the other on the contrary side
being unarmed, and unprovided of all habiliment of war, having for
their defence for the most part nothing else but slings and stones,
and a few harquebusses.

     On the ninth of March there was a hot skirmish at Angrogne; for
three companies of soldiers went to Angrogne, to burn and spoil all
that remained, and to destroy the wines which were hidden in the
ground. Where, amongst themselves, they mocked and flouted the poor
people, saying, "These Lutheran Waldois are valiant fellows behind
their bulwarks; but if they had been in the plain field, they had
been well canvassed." After this it chanced that thirty of the
Waldois went and assailed these aforesaid companies in the plain
field. They fought a long season, and that so near, that some of them 
fought hand to hand. In this conflict one of those of Angrogne,
wrestled with a captain of the enemies, strong and mighty, and cast
him down upon the ground. Many of the soldiers were slain, and many
hurt; but of the Angrognians there was but one slain, and another
hurt a little, who notwithstanding gave not over to fight manfully.
Then the soldiers, seeing the loss of their men, retired suddenly.

     After that, the lord of Trinity sent two gentlemen of the
valley of Lucerne to them of Angrogne, to feel them if they would
come to any agreement. To whom answer was given, that they would
stand to their first answer. From that time he sent very often to
treat of the agreement; but what his meaning was, it might well
appear; for when the poor people hoped for some agreement, they were
most furiously assaulted. Upon this, there was a day assigned in the
valley of Lucerne, to confer touching the agreement with certain men
pertaining to the lord of Ranconis, and the safe-conduct was promised
and granted.

     The night before the ministers and rulers of Angrogne should
take their journey, they perceived a company of soldiers going up a
hill by which they of Angrogne should pass, and hid them in houses on
the way-side, thinking to take at unawares them of Angrogne that were
sent to treat of the agreement. But they, having intelligence of this
conspiracy, watched and warded. It was an easy matter, as divers
thought, that night to have taken the lord of Trinity, and to have
spoiled his whole camp; but they of Angrogne and Lucerne would not
execute this enterprise, lest thereby they should offend God, and
pass the bounds of their vocation, taking upon them no more but to
defend themselves.

     At that time a pitiful case happened in the meadow of Tour. The
lord of Ranconis, seeming to be sorry for this war, sent into the
meadow of Tour an honest man of Briqueras, named Francis of Gilles,
to take advice what means were best to further the agreement; who,
having consulted with the ministers and rulers, returned homeward
that day according to his master's commandment, and having sent back
one who conducted him, was mur dered soon after, at the foot of
Angrogne, by two of Angrogne, who otherwise seemed to be honest, and
of good parentage. Soon after, one of the two, who had committed this
fact, entered into the meadow of Tour and was immediately apprehended
and bound. He confessed the fact without any further delay.
Immediately the other also was taken.

     The Waldois were marvellously troubled and aggrieved with this
fact, and wrote to the lord of Ranconis, declaring unto him the whole
circumstance of the fact, and that they had the offenders in ward,
and that if it would please him to send certain to examine the
matter, they, for their part, would so execute justice in the
punishment of them, that their innocency to all men should appear.
The lord of Ranconis wrote unto them that they should deliver unto
him the offenders, and that he would do such justice upon them as the
case required. To this they of Angrogne answered, that upon three
conditions they should be delivered according to his request:  first,
that the prisoners should be compelled to do nothing against their
consciences; and as touching religion, nothing should be spoken unto
them, but out of the word of God:  secondly, that speedy and sharp
justice should be executed upon them; and that hereafter this should
be no prejudice to the liberties and privileges of the people of
Angrogne:  the third, that the execution of them should be upon the
borders of Angrogne, for an example to all others. This being
accorded with one assent, (yea, without contradiction of their
parents,) they sent them prisoners, accompanied with sixty gunners,
to the confines of Lucerne, and there delivered them into the hands
of the lord of Ranconis This redounded to the great commendation of
them of Angrogne.

     After this the lord of Trinity, having left certain garrisons
about Angrogne, and the valley of Lucerne, went to Perouse near to
the valley of St. Martin, to succour the garrison there, being in
great danger, and there remained a month. During which time, they of
Angrogne, and the valley of Lucerne, lived in more quietness than
before; but yet they were much afflicted, by reason of the scarcity
of victuals which sore pressed them, and namely those of the meadow
of Tour, for they were spoiled of their victuals. This poor people
lived on milk and herbs, having very little bread:  but afterwards,
when they were even like to be famished, God of his goodness sent
them better succour, both of corn and bread, than they had before.
The enemies thought to have taken the meadow of Tour by famine; for
they took away the victuals that were to be had in all places round
about. Every household was suffered to have no more than should
sustain them that day, and that also was very little; to the end that
they should not succour this poor people.

     After that, the lord of Trinity, being returned from Perouse to
Lucerne, sent certain to treat of an agreement, and required to
commune with some of the people. Then they began to consult and
devise, by all means, how they might come to some good agreement. But
on Monday, being the seventeenth of April, by break of day, he sent
certain bands of Spaniards, which he had there, with the garrison of
Tour, to the mountain of Tailleret, by the way which leadeth to the
meadow of Tour, on the south side:  they murdered men, women, and 
children of Tailleret, whom they found in their beds. Then they
marched on along upon the mountain, towards the meadow of Tour. Anon
after, the people perceived two other companies of soldiers, marching
by Angrogne by two several ways, to assault the meadow of Tour. In
the morning, as soon as they rose, they blew their horns, for they
saw the Spaniards already entered. When they had made their prayers,
every man ran to meet the enemies; some on the east side, and the
others on the south. They which first resisted the Spaniards (who
were already past the bulwarks) were in the beginning but twelve
gunners, and a few others, whom they caused to go up to the hill, and
roll down great stones. These twelve, having found a fit place for
their purpose to stay the Spaniards, began to shoot off their
harquebusses at them. The Spaniards, seeing themselves so sore
assaulted both above and beneath, and the place so narrow and so
strait, recoiled back, and retired as fast as they could by the same
way by which they came. If they had tarried a little longer, they had
been enclosed between the two mountains; which place was so strait,
that they could not have escaped. The people chased them unto their
camp, which was at Tour. As they fled, they found often some forts,
where they did resist for a little while, but they were always beaten
out. In this combat, God gave victory to the poor Waldois, with great
slaughter of the Spaniards, where also very many of them were sore
hurt and wounded.

     The said lord of Trinity sent unto the Spaniards, that they
should not faint and give over, but stick to it like men, and he
would shortly send them succour:  but they would not. Those of the
valley of Lucerne, hearing of this conflict, came in the mean time to
help their neighbours. Amongst others, there was one slain in that
battle, for whom the lord of Trinity much lamented, saying, that he
would rather have lost a whole band than that man. The other two
companies which marched by Angrogne, perceiving the Spaniards to be
so beaten and put to flight, and seeing also those of the meadow of
Tour coming to encounter with them, retired in haste. Upon that the
lord of Trinity went to Cavors, three miles from Lucerne, being in a
great perplexity; and as he was about to send succour to the
Spaniards, he heard the sound of a drum above Lucerne, and suspected
that there was an army of the Waldois coming against him. Upon this
divers of the soldiers fled away by the plain, crying that all was
lost. It was certainly reported, that if the Waldois had pursued the
army, as they might easily have done, the camp had that day been
chased out of Lucerne. The poor people lacked no courage so to do;
for albeit they had neither eaten nor drunk all the day before, and
had sore travailed and fought, yet they said, that if they had but a
little refreshed themselves with a morsel of bread, and a glass of
wine, they durst take upon them to enter into the camp of their
enemies.

     Within a few days after, they of Angrogne were advertised by
the lord of Trinity's letters, that he fully determined to cut down
their trees and vines, and destroy their corn being on the ground;
and furthermore, that two forts should be built at Angrogne. The day
was assigned, and horsemen appointed, with all speed to execute this
mischievous enterprise. The poor people thought that they should be
assailed as sore as ever they were, and fight as hard as ever they
did before. But God prevented this cruel attempt; for the night
before this should be executed, the lord of Trinity received certain
letters from the duke, which stayed this enterprise. They of the
meadow of Tour being advertised that the lord of Trinity did now
intend to send ordnance to beat down the bulwarks which were made of
stones, they made a bulwark of earth, which was in compass about five
hundred paces, which they might easily see from Lucerne. They of the
meadow of Tour told the lord of Trinity's men, that if they brought
any artillery, they should not so soon carry it away again; and
shortly the ordnance was sent back again.

     About this season, the chief rulers and ministers of the
Waldois, requested earnestly the lord of Ranconis to present a
supplication which they had made to the duchess of Savoy:  for they
had intelligence, that she was sore offended that her subjects were
so cruelly handled. In this supplication they declared the equity of
their cause, protesting all due obedience to the duke their sovereign
lord, and if it might be proved by the pure word of God that they
held any error, they would, with all humble submission, receive
correction, and be reformed, humbly beseeching her Grace to appease
the displeasure which the duke had conceived against them, by the
untrue surmises of their adversaries; and if there were any thing
wherein they had offended him, they most humbly craved his gracious
pardon.

     About this time the lord of Trinity, by sickness, was in great
danger of his life. Soon after the supplication was delivered, the
duchess sent an answer to the Waldois, by the said lord of Ranconis.
The effect thereof was, that she had obtained of the duke's Grace all
that they demanded in their supplication, upon such conditions as the
said lord of Ranconis would propound unto them. But when they
understood that the said conditions were very rigorous, they sent
another supplication unto the duchess, wherein they humbly besought
her Grace to be a mean that the said conditions and articles might be
moderated; which articles here follow.

     "First, That they should banish their ministers.

     "Secondly, That they should receive the mass, and other
ceremonies of the Romish Church.

     "Thirdly, That they should pay a ransom to the soldiers for
certain of their men which they had taken.

     "Fourthly, That they should assemble and preach no more as they
were wont to do.

     "Fifthly, That the duke would make fortresses at his pleasure,
in all that country:  with other like things."

The supplication of the Waldois to the duchess of Savoy.

     The people made humble request in this their last supplication,
"that it would please the said duchess to give the duke her husband
to understand, how that these conditions were strange and rigorous.
And as for their parts, although they had good trial of their
ministers, that they were good men and fearing God, of sound
doctrine, of good life, and honest conversation; yet nevertheless
they were contented so to do, if he would give leave to some of them
to remain:  requesting this, that it might be permitted unto them to
choose some other good ministers in their places, before they
departed, lest that their churches should remain without pastors.

     "Concerning the mass, and other ceremonies of the Church of
Rome, if the duke should cause them to be ministered in their
parishes, they neither would nor could withstand the same, and for
their part, they would do no injury or violence to those that should
minister them, or be present thereat:  notwithstanding they besought
him, that they might not be constrained to be present themselves at
the ministration thereof, nor to pay any thing to the maintenance of
the same, or else to yield either favour or consent thereunto.

     "As touching the ransom which was demanded of them for their
prisoners, considering the extreme poverty that they were in, and the
great calamities and damages which they had suffered, it was to them
a thing impossible. Yea, if his Highness were truly informed what
loss they had sustained, by burning, spoiling, and sacking of their
houses and goods, without all mercy or pity, he would not only not
require of them any such thing, but, as a gracious and merciful
prince, he would succour and support them, that they might be able to
maintain their poor families, whom they nourished (as they were bound
to do) to the service of God, and of their said lord and prince:  and
therefore they desired that it might please him, that their poor
brethren remaining in captivity and prison, and such as were sent to
the galleys for the profession of their religion, might speedily be
delivered and set at liberty.

     "As for their assemblies and preachings, they were contented
that they should be kept only amongst themselves, in their accustomed
places, and in other valleys aforesaid, where any assembly of the
faithful should be, which were desirous to hear the preaching of the
gospel.

     "Touching the fortresses, forasmuch as by those which were
already made they had suffered great molestations and troubles, as
well concerning their goods, as also their religion, they were
assured, that if he should build up new forts, they should never be
able to abide the troubles, miseries, and calamities, that would
follow thereupon:  and therefore they most humbly desired the said
duchess to be so good and gracious unto them, as to obtain of the
duke that he would accept their persons in the stead of forts; and
that, seeing those places were by nature and of themselves strong and
well fortified, it might please their said lord the duke to receive
them into his protection and safeguard; and by the grace and
assistance of God they would serve him themselves for such walls and
forts, that he should not need to build any other. And because many
of those which dwelt near about them had robbed and spoiled them, not
only of their household goods and such other things, but also driven
away their cattle, that it might please him to give them leave to
recover the said goods by way of justice, and to buy again that which
the soldiers had sold, and that for the same price for the which it
was sold.

     "Briefly, they also besought their said lord, that it might
please him to be so gracious unto them, as to grant them a
confirmation of all their franchises, immunities, and privileges, as
well general as particular, given unto them as well by him as by his
predecessors; and likewise of those, who, as well as their ancestors,
had bought of their lords, and to receive them, as his most humble
and obedient subjects, into his protection and safeguard.

     "And because in time past, instead of good and speedy justice,
all iniquity was committed by those that had the administration of 
justice in their valleys; and forasmuch as their purses were emptied
and punished rather than the malefactors'; that it might please him
to give order that such justice might be done amongst them, whereby
the wicked might be punished with all severity, and the innocent
defended and maintained in their right.

     "Finally, forasmuch as divers of this poor people (being
astonished at the coming of the army, and fearing lest they should
not only be spoiled of all their goods, but also they with their
wives and children be utterly destroyed) made promise, against their
consciences, to live according to the traditions of the Church of
Rome; they were marvellously troubled and tormented in spirit, and
did nothing but languish in that distress. Wherefore they humbly
besought the said duchess to take pity upon them, and to obtain that
they might not be compelled to do any thing against their conscience;
and moreover, that it might please the duke to permit them to live in
liberty and freedom of conscience:  also, that all their poor
brethren, banished for the cause of religion, might return home to
their houses; and that all confiscations and penalties made against
them, might be abolished. And for their part, they promised to give
all due reverence and honour to God and his holy word, and to be true
and faithful subjects unto their lord and prince; yea, more than any
other." Underneath the said supplication there was written: 

     "Your faithful and humble subjects, the poor afflicted of the
valleys of Lucerne, Angrogne, St. Martin, and Perouse, and,
generally, all the people of the Waldois, who inhabit the country of
Piedmont."

     After that this supplication was viewed and read of the said
duchess, she so persuaded with the duke, that answer was made with
these conditions, declared in these articles following: 

     "That there shall shortly be made letters patent by the duke's
Highness, by the which it may appear that he hath forgiven and
pardoned them of the valleys of Angrogne, Bobi, Villars, Valquichard,
Roras, Tailleret, La Rua de Bonet, (bordering upon Tour,) St. Martin,
Perouse, Roccapiata, St. Barthilimi, and all such as have aided them;
of all such faults as they have committed, as well in bearing armour
against his Highness, as against the lords and certain other
gentlemen whom he retained and kept in his protection and safeguard.

     "That it shall be lawful for them of Angrogne, Bobi, Villars,
Valquichard, Roras, members of the valley of Lucerne, and for them of
Rodoret, Marcele, Maneille, and Salsa, (members of the valley of St.
Martin,) to have their congregations, sermons, and other ministries
of their religion in places accustomed.

     "That it shall be lawful for them of Villars (members of the
valley of Lucerne) to have the same, but that only until the time
that his Highness doth build a fort in the same place. But whilst the
said fort is in building, it shall not be lawful to have their
preachings and assemblies within the said precinct of the place, but
it shall be lawful for them to build a place for that purpose near at
hand, where they shall think good, on that side towards Bobi.
Nevertheless it shall be permitted to their ministers to come within
the precinct aforesaid, to visit the sick, and exercise other things
necessary to their religion, so that they preach not, nor make any
assembly there.

     "It shall also be permitted to them of Tailleret, and La Rua de
Bonet, bordering upon Tour, to have their sermons and assemblies in
places accustomed, so that they enter not for that purpose into the
rest of the confines of Tour.

     "That it shall not be lawful for the said members of the
valleys of Lucerne and St. Martin, to come to the rest of their
borders, nor to any of his Highness's dominions; nor to have their
preachings, assemblies, or disputations, out of their own borders,
having liberty to have them therein. And if they be examined of their
faith, it shall be lawful for them to answer without danger of
punishment in body or goods.

     "The like shall be lawful for them of the parish of Perouse,
which at this present are fled because of the said religion, and were
wont to have their assemblies and preachings, and other ministries
according to their religion, at the place called Le Puis; so that
they come not to other places and borders of the said parish.

     "It shall be permitted to them of the parish of Pinachia, of
the valley of Perouse, who at this present be fled because of the
said religion, and were wont to go to sermons and assemblies, and
other ministries of that religion, to have the like, only at the
place called Le Grandoubion.

     "It shall be permitted to them of the parish of St. Germain, of
the valley of Perouse, and to them of Roccapiata, who at this present
are fled because of the said religion, and continue in the same, to
have one only minister, who may the one day preach at St. Germain, at
the place called l'Adormilleux, and the other day at Roccapiata, at
the place called Vandini only.

     "It shall be permitted to all them of the towns and villages of
the said valleys, who at this present are fled, and continue in the
said religion, notwithstanding any promise or abjuration made before
this war against the said religion, to repair and return to their
houses with their households, and to live according to the same,
going and coming to the sermons and assemblies which shall be made by
their ministers in the places above specified, so that they obey that
which is above said.

     "And because many of the said towns and villages dwell out of
the precinct of the preaching, having need to be visited, and of
other things according to their said religion, their ministers, which
dwell within the precinct, shall be suffered, without prejudice, to
visit and duly aid them of such ministries as shall be necessary for
them, so that they make no sermons nor assemblies.

     "By especial grace it shall be permitted to all them of the
valley of Meane, and them of St. Barthilimi, neighbours to
Roccapiata, and who are fled and continue in the said religion,
peaceably to enjoy the grace and liberties granted in the next
article before, so that they observe all which they before promise to
observe.

     "The goods already seized as forfeited, shall be restored to
all the inhabitants of the said valleys, and to all that are fled and
continue in the said religion, as well them of the said valleys, as
to those of Roccapiata, St. Barthilimi, and of Meane; so that they be
not seized for any other cause than for the said religion, and for
the war present and lately passed.

     "It shall be lawful for them aforesaid to recover by way of
justice, of their neighbours, their movable goods and cattle, so it
be not of soldiers; and that which hath been sold, they shall also
recover by way of justice, so that they restore the price for which
it hath been sold. Their neighbours shall have the like against them.

     "All their franchises, freedoms, and privileges, as well
general as particular, granted as well by his Highness's
predecessors, as by himself, and obtained of other inferior lords,
whereof they shall make proof by public writing, shall be confirmed
unto them.

     "The said valleys shall be provided for, to have good justice
ministered unto them, whereby they may know they are kept in
safeguard by his Highness, as well as all his other subjects.

     "The inhabitants of the said valleys shall make a roll of all
the names and surnames of all them of the said valleys, which are
fled for religion, as well such as have abjured as others, to the end
they may be restored and maintained in their goods and households,
and enjoy such grace and benefits as their prince and lord hath
bestowed on them.

     "And inasmuch as it is known to every man, that the prince may
build fortresses in his country, where it shall please him, without
contradiction, nevertheless, to take all suspicion out of the minds
of the aforesaid Waldois, it is declared, that if at any time
hereafter his Highness shall make a fort at Villars, the inhabitants
of the said place shall not be constrained to bear the charges, but
only as they shall think good lovingly to aid their prince:  which
fort being builded, (by God's aid,) a governor and captain shall
therein be appointed, who shall attempt nothing but the service of
his Highness, without offence of the inhabitants, either in their
goods or consciences.

     "It shall be lawful for them, before the discharging of their
ministers, such as it shall please his Highness to have discharged,
to choose and call others in their steads; so that they choose not M.
Martin de Pragela, nor change from one place to another of the said
valleys any of them which be discharged.

     "The mass, and other service after the usage of Rome, shall be
kept in all the parishes of the said valleys, where the sermons,
assemblies, and other ministries of their religion are made; but none
shall be compelled to be present thereat, nor to minister aid or
favour to such as shall use that service.

     "All the expenses and charges borne by his Highness in this
war, shall be forgiven and released to them for ever; also the eight
thousand crowns wherein the inhabitants of the said valleys were
behind, as part of sixteen thousand crowns which they had promised in
the war passed; and his Highness will command that the writings for
that cause made shall be annulled and cancelled.

     "All the prisoners shall be rendered and restored, which shall 
be found to be in the hands of the soldiers, paying ransom
reasonable, according to their goods, as they shall be seized; and
those that shall be adjudged to be wrongfully taken, shall be
released without ransom.

     "Likewise all they of the said valleys, which for religion, and
not for other causes, are detained in the galleys, shall be released
without ransom.

     "Finally, it shall be lawful for all them of the said valleys,
them of Meane, Roccapiata, and St. Barthilimi, of what degree,
estate, or condition soever they be, (except ministers,) to accompany
and dwell and to be in daily conversation, with the rest of their
Highness's subjects; and to tarry, go, and come in all places of his
Highness's country; to sell and buy, and use all trades of
merchandise, in all places in his Highness's country, (as before is
said,) so that they preach not, nor make any assemblies or
disputations, as we have before said:  and that these which be of the
limits dwell not out of of them; and they which be of the towns and
villages of the said valleys, dwell not out of them, nor of their
borders:  and in so doing they shall not be molested by any means, and
shall not be offended nor troubled in body or goods, but shall remain
under the protection and safeguard of his Highness.

     "Furthermore, his Highness shall set order to stay all
troubles, inconveniences, secret conspiracies of wicked persons,
after such sort that they shall remain quietly in their religion. For
observation whereof, George Monastier, one of the elders of Angrogne;
Constantion Dialestini, otherwise called Rembaldo, one of the elders
of Villars; Pirrone Arduino, sent from the commonalty of Bobi;
Michael Raymundet, sent from the commonalty of Tailleret, and of La
Rua de Bovet, bordering upon Tour; John Malenote, sent from certain
persons of St. Jean; Peter Paschall, sent from the commonalty of the
valley of St. Martin; Thomas Roman of St. German, sent from the
commonalty of the same place, and of all the valley of Perouse,
promise for them and their commonalties severally, that the contents
of these conclusions aforesaid shall be inviolately kept; and for
breach thereof do submit themselves to such punishment as shall
please his Highness; promising likewise to cause the chief of the
families of the commonalties to allow and confirm the said promise.

     "The honourable lord of Ranconis doth promise, that the Duke's
highness shall confirm and allow the aforesaid conclusions to them,
both generally and particularly, at the intercession and special
favour of the noble lady the princess.

     "In testimony hereof, the aforesaid lord of Ranconis hath
confirmed these present conclusions with his own hand; and the
ministers have likewise subscribed, in the name of all the said
valleys; and they that can write, in the names of all their
commonalties.

"At Cavor, the fifth day of June, 1561.
Philip of Savoy.
Francis Valla, minister of Villars.
Claudius Bergius, minister of Tailleret.
Georgius Monasterius.
Michael Raymundet."

     This accord being thus made and passed, by means of the duchess
of Savoy, the poor Waldois have been in quiet until this present; and
God, of his infinite goodness, have delivered them out of so many
troubles and conflicts, hath set them at liberty to serve him purely,
and with quietness of conscience.

     Wherefore there is none at this present (except he be
altogether blind or senseless) but seeth and well perceiveth, that
God would make it known by experience to these poor Waldois, and all
other faithful people, that all things turn to the best to them which
love and fear him:  for by all these afflictions which they suffered,
(as is before rehearsed,) this good heavenly Father hath brought them
to repentance and amendment of life; he hath effectuously taught them
to have recourse to his fatherly mercy, and to embrace Jesus Christ
for their only Saviour and Redeemer.

     Furthermore, he hath taught them to tame the desires and lusts
of the flesh, to withdraw their hearts from the world, and lift them
up to heaven and to be always in a readiness to come to him, as unto
their most loving and pitiful Father. To be short, he hath sent them
to the school of his children, to the end they should profit in
patience and hope; to make them to mourn, weep, and cry unto him. And
above all, be hath made them so often to prove his succours at time
of need, to see them before their eyes, to feel and touch them with
their hands (as a man would say) after such sort, that they have had
good occasion, and the faithful with them, never to distrust so good
a Father, and so careful for the health of his children; but to
assure themselves they shall never be confounded what thing soever
happen.

     And yet to see this more manifestly, and that every man may
take profit thereof, it shall be good to understand what this poor
people did, whilst they were in these combats and conflicts. As soon
as they saw the army of their enemies approach, they cried all
together for aid and succour to the Lord; and before they began to
defend themselves, they fell to prayer, and in fighting lifted up
their hearts, and sighed to the Lord. As long as the enemies were at
rest, every one of these poor people on their knees called upon God.
When the combat was ended, they gave him thanks for the comfort and
succour which they had felt. In the mean time, the rest of the
people, with their ministers, made their hearty prayer unto God, with
sighs and tears, and that from the morning until the evening. When
night was come, they assembled again together:  they that had fought,
rehearsed the wonderful aid and succour which God had sent them, and
so all together rendered thanks unto him for his fatherly goodness.
Always he changed their sorrow into joy. In the morning trouble and
affliction appeared before them, with great terror on all sides; but
by the evening they were delivered, and had great cause of rejoicing
and comfort.

     This poor people had two terrible enemies, war and famine,
which kept them under in such sort, that a man would have thought
they had been utterly lost and destroyed:  but God, of his endless
mercy, delivered them from such dangers, and restored them to their
houses, where they remained afterwards in peace and quietness; and
all they that had declared themselves to be their open enemies, were
brought to confusion, as well those who sought to get their goods, as
those who only desired to shed their blood; for proof whereof, the
only example of two gentlemen of the valley of Lucerne shall suffice.
These not only moved cruel war against their poor tenants and others,
but most shamefully spoiled them, and took intolerable fines of all
those that disobeyed their edicts to keep a good conscience.

     Besides this, they went about to seize all their goods as
forfeited, waiting to have the whole forfeiture thereof themselves.
And for this cause they did not only incense the duke with false
reports, and with grievous complaints and accusations against these
poor Waldois, but also pursued the same so long, and with such
charges, that they were fain to sell their inheritance, in hope to
bring their purpose to pass, and to enjoy that goodly prey, which
they thought could not escape their hands. But in the end, for their
reward, they got nothing but shame and confusion.

     And as for the monks and priests, who by such means thought to
advance themselves, and to bring their trumpery into estimation, they
have lost the little rule which they had over that people, and are
confounded, and their religion brought to disdain. Thus God beateth
down those who exalt themselves above measure, and maketh his
adversaries to fall into the pits which they themselves have made.
Let us pray unto him therefore, that it would please him likewise to
stretch out his puissant arm at this day to maintain his poor church
now afflicted, and to confound all the devices of Satan and his
members, to the advancement of his glory and kingdom.

The conclusion of the story of Merindol and Cabriers.

     And thus hast thou, Christian reader! for thy erudition and
comfort, the story and doings discoursed concerning these two
countries, both of Provence and also of Piedmont, the one being
subject to the dominion of France, the other belonging to the duke of
Savoy; in which two aforesaid regions and countries, how long the
gospel of Christ hath continued, (even from the time of the first
Waldenses,) the history itself declareth.

     Furthermore, what injuries and wrongs have been done against
them for the gospel's sake, what rigour and cruelty hath been showed
of the adversary part; again, for their part, what patience in their
suffering, what constancy in their doctrine, what truth in their
words, and simplicity in their deeds, what obedience towards their
magistrates, and faith towards God, they have used; and finally, how
miraculously and mightily God hath fought for his people, and
confounded the enemies, the said history may give thee full knowledge
and experience.

     Wherein this thou hast moreover, for thy more learning, to note
and consider with thyself, besides many other memorable things in
this story contained, how unwilling this people were at first, and
what remorse of conscience they had for their obedience towards their
magistrates, to lift up any hand or finger for their own defence. And
therefore many of them being slain and cruelly murdered, as willingly
offering their throats without any resistance to the cruel hands of
their enemies, the rest were compelled to flee into the mountains,
being spoiled of house, victual, and weapon, only to save their poor
lives with fleeing (which otherwise they would not with resisting)
into rocks and caves, thinking there rather to perish by famine, than
to use that defence for themselves, which nature giveth to every
brute beast to help itself, as it may, against violence and injury.
Yet these poor Waldois, refusing all resistance, and laying down
their own weapons, for obedience' sake, yea, not lifting up their own
hands to defend their own heads, only used the poor shift of fleeing
from their enemies, till at length the rage of those bloody
persecutors, satisfied with no blood, nor contented with any reason,
ceased not still most furiously to infest them, yea, to take also the
mountains from them, who had taken from them their houses before;
neither yet permitting them to live with the wild beasts in the
desert, who could not live in their towns at home; till at length, by
extreme necessity, the providence of God so working with them, they
were compelled to turn their faces, and to take those weapons which
the ground gave into their hands. And with these stones so
marvellously the God of hosts wrought for his people, that they beat,
vanquished, and overthrew their adversaries; they confounded their
pride, they abated their malice, and at last stayed the intolerable
rage of their persecution. So mercifully and victoriously the Lord
God Omnipotent fought with his people, or rather for his people,
(they but turning almost their faces to their enemies,) no otherwise
than he fought in times past with Joshua against the heathen, with
the Israelites against the Philistines, with the Maccabees against
Antiochus and the Syrians.

     This history, carrying with it a true narration of things done
in the said country of Piedmont, and written as it seemeth by certain
of the ministers who were at the doing thereof, with the like faith
and simplicity we have collected, partly out of the Italian, and
partly out of the French tongue; for in both languages it is written
although; in the French tongue it is much more largely discoursed,
which book most principally herein we have followed.

     Now that we have finished these foreign histories, concerning
such matters as have been passed in other realms and nations of
Germany, Italy, Spain, France, and Savoy; consequently it remaineth,
after this digression, to return and reduce our story again to our
own country matters here done and passed at home, after that first we
shall have added one foreign story more concerning the martyrdom of a
Christian Jew, who suffered about these years in Constantinople,
among the Turks, in this wise as followeth: 

The story of a Christian Jew martyred by the Turks at Constantinople,
A.D. 1528.

     To these foreign martyrs aforesaid we will adjoin the history
of a certain Jew, who, A.D. 1528, dwelling in the city of
Constantinople, and there receiving the sacrament of baptism, was
converted, and became a good Christian. When the Turks understood
hereof, they were vehemently exasperated against him, that he,
forsaking his Jewishness, should be regenerated to the faith of
Christ:  and fearing lest his conversion should be a detriment to
their Mahometical law, they sought means how to put him to death,
which in a short time after they accomplished; and, for the greater
infamy to be done to the man, they cast his dead corpse into the
streets, commanding that no man should be so hardy as to bury the
same.

     Wherein the marvellous glory and power of Christ appeared; for
the dead corpse, lying so by the space of nine days in the midst of
the streets, retained so its native colour, and was so fresh, without
any kind of filthiness or corruption, and also not without a certain
pleasant and delectable scent or odour, as if it had been lately
slain, or rather not slain at all, which when the Turks beheld, they
were thereat marvellously astonished; and being greatly afraid, they
themselves took it up, and carried it to a place near, without the
town, and buried it.

The conclusion.

     Having thus comprehended the troubles and persecutions of such
godly saints, and blessed martyrs, which have suffered in other
foreign nations above mentioned, here now ending with them, and
beginning the eighth book, we are (God willing) to return again to
our own matters, and to prosecute such acts and records, as to our
own country of England do appertain; in the process whereof; among
many other things, may appear the marvellous work of God's power and
mercy, in suppressing and banishing out of this realm the long-
usurped supremacy of the pope; also in subverting and overthrowing
the houses of monks and friars, with divers other matters
appertaining to the reformation of Christ's true church and religion.
All which things, as they have been long wished and greatly groaned
for in times past by many godly learned men, so much more ought we
now to rejoice and give God thanks, seeing these days of reformation
which God hath given us. If John Huss, or good Jerome of Prague, or
John Wickliff before them both, or William Brute, Thorpe, Swinderby,
or the Lord Cobham; if Zisca with all the company of the Bohemians;
if the Earl Reimond, with all the Toulousians; if the Waldois, or the
Albigenses, with infinite others, had either been in these our times
now, or else had seen then this ruin of the pope, and revealing of
antichrist, which the Lord now hath dispensed unto us, what joy and
triumph would they have made! Wherefore now, beholding that thing
which they so long time have wished for, let us not think the benefit
to be small, but render therefore most humble thanks to the Lord our
God, who by his mighty power, and the brightness of his word, hath
revealed this great enemy of his so manifestly to the eyes of all
man, who before was hid in the church so colourably, that almost few
Christians could espy him. For who would ever have judged or
suspected in his mind, that the bishop of Rome (commonly received,
and believed, almost of all men, to be the vicar and vicegerent of
Christ here in earth) to be antichrist, and the great adversary of
God, whom St. Paul so expressly prophesieth of, in these latter days
to be revealed by the brightness of the Lord's coming, as all men
now, for the most part, may see it is come to pass? Wherefore to the
Lord, and Father of lights, who revealeth all things in his due time,
be praise and glory for ever. Amen.



THE EIGHTH BOOK,
PERTAINING TO THE LAST THREE HUNDRED YEARS FROM THE LOOSING OUT OF
SATAN.
CONTINUING THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH MATTERS APPERTAINING TO BOTH
STATES, AS WELL ECCLESIASTICAL, AS CIVIL AND TEMPORAL.
163. THE HISTORY OF SEVEN GODLY MARTYRS BURNT AT COVENTRY.

Mistress Smith, widow; Robert Hatchets, a shoemaker; Archer, a
shoemaker; Hawkins, a shoemaker; Thomas Bond, a shoemaker; Wrigsham,
a glover; Landsdale, a hosier, at Coventry, A.D. 1519. Their
persecutors:  Simon Mourton, the bishop's sumner; also the bishop of
Coventry, and Friar Stafford, warden.
Illustration:  The Seven Martyrs

     THE principal cause of the apprehension of these persons, was 
for teaching their children and family the Lord's Prayer and Ten
Commandments in English, for which they were, upon Ash Wednesday,
taken and put in prison, some in places under ground, some in
chambers and other places about, till Friday following.

     Then they were sent to a monastery called Mackstock Abbey, six
miles from Coventry; during which time their children were sent for
to the Grey Friars in Coventry, before the warden of the said friars,
called Friar Stafford; who straitly examining them of their belief,
and what heresies their fathers had taught them, charged them, upon
pain of suffering such death as their fathers should, in no wise to
meddle any more with the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and Commandments
in English.

     Which done, upon Palm Sunday the fathers of these children were
brought back again to Coventry, and there, the week next before
Easter, (because most of them had borne faggots in the same city
before,) were condemned for relapse to be burned.

     Only Mistress Smith was dismissed for that present, and sent
away. And because it was in the evening, being somewhat dark, as she
should go home, the aforesaid Simon Mourton, the sumner, offered
himself to go home with her. Now as he was leading her by the arm,
and heard the rattling of a scroll within her sleeve; "Yea," said he,
"what have ye here?" And so took it from her, and espied that it was
the Lord's Prayer, the Articles of the Faith, and the Ten
Commandments in English. Which when the wretched sumner understood;
"Ah sirrah!" said he, "come, as good now as another time: " and so
brought her back again to the bishop, where she was immediately
condemned, and so burned with the six men before named, the fourth of
April, in a place thereby, called The Little Park, A.D. 1519.

Robert Silkeb, at Coventry, A.D. 1521.

     In the same number of these Coventry men above rehearsed was
also Robert Silkeb, who, at the apprehension of these, as is above
recited, fled away, and for that time escaped. But about two years
after he was taken again, and brought to the said city of Coventry,
where he was also burned the morrow after he came thither, which was
about the thirteenth day of January, A.D. 1521.

     Thus, when these were despatched, immediately the sheriffs went
to their houses, and took all their goods and cattle to their own
use, not leaving their wives and children any parcel thereof, to help
themselves withal. And forasmuch as the people began to grudge
somewhat at the cruelty showed, and at the unjust death of these
innocent martyrs, the bishop, with his officers and priests, caused
it to be noised abroad by their tenants, servants, and farmers, that
they were not burned for having the Lord's Prayer and the
Commandments in English, but because they did eat flesh on Fridays
and other fasting days; which neither could be proved either before
their death or after, nor yet was any such matter greatly objected to
them in their examinations. The witnesses of this history be yet
alive, which both saw them and knew them; of whom one is by name
Mother Hall, dwelling now in Bagington, two miles from Coventry:  by
whom also this is testified of them, that they, above all other in
Coventry, pretended most show of worship and devotion at the holding
up of the sacrament; whether to colour the matter, or no, it is not
known. This is certain, that in godliness of life they differed from
all the rest of the city; neither in their occupying would they use
any oath, nor could abide it in them that occupied with them.



164. PATRICK HAMILTON

Patrick Hamilton, at St. Andrews in Scotland, A.D. 1527. His
persecutors were, James Be-ton, archbishop of St. Andrews; Master
Hugh Spens, dean of divinity in the university of St. Andrew; Master
John Weddel, rector of the university; James Simpson, official;
Thomas Ramsay, canon, and dean of the abbey of St. Andrew; Allane
Meldrum, canon; John Greson, principal of the Black Friars; John
Dillidaff, warden of the Grey Friars; Martin Balbur, lawyer; John
Spens, lawyer; Alexander Yong, bachelor of divinity, canon; John
Annand, canon; Friar Alexander Campbel, prior of the Black Friars,
&c.

     Patrick Hamilton, a Scotchman born of high and noble stock, and
of the king's blood, young, and of flourishing age, and excellent
towardness, of twenty-three years, called abbot of Ferme, first
coming out of his country with three companions to seek godly
learning, went to the university of Marburg in Germany, which
university was then newly erected by Philip, landgrave of Hess, where
he, using conference and familiarity with learned men, especially
with Francis Lambert, so profited in knowledge and mature judgment in
matters of religion, that he, through the incitation of the said
Lambert, was the first in all that university of Marburg which
publicly did set up conclusions there, to be disputed of, concerning
faith and works; arguing also no less learnedly than fervently upon
the same. What those propositions and conclusions were, partly in his
treatise hereafter following, called Patrick's Places, may appear.

     Thus the ingenious wit of this learned Patrick, increasing
daily more and more in knowledge, and inflamed with godliness, at
length began to revolve with himself touching his return into his
country, being desirous to impart unto his countrymen some fruit of
the understanding which he had received abroad. Whereupon, persisting
in his godly purpose, he took one of the three whom he brought out of
Scotland, and so returned home without any longer delay; where he,
not sustaining the miserable ignorance and blindness of that people,
after he had valiantly taught and preached the truth, and refelled
their abuses, was first accused of heresy, and afterwards, constantly
and stoutly sustaining the quarrel of God's gospel against the high
priest and archbishop of St. Andrews, named James Be-ton, was cited
to appear before him and his college of priests, the first day of
March, A.D. 1527. But he, being not only forward in knowledge, but
also ardent in spirit, not tarrying for the hour appointed, prevented
the time, and came very early in the morning, before he was looked
for; and there mightily disputing against them, when he could not by
the Scriptures he convicted, by force he was oppressed. And so the
sentence of condemnation being given against him, the same day after
dinner, in all the hot haste, he was had away to the fire, and there
burned (the king being yet but a child):  which thing made the bishops
more bold. And thus was this noble Hamelton, the blessed servant of
God, without all just cause, made away by cruel adversaries, yet not
without great fruit to the church of Christ; for the grave testimony
of his blood left the verity and truth of God more fixed and
confirmed in the hearts of many, than ever could after be plucked
away:  insomuch that divers afterwards, standing in his quarrel,
sustained also the like martyrdom, as hereafter (Christ willing)
shall appear, as place and time shall require.

     In the mean season we think good to express here his articles,
and order of his process, as we received them from Scotland, out of
the registers.

     The articles and opinions objected against Master Patrick
Hamilton, by James Beton, archbishop of St. Andrews.

     "That man hath no free-will.

     "That there is no purgatory.

     "That the holy patriarchs were in heaven before Christ's
passion.

     "That the pope hath no power to loose and bind; neither any
pope had that power after St. Peter.

     "That the pope is antichrist, and that every priest hath the
power that the pope hath.

     "That Master Patrick Hamilton was a bishop.

     "That it is not necessary to obtain any bulls from any bishop.

     "That the vow of the pope's religion is a vow of wickedness.

     "That the pope's laws be of no strength.

     "That all Christians, worthy to be called Christians, do know
that they be in the state of grace.

     "That none be saved, but they are before predestinate.

     "Whosoever is in deadly sin, is unfaithful.

     "That God is the cause of sin, in this sense, that is, that he
withdraweth his grace from men, whereby they sin.

     "That it is devilish doctrine, to enjoin to any sinner actual
penance for sin.

     "That the said Master Patrick himself doubteth whether all
children, departing incontinent after their baptism, are saved or
condemned.

     "That auricular confession is not necessary to salvation."

     These articles above written were given in, and laid against
Master Hamilton, and inserted in their registers, for the which also
he was condemned, by them that hated him, to death. But other learned
men, which communed and reasoned with him, do testify, that these
articles following were the very articles, for which he suffered.

     "I. Man hath no free-will.

     "II. A man is only justified by faith in Christ.

     "III. A man, so long as he liveth, is not without sin.

     "IV. He is not worthy to be called a Christian, who believeth
not that he is in grace.

     "V. A good man doth good works:  good works do not make a good
man.

     "VI. An evil man bringeth forth evil works; evil works, being
faithfully repented, do not make an evil man.

     "VII. Faith, hope, and charity be so linked together, that one
of them cannot be without another in one man, in this life."

     And as touching the other articles whereupon the doctors gave
their judgments, as divers do report, he was not accused of them
before the bishop; albeit in private disputation he affirmed and
defended the most of them. Here followeth the sentence pronounced
against him.

     "Christi nomine invocato:  We, James, by the mercy of God,
archbishop of St. Andrews, primate of Scotland, with the counsel,
decree, and authority of the most reverend fathers in God, and lords,
abbots, doctors of theology, professors of the Holy Scripture, and
masters of the university, assisting us for the time, sitting in
judgment within our metropolitan church of St. Andrew, in the cause
of heretical pravity, against Master Patrick Hamilton, abbot or
pensionary of Ferme, being summoned to appear before us, to answer to
certain articles affirmed, taught, and preached by him, and so
appearing before us, and accused, the merits of the cause being
ripely weighed, discussed, and understood by faithful inquisition
made in Lent last past:  we have found the same Master Patrick many
ways infamed with heresy, disputing, holding, and maintaining divers
heresies of Martin Luther, and his followers, repugnant to our faith,
and which is already condemned by general councils, and most famous
universities. And he being under the same infamy, we decreeing before
him to be summoned and accused upon the premises, he, of evil mind,
(as may be presumed,) passed to other parts forth of the realm,
suspected and noted of heresy. And being lately returned, not being
admitted, but of his own head, without licence or privilege, hath
presumed to preach wicked heresy.

     "We have found also, that he hath affirmed, published, and
taught divers opinions of Luther, and wicked heresies, after that he
was summoned to appear before us, and our council:  That man hath no
free-will:  that man is in sin so long as he liveth:  that children,
incontinent after their baptism, are sinners:  all Christians that be
worthy to be called Christians, do know that they are in grace:  that
no man is justified by works, but by faith only:  good works make not
a good man, but a good man doth make good works:  that faith, hope,
and charity are so knit, that he that hath the one, hath the rest,
and he that wanteth the one of them, wanteth the rest, &c., with
divers other heresies and detestable opinions; and hath persisted so
obstinate in the same, that by no counsel nor persuasion he may be
drawn therefrom to the way of our right faith.

     "All these premises being considered, we, having God and the
integrity of our faith before our eyes, and following the counsel and
advice of the professors of the Holy Scripture, men of laws, and
other assisting us for the time, do pronounce, determine, and declare
the said Master Patrick Hamilton, for his affirming, confessing, and
maintaining of the aforesaid heresies, and his pertinacity, (they
being condemned already by the church, general councils, and most
famous universities,) to be a heretic, and to have an evil opinion of
the faith; and therefore to be condemned and punished, like as we
condemn and define him to be punished, by this our sentence
definitive; depriving, and sentencing him to be deprived, of all
dignities, honours, orders, offices, and benefices of the church; and
therefore do judge and pronounce him to be delivered over to the
secular power, to be punished, and his goods to be confiscated.

     "This our sentence definitive was given and read at our
metropolitan church of St. Andrew, the last day of the month of
February, A.D. 1527, being present the most reverend fathers in
Christ, and lords, Gawand, bishop of Glasgow; George, bishop of
Dunkeld; John, bishop of Brechin; William, bishop of Dunblane;
Patrick, prior of St. Andrews; David, abbot of Abirbrothoke; George,
abbot of Dunfermline; Alexander, abbot of Caunbuskineth; Henry, abbot
of Lendors; John, prior of Peterweme; the dean and subdean of
Glasgow; Master Hugh Spens, Thomas Ramsay, Allane Meldrum, &c.

     "In the presence of the clergy and the people," &c.

     After the condemnation and martyrdom of this true saint of God
were despatched by the bishops and doctors of Scotland, the rulers
and doctors of the university of Louvain, hearing thereof, received
such joy and consolation at the shedding of that innocent blood, that
for the abundance of heart they could not stay their pen to utter
condign thanks; applauding and triumphing, in their letters sent to
the aforesaid bishop of St. Andrews and doctors of Scotland, at the
worthy and famous deservings of their achieved enterprise in that
behalf:  as by the tenor of their said letter may appear, which here
followeth: 

     "Your excellent virtue, most honourable bishop, hath so
deserved, that albeit we be far distant both by sea and land, without
conjunction of familiarity, yet we desire with all our hearts to
thank you for your worthy deed, by whose works that true faith, which
not long ago was tainted with heresy, not only remaineth unhurt, but
also is more confirmed. For as our dear friend Master Alexander
Galoway, canon of Aberdeen, hath showed us the presumption of the
wicked heretic, Patrick Hamilton, which is expressed in this your
example, in that you have cut off, when there was no hope of
amendment, &c.

     "The which thing, as it is thought commendable to us, so the
manner of the proceeding was no less pleasant, that the matter was
performed by so great consent of so many states, as of the clergy,
nobility, and vulgar people; not rashly, but most prudently, the
order of law being in all points observed. We have seen the sentence
which ye pronounced, and always do approve the same, not doubting but
that the articles which be inserted are erroneous:  so that whosoever
will defend for a truth any one of the same, with pertinacity, should
be esteemed an enemy to the faith, and an adversary to the Holy
Scripture. And albeit one or two of them appear to be without error,
to them that will consider only the bare words; as for example, "Good
works make not a good man, but a good man worketh good works;" yet
there is no doubt but they contain a Lutheran sense, which in a
manner they signify; to wit, that works done after faith and
justification, make not a man the better, nor are worthy of any
reward before God. Believe not that this example shall have place
only among you, for there shall be those among extern nations who
shall imitate the same, &c.

     "Certainly ye have given us great courage, so that now we
acknowledge your university, which was founded according to the
example of our university of Louvain, to be equal to ours, or else
above; and would God occasion were offered of testifying our minds
toward you. In the mean time, let us labour with one consent, that
the ravening wolves may be expelled from the sheepfold of Christ,
while we have time. Let us study to preach to the people more
learnedly hereafter, and more wisely. Let us have inquisitors and
espiers of books, containing that doctrine, especially that are
brought in from far countries, whether by apostate monks, or by
merchants, the most suspected kind of men in these days. It is said
that since Scotland first embraced the Christian faith, it was never
defiled with any heresy. Persevere therefore, being moved thereunto
by the example of England, your next neighbour, which in this most
troublous time is not changed, partly by the working of the bishops,
among the which Roffensis hath showed himself an evangelical Phœnix,
and partly of the king, declaring himself to be another Matthias of
the new law, pretermitting nothing that may defend the law of his
realm; the which if your most renowned king of Scotland will follow,
he shall purchase to himself eternal glory. Further, as touching the
condign commendation due for your part, most reverend bishop! in this
behalf, it shall not be the least of your praise, that these heresies
have been extinct some time in Scotland, you being primate of
Scotland, and principal author thereof:  albeit that they also which
have assisted you, are not to be defrauded of their deserved praise;
as the reverend bishop of Glasgow, of whose erudition we have here
given us partly to understand, and also the reverend bishop of
Aberdeen, a stout defender of the faith, together with the rest of
the prelates, abbots, priors, and professors of Holy Scripture. Let
your reverend fatherhood take this little testificate of our duty
towards you in good part, whom we wish long and happily well to fare
in Christ.

"From Louvain, the year 1528, April 21st.
"By the masters and professors of Theology in the university of
Louvain."

     In the epistle of the Louvanian doctors, I shall not need,
gentle reader! to note unto thee, what a pernicious thing in a
commonwealth is blind ignorance, when it falleth into cruel hearts;
which may well be compared to a sword, put into the hands of one that
is both blind and mad. For as the blind man, having no sense to see
and judge, knoweth not whom he striketh; so the madman, being cruel
and furious, hath no compassion in sparing any. Whereupon it
happeneth many times with these men, as it did with the blind furious
Pharisees, that as they, having the sword of authority in their
hands, instead of malefactors and false prophets, slew the true
prophets of God, and at last crucified the King of glory; so these,
catholic Louvanians, and followers of their Messias of Rome, take in
their hands the sword of jurisdiction; who, neither seeing what to
spare, nor caring whom they smite, under the style and pretence of
heretics, murder and blaspheme, without mercy, the true preachers of
the gospel, and the holy anointed of the Lord.

     But to return to the matter again of Master Hamilton; here is
moreover to be observed, as a note worthy of memory, that in the year
of our Lord 1564, in the which year this present history was
collected in Scotland, there were certain faithful men of credit then
alive, who, being present the same time when Master Patrick Hamilton
was in the fire, heard him to cite and appeal the Black Friar called
Campbel, that accused him, to appear before the high God, as general
Judge of all men, to answer to the innocency of his death, and
whether his accusation was just or not, between that and a certain
day of the next month, which he there named. Moreover, by the same
witness it is testified, that the said friar died immediately before
the said day came, without remorse of conscience that he had
persecuted the innocent; by the example whereof divers of the people
the same time much mused, and firmly believed the doctrine of the
aforesaid Master Hamilton to be good and just.



165. MASTER PATRICK'S PLACES

     Hereunto I thought good to adjoin a certain godly and
profitable treatise of the said Master Patrick Hamilton, written
first by him in Latin, and afterwards translated by John Frith into
English; which he names "Patrick's Places;" not unprofitable, in my
mind, to be seen and read of all men, for the pure and comfortable
doctrine contained in the same, as not only by the treatise itself
may appear, but also by the preface of the said John Frith, prefixed
before, which also I thought not inconvenient to insert with the
same, as here followeth: 

John Frith unto the Christian reader.

     "Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in
these last days and perilous times hath stirred up in all countries
witnesses unto his Son, to testify the truth unto the unfaithful, to
save at least some from the snares of antichrist, which lead to
perdition, as ye may here perceive by that excellent and well learned
young man, Patrick Hamilton, born in Scotland of a noble progeny: 
who, to testify the truth, sought all means, and took upon him
priesthood, (even as Paul circumcised Timothy, to win the weak Jews,)
that he might be admitted to preach the pure word of God.
Notwithstanding, as soon as the chamberlain and other bishops of
Scotland had perceived that the light began to shine, which disclosed
their falsehood that they conveyed in darkness, they laid hands on
him, and because he would not deny his Saviour Christ at their
instance, they burnt him to ashes. Nevertheless God of his bounteous
mercy (to publish to the whole world what a man these monsters have
murdered) hath reserved a little treatise, made by this Patrick,
which, if ye list, ye may call Patrick's Places; for it treateth
exactly of certain commonplaces, which known, ye have the pith of all
divinity. This treatise I have turned into the English tongue, to the
profit of my nation:  to whom I beseech God to give light, that they
may espy the deceitful paths of perdition, and return to the right
way, which leadeth to life everlasting, Amen."

The doctrine of the law.

     "The law is a doctrine that biddeth good, and forbiddeth evil,
as the commandments do specify here following: 

     I. Thou shalt worship but one God.

     II. Thou shalt make thee no image to worship it.

     III. Thou shalt not swear by his name in vain.

     IV. Hold the sabbath day holy.

     V. Honour thy father and thy mother.

     VI. Thou shalt not kill.

     VII. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

     VIII. Thou shalt not steal.

     IX. Thou shalt not bear false witness.

     X. Thou shalt not desire aught that belongeth to thy neighbour.

     "All these commandments are briefly comprised in these two,
Matt. xxii. 37, Love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind:  this is the first, and great
commandment. The second is like unto this, that is, Love thy
neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hangeth all the law
and the prophets."

Certain general propositions proved by the Scripture.

The First Proposition.

     "He that loveth God loveth his neighbour.

     "This proposition is proved, 1 John iv. 20, If a man say, I
love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar. He that loveth not
his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not
seen?"

The Second Proposition.

     "He that loveth his neighbour as himself, keepeth all the
commandments of God.

     "This proposition is proved:  Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, even so do to them:  for this is the law and the
prophets. He that loveth his neighbour, fulfilleth the law. Thou
shalt not commit adultery:  thou shalt not kill:  thou shalt not steal: 
thou shalt not bear false witness:  thou shalt not desire. And if
there be any other commandment, all are comprehended in this saying,
Love thy neighbour as thyself. All the law is fulfilled in one word,
that is, Love thy neighbour as thyself."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that loveth his neighbour, keepeth all the commandments of
God.

     "He that loveth God, loveth his neighbour.

     "Ergo, he that loveth God, keepeth all the commandments of
God."

The Third Proposition.

     "He that hath faith, loveth God.

     "My Father loveth you, because you love me, and I believe that
I come of God."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that keepeth the commandments of God, hath the love of God.

     "He that hath faith, keepeth the commandments of God.

     "Ergo, he that hath faith, loveth God."

The Fourth Proposition.

     "He that keepeth one commandment of God, keepeth them all.

     "This proposition is confirmed:  It is impossible for a man
without faith to please God; that is, to keep any one of God's
commandments, as he should do. Then whosoever keepeth any one
commandment hath faith."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that hath faith keepeth all the commandments of God.

     "He that keepeth any one commandment of God, hath faith.

     "Ergo, he that keepeth one commandment keepeth them all.

The Fifth Proposition.

     "He that keepeth not all the commandments of God, keepeth not
one of them."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that keepeth one commandment of God, keepeth all.

     "Ergo, he that keepeth not all the commandments of God, keepeth
not one of them."

The Sixth Proposition.

     "It is not in our power to keep any one of the commandments of
God."

ARGUMENT.

     "It is impossible to keep any of the commandments of God,
without grace.

     "It is not in our power to have grace.

     "Ergo, it is not in our power to keep any of the commandments
of God.

     "And even so may you reason concerning the Holy Ghost and
faith, forasmuch as neither without them we are able to keep any of
the commandments of God, neither yet be they in our power to have:  It
is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth."

The Seventh Proposition.

     "The law was given us to show our sin.

     "By the law cometh the knowledge of sin. I knew not what sin
meant, but through the law; for I had not known what lust had meant,
except the law had said, Thou shalt not lust. Without the law sin was
dead, that is, it moved me not, neither wist I that it was sin, which
notwithstanding was sin, and forbidden by the law."

The Eighth Proposition.

     "The law biddeth us do that thing which is impossible for us."

ARGUMENT.

     "The keeping of the commandments is to us impossible.

     "The law commandeth to us the keeping of the commandments.

     "Ergo, the law commandeth unto us that is impossible.

     "Objection. But thou wilt say, Wherefore doth God bid us do
what is impossible for us?

     "Answer. I answer, To make thee know that thou art but evil,
and that there is no remedy to save thee in thine own hand:  and that
thou mayest seek remedy at some other; for the law doth nothing else
but command thee."

The doctrine of the gospel.

     "The gospel is as much as to say, in our tongue,good tidings;
like as these be hereunder following, and such others, Luke ii. 10.
"Christ is the Saviour of the world, John iv. 42.
"Christ is the Saviour, Luke ii. 11.
"Christ died for us, Rom. v. 6.
"Christ died for our sins, Rom. iv. 25.
"Christ bought us with his blood, 1 Pet. i. 19.
"Christ washed us with his blood, Rev. i. 5.
"Christ offered himself for us, Gal. i. 4.
"Christ bare our sins on his back, Isa. liii. 6.
"Christ came into this world to save sinners, 1 Tim. i. 15.
"Christ came into this world to take away our sins, 1 John iii. 5.
"Christ was the price that was given for us and our sins, 1 Tim. ii.
6.
"Christ was made debtor for us, Rom. viii. 12.
"Christ hath paid our debt, for he died for us, Col. ii. 14.
"Christ made satisfaction for us and our sins, 1 Cor. vii. 23.
"Christ is our righteousness, 1 Cor. i. 30.
"Christ is our sanctification, 1 Cor. i. 30.	
"Christ is our redemption, 1 Cor. i. 30.
"Christ is our peace, Eph. ii. 14.
"Christ hath pacified the Father of heaven for us, Rom. v. 1.
"Christ is ours and all his, 1 Cor. iii. 23.
"Christ hath delivered us from the law, from the devil, and from
hell, Col. ii. 14-17.
"The Father of heaven hath forgiven us our sins, for Christ's sake, 1
John i. 9.
"(Or any such other, like to the same, which declare unto us the
mercy of God.) "

The nature and office of the law and of the gospel.

"The law showeth us our sin, Rom. iii. 9-20.
"The gospel showeth us remedy for it, John i. 29.
"The law showeth us our condemnation, Rom. vii. 23, 24.
"The gospel showeth us our redemption, Eph. i.
"The law is the word of ire, Rom. iv. 15.
"The gospel is the word of grace, Acts xx. 24.
"The law is the word of despair, Deut. xxvii. 15-26.
"The gospel is the word of comfort, Luke ii. 10.
"The law is the word of unrest, Rom. vii. 24.
"The gospel is the word of peace, Eph. vi. 15."

A disputation between the law and the gospel; where is shown the
difference or contrariety between them both.

     "The law saith, Pay thy debt.

     "The gospel saith, Christ hath paid it.

     "The law saith, Thou art a sinner; despair, and thou shalt be
damned.

     "The gospel saith, Thy sins are forgiven thee, be of good
comfort, thou shalt be saved!

     "The law saith, Make amends for thy sins.

     "The gospel saith, Christ hath made it for thee. "The law
saith, The Father of heaven is angry with thee.

     The gospel saith, Christ hath pacified him with his blood.

     "The law saith, Where is thy righteousness, goodness, and 
satisfaction?

     "The gospel saith, Christ is thy righteousness, thy goodness,
thy satisfaction.

     "The law saith, Thou art bound and obliged to me, to the devil,
and to hell.

     "The gospel saith, Christ hath delivered thee from them all."

The doctrine of faith.

     "Faith is to believe God, like as Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness.

     "To believe God, is to believe his word, and to account it
true, that he saith.

     "He that believeth not God's word, believeth not God himself.

     "He that believeth not God's word, he counteth him false and a
liar, and believeth not that he may and will fulfil his word; and so
he denieth both the might of God, and God himself."

The Ninth Proposition.

     "Faith is the gift of God."

ARGUMENT.

     "Every good thing is the gift of God. "Faith is good.

     "Ergo, faith is the gift of God.

The Tenth Proposition.

     "Faith is not in our power."

ARGUMENT.

     "The gift of God is not in our power.

     "Faith is the gift of God.

     "Ergo, faith is not in our power."

The Eleventh Proposition.

     "He that lacketh faith, cannot please God.

     "Without faith it is impossible to please God; all that cometh
not of faith is sin; for without faith can no man please God."

INDUCTION.

     "He that lacketh faith, trusteth not God:  he that trusteth not
God, trusteth not his word:  he that trusteth not his word, holdeth
him false and a liar:  he that holdeth him false and a liar,
believethnot that he may do that he promiseth, and so denieth he that
he is God.

     "Ergo, he that lacketh faith cannot please God.

     "If it were possible for any man to do all the good deeds that
ever were done either by men or angels, yet being in this case, it is
impossible for him to please God."

The Twelfth Proposition.

     "All that is done in faith, pleaseth God.

     "Right is the word of God, and all his works in faith.

     "Lord, thine eyes look to faith:  that is as much as to say,
Lord, thou delightest in faith."

The Thirteenth Proposition.

     "He that hath faith is just and good."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that is a good tree, bringing forth good fruit, is just and
good.

     "He that hath faith, is a good tree bringing forth good fruit.

     "Ergo, he that hath faith, is just and good."

The Fourteenth Proposition.

     "He that hath faith, and believeth God, cannot displease him."

INDUCTION.

     "He that hath faith, believeth God; he that believeth God,
believeth his word; he that believeth his word, wotteth well that he
is true and faithful, and may not lie, knowing that he both may, and
will, fulfil his word.

     "Ergo, he that hath faith cannot displease God, neither can any
man do a greater honour to God, than to count him true."

OBJECTION.

     "Thou wilt then say, that theft, murder, adultery, and all
vices, please God."

ANSWER.

     "Nay verily, for they cannot be done in faith; for a good tree
beareth good fruit."

The Fifteenth Proposition.

     "Faith is a certainty or assuredness.

     "Faith is a sure confidence of things which are hoped for, and
certainty of things which are not seen.

     "The same Spirit certifieth our spirit, that we are the
children of God. Moreover, he that hath faith, wotteth well that God
will fulfil his word:  whereby it appeareth, that faith is a certainty
or assuredness.

A man is justified by faith.

     "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness.

     "We suppose therefore, that a man is justified by faith,
without the deeds of the law.

     "He that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the
wicked, his faith is counted to him for righteousness.

     "The just man liveth by his faith.

     "We wot that a man is not justified by the deeds of the law,
but by the faith of Jesus Christ; and we believe in Jesus Christ,
that we may be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the deeds
of the law."

What is the faith of Christ?

     "The faith of Christ is to believe in him; that is, to believe
his word, and believe that he will help thee in all thy need, and
deliver thee from all evil.

     "Thou wilt ask me, What word? I answer, The gospel.

     "He that believeth in Christ shall be saved, Mark xvi. 16.

     "He that believeth the Son hath everlasting life, John iii. 15.

     "Verily I say unto you, He that believeth in me, hath
everlasting life, John vi. 47.

     "This I write unto you, that believe on the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, 1 John v. 13.

     "Thomas! because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed:  blessed
are they which have not seen, and yet have believed, John xx. 29.

     "To him gave all the prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of their sins,
Acts x. 43.

     "What must I do to be saved? The apostles answered, Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, Acts xvi. 30, 31.

     "If thou dost acknowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the
Lord, and believe with thine heart that God raised him from death,
thou shalt be safe, Rom. x. 9.

     "He that believeth not in Christ shall be condemned. He that
believeth not the Son shall never see life, but the ire of God bideth
upon him, John iii. 36.

     "The Holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, because they
believe not in me, John xvi. 9.

     "They that believe in Jesus Christ are the sons of God. Ye are
all the sons of God, because ye believe in Jesus Christ, 1 John iii.

     "He that believeth that Christ is the Son of God, is safe, John
iii. 30.

     "Peter said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God! Jesus
answered and said unto him, Happy artthou, Simon, the son of Jonas,
for flesh and blood hath not opened to thee that, but my Father that
is in heaven, Matt. xvi. 16, 17.

     "We have believed, and know that thou art Christ the Son of the
living God.

     "I believe that thou art Christ the Son of God, which should
come into the world, John xi. 27. "These things are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and that ye, in
believing, might have life through his name, John xx. 31.

     "I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Acts viii. 37."

The Sixteenth Proposition.

     "He that believeth the gospel, believeth God."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that believeth God's word, believeth God. "The gospel is
God's word.

     "Ergo, he that believeth the gospel, believeth God.

     "To believe the gospel is this:  that Christ is the Saviour of
the world, John vi. 29.

     "Christ is our Saviour, Luke ii. 11.

     "Christ bought us with his blood, Heb. xiii. 20; 1 Pet. i. 19;
Rev. v. 9.

     "Christ washed us with his blood, Rev. i. 5. "Christ offered
himself for us, Heb. ix. 25.

     "Christ bare our sins on his own back, &c., 1 Pet. ii. 24."

The Seventeenth Proposition.

     "He that believeth not the gospel believeth not God."

ARGUMENT.

     "He that believeth not God's word, believeth not God himself.

     "The gospel is God's word.

     "Ergo, he that believeth not the gospel, believeth not God
himself; and consequently, he that believeth not those things above
written, and such others, believeth not God."

The Eighteenth Proposition.

     "He that believeth the gospel, shall be safe.

     "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel unto every
creature:  he that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved; but he
that believeth not, shall be condemned, Mark xvi."

A comparison between Faith and Incredulity.

"Faith is the root of all good:  incredulity is the root of all evil.
"Faith maketh God and man good friends:  incredulity maketh them foes.
"Faith bringeth God and man together:  incredulity sundereth them.
"All that faith doth, pleaseth God:  all that incredulity doth,
displeaseth God.
"Faith only maketh a man good and righteous:  incredulity only maketh
him unjust and evil.
"Faith maketh a man a member of Christ:  incredulity maketh him a
member of the devil.
"Faith maketh a man the inheritor of heaven:  incredulity maketh him
inheritor of hell.
"Faith maketh a man the servant of God:  incredulity maketh him the
servant of the devil.
"Faith showeth us God to be a sweet Father:  incredulity showeth him a
terrible Judge.
"Faith holdeth stiff by the word of God:  incredulity wavereth here
and there.
"Faith counteth and holdeth God to be true:  incredulity holdeth him
false and a liar.
"Faith knoweth God:  incredulity knoweth him not.
"Faith loveth both God and his neighbour:  incredulity loveth neither
of them.
"Faith only saveth us:  incredulity only condemneth us.
"Faith extolleth God and his deeds:  incredulity extolleth herself and
her own deeds."

Of hope.

     "Hope is a trusty looking after the thing that is promised us
to come, as we hope after the everlasting joy, which Christ hath
promised unto all that believe in him."

We should put our hope and trust in God alone, and in no other thing.

     "It is better to trust in God and not in man, Psal. cxviii. 8.

     "He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool, Prov. xxviii. 26.

     "It is good to trust in God, and not in princes, Psal. cxviii.
9.

     "They shall be like unto the images which they make, and all
that trust in them, Psal. cxv. 8.

     "He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool, Prov. xxviii. 26.

     "Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, Jer. xvii. 5.

     "Bid the rich men of this world, that they trust not in their
unstable riches; but that they trust in the living God, I Tim. vi.
17.

     "It is hard for them that trust in money, to enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

     "Moreover we should trust in him only, that mayhelp us:  God
only may help us, therefore we should trust in him only.

     "Well are they that trust in God, and woe to them that trust
not in him.

     "Well is that man that trusteth in God, for God shall be his
trust.

     "They shall rejoice that trust in thee; they shall ever be
glad, and thou wilt defend them."

Of charity.

     "Charity is the love of thy neighbour. The rule of charity is
this:  Do as thou wouldst be done to:  for Christ holdeth all alike,
the rich, the poor, the friend and the foe, the thankful and
unthankful, the kinsman and stranger."

A comparison between faith, hope, and charity.

     "Faith cometh of the word of God; hope cometh of faith; and
charity springeth of them both.

     "Faith believeth the word; hope trusteth after that which is
promised by the word; charity doth good unto her neighbour, through
the love that she hath to God, and gladness that is within herself.

     "Faith looketh to God and his word; hope looketh unto his gift
and reward; charity looketh on her neighbour's profit.

     "Faith receiveth God; hope receiveth his reward; charity loveth
her neighbour with a glad heart, and that without any respect of
reward. "Faith pertaineth to God only; hope to his reward; and
charity to her neighbour."

The doctrine of works.

No manner of works make us righteous.

     "We believe that a man shall be justified without works, Rom.
iii.

     "No man is justified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ; and we believe in Jesus Christ, that we may he
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law;
for if righteousness come by the law, then died Christ in vain, Gal.
ii.

     "That no man is justified by the law is manifest; for a
righteous man liveth by his faith, but the law is not of faith, Acts
xvii.

     "Moreover, since Christ the Maker of heaven and earth, and all
that is therein, behoved to die for us, we are compelled to grant
that we were so far drowned and sunken in sin, that neither our
deeds, nor all the treasures that ever God made or might make, could
have holpen us out of them:  therefore no deeds or works may make us
righteous."

No works make us unrighteous.

     "If any evil works make us unrighteous, then the contrary works
should make us righteous. But it is proved that no works can make us
righteous:  therefore no works make us unrighteous."

Works make us neither good nor evil.

     "It is proved that works neither make us righteous nor
unrighteous:  therefore no works make us either good or evil. For
righteous and good are one thing, and unrighteous and evil likewise
one.

     "Good works make not a good man, nor evil works an evil man: 
but a good man bringeth forth good works, and an evil man evil works.

     "Good fruit maketh not the tree good, nor evil fruit the tree
evil:  but a good tree beareth good fruit, and an evil tree evil
fruit.

     "A good man cannot do evil works, nor an evil man good works: 
for a good tree cannot bear evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit.

     A man is good ere he do good works, and evil ere he do evil
works:  for the tree is good ere it bear good fruit, and evil ere it 
bear evil fruit."

     Every man, and the works of man, are either good or evil.

     "Every tree, and the fruits thereof, are either good or evil.
Either make ye the tree good, and the fruit good also, or else make
the tree evil, and the fruit of it likewise evil, Matt. xii. 23.

     "A good man is known by his works:  for a good man doth good
works, and an evil man evil works. Ye shall know them by their fruit;
for a good tree beareth good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit. A
man is likened to the tree, and his works to the fruit of the tree.

     "Beware of the false prophets, which come to you in sheep's
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves:  ye shall know them
by their fruits, Matt. vii. 15.

None of our works either save us or condemn us.

     "If works make us neither righteous nor unrighteous, then thou
wilt say, it maketh no matter what we do. I answer, If thou do evil,
it is a sure argument that thou art evil, and wantest faith. If thou
do good, it is an argument that thou art good, and hast faith; for a
good tree beareth good fruit, and an evil tree evil. Yet good fruit
makes not the tree good, nor evil fruit the tree evil; so that man is
good ere he do good deeds, and evil ere he do evil deeds."

The man is the tree, his works are the fruit.

     "Faith, maketh the good tree, and incredulity the evil tree: 
such a tree, such fruit; such a man, such works. For all things that
are done in faith, please God, and are good works; and all that are
done without faith, displease God, and are evil works.

     "Whosoever believeth or thinketh to be saved by his works,
denieth that Christ is his Saviour, that Christ died for him, and
that all things pertain to Christ. For how is he thy Saviour, if thou
mightest save thyself by thy works? or whereto should he die for
thee, if any works might have saved thee?

     "What is this to say, Christ died for thee? Verily, that thou
shouldst have died perpetually; and Christ, to deliver thee from
death, died for thee, and changed thy perpetual death into his own
death; for thou madest the fault, and he suffered the pain; and that,
for the love he had to thee before thou wast born, when thou hadst
done neither good nor evil.

     "Now, seeing he hath paid thy debt, thou needest not, neither
canst thou, pay it; but shouldst be damned if his blood were not. But
since he was punished for thee, thou shalt not be punished.

     "Finally, He hath delivered thee from thy condemnation and all
evil, and desireth nought of thee, but that thou wilt acknowledge
what he hath done for thee, and bear it in mind; and that thou
wouldst help others for his sake, both in word and deed, even as he
hath holpen thee for nought, and without reward.

     "Oh how ready would we be to help others, if we knew his
goodness and gentleness towards us; he is a good and a gentle Lord,
for he doth all for nought. Let us, I beseech you therefore, follow
his footsteps, whom all the world ought to praise and worship. Amen!
"

He that thinketh to be saved by his works calleth himself Christ: 

     "For he calleth himself the Saviour; which pertaineth to Christ
only.

     "What is a Saviour, but he that saveth? and he saith, I saved
myself; which is as much to say as, I am Christ; for Christ only is
the Saviour of the world."

We should do no good works for the intent to get the inheritance of
heaven, or remission of sin: 

     "For whosoever believeth to get the inheritance of heaven, or
remission of sin, through works, he believeth not to get the same for
Christ's sake; and they that believe not that their sins are forgiven
them, and that they shall be saved, for Christ's sake, they believe
not the gospel:  for the gospel saith, You shall be saved for Christ's
sake; your sins are forgiven for Christ's sake.

     "He that believeth not the gospel, believeth not God. So it
followeth, that those who believe to be saved by their works, or to
get remission of their sins by their own deeds, believe not God, but
account him as a liar, and so utterly deny him to be God.

OBJECTION.

     "Thou wilt say, Shall we then do no good deeds?"

ANSWER.

     "I say not so, but I say we should do no good works to the
intent to get the inheritance of heaven, or remission of sin. For if
we believe to get the inheritance of heaven through good works, then
we believe not to get it through the promise of God:  or if we think
to get remission of our sins by our deeds, then we believe not that
they are forgiven us, and so we count God a liar. For God saith, Thou
shalt have the inheritance of heaven for my Son's sake; thy sins are
forgiven thee for my Son's sake:  and you say it is not so, But I will
win it through my works.

     "Thus you see I condemn not good deeds, but I condemn the false
trust in any works; for all the works wherein a man putteth any
confidence, are therewith poisoned, and become evil. Wherefore thou
must do good works, but beware thou do them not to deserve any good
through them; for if thou do, thou receivest the good not as the
gifts of God, but as a debt to thee, and makest thyself fellow with
God, because thou wilt take nothing of him for nought. And what
needeth he any thing of thine, who giveth all things, and is not the
poorer? Therefore do nothing to him, but take of him, for he is a
gentle Lord; and with a gladder will giveth us all that we need, than
we can take it of him:  if then we want aught, let us blame ourselves.

     "Press not therefore to the inheritance of heaven through
presumption of thy good works; for if thou do, thou countest thyself
holy, and equal to God, because thou wilt take nothing of him for
nought; and so shalt thou fall as Lucifer fell for his pride."

FINIS.

Certain brief notes or declarations upon the aforesaid Places of
Master Patrick.

     "This little treatise of Master Patrick's Places, albeit in
quantity it be short, yet in effect it comprehendeth matter able to
fill large volumes, declaring to us the true doctrine of the law, of
the gospel, of faith, and of works, with the nature and properties,
and also the difference of the same:  which difference is thus to be
understood:  that in the cause of salvation, and in the office of
justifying, these are to be removed and separated asunder, the law
from the gospel, and faith from works:  otherwise, in the person that
is justified, and also in order of doctrine, they ought commonly to
go necessarily together.

     "Therefore, wheresoever any question or doubt riseth of
salvation, or our justifying before God, there the law and all good
works must be utterly excluded and stand apart, that grace may appear
free, the promise simple, and that faith may stand alone; which faith
alone, without law or works, worketh to every man particularly, his
salvation, through mere promise, and the free grace of God. This word
particularly, I add, for the particular certifying of every man's
heart, privately and peculiarly, that believeth in Christ. For as the
body of Christ is the cause efficient of the redemption of the whole
world in general; so is faith the instrumental cause, by which every
man applieth the said body of Christ particularly to his own
salvation. So that in the action and office of justification, both
law and works here be utterly secluded and exempted, as things having
nothing to do in this behalf. The reason is this, for seeing that all
our redemption universally springeth only from the body of the Son of
God crucified, then is there nothing that can stand us in stead, but
that only wherewith this body of Christ is apprehended. Now,
forasmuch as neither the law nor works, but faith only, is the thing
which apprehendeth the body and death of Christ, therefore faith only
is that matter which justifieth every soul before God, through the
strength of that object which it doth apprehend. For the object only
of our faith is the body of Christ, like as the brazen serpent was
the object only of the eyes of the Israelites' looking, and not of
their hands working:  by the strength of which object, through the
promise of God, immediately proceeded health to the beholders. So the
body of Christ, being the object of our faith, striketh righteousness
to our souls, not through working, but believing only.

     "Thus you see how faith, being the only eye of our soul,
standeth alone with her object in case of justifying; but yet,
nevertheless, in the body she standeth not alone:  for besides the
eye, there be also hands to work, feet to walk, ears to hear, and
other members more, every one convenient for the service of the body,
and yet there is none of them all that can see, but only the eye. So
in a Christian man's life, and in order of doctrine, there is the
law, there is repentance, there is hope, charity, and deeds of
charity; all which, in life and in doctrine, are joined, and
necessarily do concur together:  and yet, in the action of justifying,
there is nothing else in man, that hath any part or place, but only
faith apprehending the object, which is the body of Christ Jesus for
us crucified, in whom consisteth all the worthiness and fulness of
our salvation, by faith; that is, by our apprehending and receiving
of him:  according as it is written in John i. 12, "Whosoever received
him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God, even all such as
believed in his name," &c. Also in Isa. liii. 11, "This just servant
of mine, in the knowledge of him shall justify many, &c."

ARGUMENT.

     "Apprehending and receiving of Christ only maketh us justified
before God.

     "Christ only is apprehended and received by faith.

     "Ergo, faith only maketh us justified before God."

ARGUMENT.

     "Justification cometh only by apprehending and receiving of
Christ.

     "The law and works do nothing pertain to the apprehending of
Christ.

     "Ergo, the law and works pertain nothing to justification."

ARGUMENT.

     "Nothing which is unjust of itself, can justify us before God,
or help any thing to our justifying.

     "Every work we do, is unjust before God.

     "Ergo, no work that we do, can justify us before God, or help
any thing to our justifying."

ARGUMENT.

     "If works could any thing further our justification, then
should our works something profit us before God.

     "No works, do the best we can, do profit us before God.

     "Ergo, no works that we do, can any thing further our
justification."

ARGUMENT.

     "All that we can do with God, is only by Christ.

     "Our works and merits be not Christ, neither any part of him.

     "Ergo, our works and merits can do nothing with God."

ARGUMENT.

     "That which is the cause of condemnation, cannot be the cause
of justification." The law is the cause of condemnation.

     "Ergo, it is not the cause of justification."

A CONSEQUENT.

     "We are quit and delivered from the law.

     "Ergo, we are not quit and delivered by the law.

     "Forasmuch therefore as the truth of the Scripture, in express
words, hath thus included our salvation in faith only, we are
enforced necessarily to exclude all other causes and means in our
justification, and to make this difference between the law and the
gospel, between faith and works; affirming, with Scripture and the
word of God, that the law condemneth us, our works do not avail us,
and that faith in Christ only justifieth us. And this difference and
distinction ought diligently to be learned and retained of all
Christians; especially in conflict of conscience between the law and
the gospel, faith and works, grace and merits, promise and condition,
God's free election and man's free-will:  so that the light of the
free grace of God in our salvation may appear to all consciences, to
the immortal glory of God's holy name. Amen."

The order and difference of places.

     "The gospel and the law; Faith and works;

     "Grace and merits; Promise and condition;

     "God's free election and man's free-will."

     "The difference and repugnance of these aforesaid Places being
well noted and expended, it shall give no small light to every
faithful Christian, both to understand the Scriptures, to judge in
cases of conscience, and to reconcile such places in the Old and New
Testament as else may seem to repugn; according to the rule of St.
Augustine, saying, Make distinction of times, and thou shalt
reconcile the Scriptures, &c. Contrariwise, where men be not
perfectly in these places instructed to discern between the law and
the gospel, between faith and works, &c., so long they can never
rightly establish their minds in the free promises of God's grace,
but walk confusedly, without order, in all matters of religion;
example whereof we have too much in the Romish Church, who,
confounding these places together without distinction, following no
method, hath perverted the true order of Christian doctrine, and hath
obscured the sweet comfort and benefit of the gospel of Christ, not
knowing what the true use of the law, nor of the gospel, meaneth."

In the doctrine of the law three things to be noted.

     "In the law, therefore, three things are to be considered.
First, what is the true rigour and strength of the law, which is, to
require full and perfect obedience of the whole man, not only to
restrain his outward actions, but also his inward motions and
inclinations of will and affection, from the appetite of sin:  and
therefore saith St. Paul, The law is spiritual, but I am carnal, &c.
Whereupon riseth this proposition, That it is not in our nature and
power to fulfil the law. Item, the law commandeth that which is to us
impossible, &c.

     "The second thing to be noted in the doctrine of the law, is,
to consider the time and place of the law, what they be, and how far
they extend. For, as the surging seas have their banks and bars to
keep them in, so the law hath its times and limits, which it ought
not to pass. If Christ had not come and suffered, the time and
dominion of the law had been everlasting:  but now, seeing Christ hath
come, and hath died in his righteous flesh, the power of the law
against our sinful flesh doth cease. For the end of the law is
Christ; that is, the death of Christ's body is the death of the law
to all that believe in him:  so that whosoever repent of their sins,
and flee to the death and passion of Christ, the condemnation and
time of the law to them is expired. Wherefore this is to be
understood as a perpetual rule in the Scripture, that the law with
all his sentences and judgments, wheresoever they are written, either
in the Old Testament or in the New, do ever include a privy exception
of repentance and belief in Christ, to the which always it giveth
place, having there his end; and can proceed no further:  according as
St. Paul doth say, The law is our schoolmaster until Christ, that we
might be justified by faith.

     "Moreover, as the law hath his time how long to reign, so also
it hath his proper place, where to reign. By the reign of the law
here is meant the condemnation of the law:  for as the time of the law
ceaseth, when the faith of Christ, in a true repenting heart,
beginneth, so hath the law no place in such as be good and faithful;
that is, in sinners repenting and amending, but only in them which be
evil and wicked. Evil men here I call such, which, walking in sinful
flesh, are not yet driven by earnest repentance to flee to Christ for
succour. And therefore saith St. Paul, To the just man there is no
law set, but to the unjust and disobedient, &c. By the just man here
is meant, not he which never had disease, but he who, knowing his
disease, seeketh out the physician; and, being cured, keepeth himself
in health, as much as he may, from any more surfeits. Notwithstanding
he shall never so keep himself, but that his health (that is, his new
obedience) shall always remain frail and imperfect, and shall
continually need the physician. Where, by the way, these three things
are to be noted:  first, the sickness itself; secondly, the knowing of
the sickness; thirdly, the physician. The sickness is sin:  the
knowing of the sickness is repentance, which the law worketh:  the
physician is Christ. And therefore, although in remission of our sins
repentance is joined with faith, yet it is not the dignity or
worthiness of repentance, that causeth remission of sins, but only
the worthiness of Christ, whom faith only apprehendeth:  no more than
the feeling of the disease is the cause of health, but only the
physician. For else, when a man is cast and condemned by the law, it
is not repentance that can save or deserve life, but if his pardon
come, then is it the grace of the prince, and not his repentance,
that saveth.

     "The third point to be considered in the doctrine of the law,
is this:  that we mark well the end and purpose why the law is given;
which is, not to bring us to salvation, nor to work God's favour, nor
to make us good; but rather to declare and convict our wickedness,
and to make us feel the danger thereof, to this end and purpose, that
we, seeing our condemnation, and being in ourselves confounded, may
be driven thereby to have our refuge in Christ the Son of God, and to
submit ourselves to him, in whom only is to be found our remedy, and
in none other. And this end of the law ought discreetly to be
pondered by all Christians:  otherwise, they that consider not this
end and purpose of the law, fall into manifold errors and
inconveniences. First, they pervert all order of doctrine:  secondly,
they seek that in the law which the law cannot give:  thirdly, they
are not able to comfort themselves, nor other:  fourthly, they keep
men's souls in an uncertain doubt and dubitation of their salvation: 
fifthly, they obscure the light of God's grace:  sixthly, they are
unkind to God's benefits:  seventhly, they are injurious to Christ's
passion, and enemies to his cross:  eighthly, they stop Christian
liberty:  ninthly, they bereave the church, the spouse of Christ, of
her due comfort, as taking away the sun out of the world:  tenthly, in
all their doings they shoot to a wrong mark; for where Christ only is
set up to be apprehended by our faith, and so freely to justify us,
they, leaving this justification by faith, set up other marks, partly
of the law, partly of their own devising, for men to shoot at. And
here cometh in the manifest and manifold absurdities of the bishop of
Rome's doctrine, which here (the Lord willing) we will rehearse, as
in a catalogue here following: 

     "I. They erroneously conceive opinion of salvation in the law,
which only is to be sought in the faith of Christ, and in no other.

     "II. They erroneously do seek God's favour by works of the law;
not knowing that the law, in this our corrupt nature, worketh only
the anger of God.

     "III. They err also in this, that where the office of the law
is diverse from, and contrary to, the gospel, they, without any
difference, confound the one with the other, making the gospel to be
a law, and Christ to be a Moses.

     "IV. They err in dividing the law unskilfully into three parts;
into the law natural, the law moral, and the law evangelical.

     "V. They err again in dividing the law evangelical into
precepts and counsels, making the precepts to serve for all men, the
counsels only to serve for them that be perfect.

     "VI. The chief substance of all their teaching and preaching
resteth upon the works of the law, as may appear by their religion,
which wholly consisteth in men's merits, traditions, laws, canons,
decrees, and ceremonies.

     "VII. In the doctrines of salvation, remission, and
justification, either they admix the law equally with the gospel, or
else, clean secluding the gospel, they teach and preach the law, so
that little mention is made of the faith of Christ, or none at all.

     "VIII. They err in thinking that the law of God requireth
nothing in us under pain of damnation, but only our obedience in 
external actions:  as for the inward affections and concupiscence,
they esteem but light matters.

     "IX. They, not knowing the true nature and strength of the law,
do erroneously imagine that it is in man's power to fulfil it.

     "X. They err in thinking not only to be in man's power to keep
the law of God, but also to perform more perfect works than be in
God's law commanded; and these they call the works of perfection. And
hereof rise the works of supererogation, of satisfaction, of
congruity and condignity, to store up the treasure-house of the
pope's church, to be sold out to the people for money.

     "XI. They err in saying, that the state monastical is more
perfect for keeping the counsels of the gospel, than other states be
in keeping the law of the gospel.

     "XII. The counsels of the gospel they call the vows of their
religious men, as profound humility, perfect chastity, and wilful
poverty.

     "XIII. They err abominably, in equalling their laws and
constitutions with God's law; and in saying, that man's law bindeth,
under pain of damnation, no less than God's law.

     "XIV. They err sinfully, in publishing the transgressors of
their laws more sharply than the transgressors of the law of God; as
appeareth by their inquisitions, and their canon law, &c.

     "XV. Finally, they err most horribly in this, that where the
free promise of God ascribeth oursalvation only to our faith in
Christ, excluding works; they, contrary, ascribe salvation only, or
principally, to works and merits, excluding faith:  whereupon ariseth
the application of the sacrifice of the mass, ex opere operato, for
the quick and dead, application of the merits of Christ's passion in
bulls, application of the merits of all religious orders, and such
other more, above specified more at large in the former part of this
history."

Here follow three cautions to be observed and avoided in the true
understanding of the law.

     "The first caution:  that we, through the misunderstanding of the
Scriptures, do not take the law for the gospel, nor the gospel for
the law; but skilfully discern and distinct the voice of the one from
the voice of the other. Many there be, which reading the book of the
New Testament, do take and understand whatsoever they see contained
in the said book, to be only and merely the voice of the gospel. And
contrariwise, whatsoever is contained in the compass of the Old
Testament; that is, within the law, stories, psalms, and prophets, to
be only and merely the word and voice of the law. Wherein many are
deceived; for the preaching of the law and of the gospel are mixed
together in both the Testaments, as well the Old as the New; neither
is the order of these two doctrines to be distinguished by books and
leaves, but by the diversity of God's Spirit speaking unto us. For
sometimes in the Old Testament God doth comfort, as he comforted
Adam, with the voice of the gospel:  sometimes also in the New
Testament he doth threaten and terrify, as when Christ threatened the
Pharisees. In some places again, Moses and the prophets play the
evangelists; insomuch that Jerome doubtethWhether he should call
Isaiah a prophet or an evangelist. In some places likewise Christ and
the apostles supply the part of Moses; and as Christ himself, until
his death, was under the law, (which law he came not to break, but to
fulfil,) so his sermons made to the Jews, run all, for the most part,
upon the perfect doctrine and works of the law, showing and teaching
what we ought to do by the right law of justice, and what danger
ensueth in not performing the same:  all which places, though they be
contained in the book of the New Testament, yet are they to be
referred to the doctrine of the law, ever having in them included a 
privy exception of repentance and faith in Christ Jesus. As for
example, where Christ thus preacheth, Blessed be they that be pure of
heart, for they shall see God. Again, Except ye be made like these
children, ye shall not enter, &c. Item, But he that doth the will of
my Father, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, &c. Item, the
parable of the unkind servant, justly cast into prison for not
forgiving his fellow, &c. The casting of the rich glutton into hell,
&c. Item, He that denieth me here before men, I will deny him before
my Father, &c.:  with such other places of like condition. All these,
I say, pertaining to the doctrine of the law, do ever include in them
a secret exception of earnest repentance, and faith in Christ's
precious blood. For else, Peter denied, and yet repented. Many
publicans and sinners were unkind, unmerciful, and hard-hearted to
their fellow servants; and yet many of them repented, and by faith
were saved, &c. The grace of Christ Jesus work in us earnest
repentance, and faith in him unfeigned. Amen!

     "Briefly, to know when the law speaketh, and when the gospel
speaketh, and to discern the voice of the one from the voice of the
other, this may serve for a note, that when there is any moral work
commanded to be done, either for eschewing of punishment, or upon
promise of any reward temporal or eternal, or else when any promise
is made with condition of any work commanded in the law, there is to
be understood the voice of the law. Contrary, where the promise of
life and salvation is offered unto us freely, without all our merits,
and simply, without any condition annexed of any law, either natural,
ceremonial, or moral; all those places, whether they be read in the
Old Testament or in the New, are to be referred to the voice and
doctrine of the gospel. And this promise of God, freely made to us by
the merits of Jesus Christ, so long before prophesied to us in the
Old Testament, and afterwards exhibited in the New Testament, and now
requiring nothing but our faith in the Son of God, is called properly
the voice of the gospel, and differeth from the voice of the law in
this, that it hath no condition adjoined of our meriting, but only
respecteth the merits of Christ the Son of God; by whose faith only
we are promised of God to be saved and justified:  according as we
read in Rom. iii., The righteousness of God cometh by faith of Jesus
Christ, in all, and upon all, that do believe, &c.

     "The second caution or danger to be avoided is, that we now,
knowing how to discern rightly between the law and the gospel, and
having intelligence not to mistake the one for the other, must take
heed again that we break not the order between these two, taking and
applying the law where the gospel is to be applied, either to
ourselves or towards others. For albeit the law and the gospel many
times are to be joined together in order of doctrine, yet case may
fall sometimes, that the law must be utterly sequestered from the
gospel:  as when any personor persons do feel themselves, with the
majesty of the law and judgment of God, so terrified and oppressed,
and with the burden of their sins overweighed and thrown down into
utter discomfort, and almost even to the pit of hell; as happeneth
many times to soft and timorous consciences of God's good servants.
When such mortified hearts do hear, either in preaching or in
reading, any such example or place of the Scripture which pertaineth
to the law, let them think the same nothing to belong to them, no
more than a mourning weed belongeth to a marriage feast:  and
therefore, removing utterly out of their minds all cogitation of the
law, of fear, of judgment, and condemnation, let them only set before
their eyes the gospel, the sweet comforts of God's promise, free
forgiveness of sins in Christ, grace, redemption, liberty, rejoicing,
psalms, thanks, singing, and a paradise of spiritual jocundity, and
nothing else; thinking thus with themselves, that the law hath done
his office in them already, and now must needs give place to his
better, that is, must needs give room to Christ the Son of God, who
is the Lord and Master, the fulfiller, and also the finisher of the
law; for the end of the law is Christ.

     "The third danger to be avoided is, that we do not use or apply, on
the contrary side, the gospel instead of the law. For as the other
before was even as much as to put on a mourning gown in the feast of
a marriage, so is this but even to cast pearls before swine; wherein
is a great abuse among many. For commonly it is seen, that these
worldly epicures and secure Mammonists, to whom the doctrine of the
law doth properly appertain, do receive and apply to themselves most
principally the sweet promises of the gospel:  and, contrariwise, the
other contrite and bruised hearts, to whom belong only the joyful
tidings of the gospel, and not the law, for the most part receive and
retain to themselves the terrible voice and sentences of the law.
Whereby it cometh to pass, that many do rejoice where they should
mourn; and on the other side, many do fear and mourn where they need
not:  wherefore, to conclude, in private use of life, let every person
discreetly discern between the law and the gospel, and aptly apply to
himself that which he seeth convenient.

     "And again, in public order of doctrine, let every discreet
preacher put a difference between the broken heart of the mourning
sinner, and the unrepentant worldling, and so conjoin both the law
with the gospel, and the gospel with the law, that in throwing down
the wicked, ever he spare the weak-hearted; and again, so spare the
weak, that he do not encourage the ungodly."

     And thus much concerning the conjunction and difference between the
law and the gospel, upon the occasion of Mr. Patrick's Places.



166. MARTYRS IN SCOTLAND AND ENGLAND, 1525-32.

Henry Forest, martyred at St. Andrews, in Scotland. Persecuted by
James Beton, archbishop of St. Andrews; and by Friar Walter Laing,
betrayer of the confession of this Henry Forest.

     Within few years after the martyrdom of Master Patrick Hamilton,
one Henry Forest, a young man born in Linlithgow, who, a little
before, had received the orders of Benet and Collet, (as they term
them,) affirmed and said, that Master Patrick Hamilton died a martyr,
and that his articles were true. For the which he was apprehended and
put in prison, by James Beton, archbishop of St. Andrew's, who,
shortly after, caused a certain friar, named Walter Laing, to hear
his confession; to whom when Henry Forest in secret confession had
declared his conscience, how he thought Master Patrick to be a good
man, and wrongfully to be put to death, and that his articles were
true, and not heretical, the friar came and uttered to the bishop the
confession that he had heard, which before was not thoroughly known.
Whereupon it followed, that his confession being brought as
sufficient probation against him, he was therefore convented before
the council of the clergy and doctors, and there concluded to be a
heretic, equal in iniquity with Master Patrick Hamilton, and there
decreed to be given to the secular judges, to suffer death.

     When the day came for his death, and that he should first be
degraded, and was brought before the clergy in a green place, being
between the castle of St. Andrew and another place called Monymaill;
as soon as he entered in at the door, and saw the faces of the
clergy, perceiving whereunto they tended, he cried with a loud voice,
saying, "Fie on falsehood! Fie on false friars, revealers of
confession! After this day let no man ever trust any false friars,
contemners of God's word, and deceivers of men!" And so they
proceeding to degrade him of his small orders of Benet and Collet, he
said with a loud voice, "Take from me not only your own orders, but
also your own baptism!" meaning thereby whatsoever is besides that
which Christ himself instituted, whereof there is a great rabblement
in baptism. Then, after his degradation, they condemned him as a
heretic equal with Master Patrick aforesaid. And so he suffered death
for his faithful testimony of the truth of Christ and of his gospel,
at the north church-stile of the abbey church of St. Andrew, to the
intent that all the people of Forfar might see the fire, and so might
hethe more feared from falling into the like doctrine which they term
by the name of heresy.

James Hamilton, brother to Master Patrick; Katharine Hamilton; a
woman of Leith; David Straton, and Master Norman Gurley:  the two last
burned. Persecuted by James Hay, bishop of Ross, commissioner of King
James the Fifth; by Beton, archbishop of St. Andrews; and by Master
John Spens, lawyer.

     Within a year after the martyrdom of Henry Forest, or thereabout,
was called James Hamilton, of Linlithgow; his sister Katharine
Hamilton, the spouse of the captain of Dunbar; also another honest
woman of Leith; David Straton, of the house of Lawristone; and Master 
Norman Gurley. These were called to the abbey church of Holyrood
House in Edinburgh, by James Hay, bishop of Ross, commissioner to
James Beton, archbishop, in presence of King James the Fifth of that
name; who, upon the day of their accusation, was altogether clad in
red apparel. James Hamilton was accused as one that maintained the
opinion of Master Patrick his brother; to whom the king gave counsel
to depart, and not to appear:  for in case he appeared, he could not
help him; because the bishops had persuaded him that the cause of
heresy did in no wise appertain unto him. And so Hamilton fled, and
was condemned as a heretic, and also his goods and lands confiscated
and disposed unto others.

     Katharine Hamilton, his sister, appeared upon the scaffold, and
being accused of a horrible heresy, to wit, that her own works could
not save her, she granted the same; and after a long reasoning
between her and Master John Spens, the lawyer, she concluded in this
manner, "Work here, work there; what kind of working is all this? I
know perfectly, that no kind of works can save me, but only the works
of Christ my Lord and Saviour." The king, hearing these words, turned
him about and laughed, and called her unto him, and caused her to
recant, because she was his aunt; and she escaped.

     The woman of Leith was detected hereof, that when the midwife, in
time of her labour, bade her say, "Our Lady help me!" she cried,
"Christ help me, Christ help me, in whose help I trust!" She also was
caused to recant, and so escaped without confiscation of her goods,
because she was married.

     Master Norman Gurley, for that he said there was no such thing as
purgatory, and that the pope was not a bishop but antichrist, and had
no jurisdiction in Scotland.

     Also David Straton, for that he said there was no purgatory, but
the passion of Christ, and the tribulations of this world. And
because, when Master Robert Lawson, vicar of Eglesgrig, asked his
tithe-fish of him, he did cast them to him out of the boat, so that
some of them fell into the sea; therefore he accused him, as one that
should have said, that no tithes should be paid. These two, because,
after great solicitation made by the king, they refused to abjure and
recant, were therefore condemned by the bishop of Ross as heretics,
and were burned upon the green side, between Leith and Edinburgh, to
the intent that the inhabitants of Fife, seeing the fire, might be
struck with terror and fear, not to fall into the like.

     And thus much touching those martyrs of Scotland that suffered
under James Beton, archbishop of St. Andrews; after whom succeeded
David Be-ton, in the same archbishopric, under whom divers others
were also martyred; as hereafter (God willing) in their order shall
appear.

Thomas Harding, an aged father, dwelling at Chesham in
Buckinghamshire, burned A.D. 1532. Persecuted by John Longland,
bishop of Lincoln, and by Rowland, vicar of Great Wycombe, the
bishop's chaplain.

     Thomas Harding, dwelling at Chesham, in the county of Buckingham,
with Alice his wife, was first abjured by William Smith, bishop of
Lincoln, A.D. 1506, with divers other more, which, the same time, for
speaking against idolatry and superstition, were taken, and
compelled, some to bear faggots, some were burnt in the cheeks with
hot irons, some condemned to perpetual prison, some thrust into
monasteries, and spoiled clean of all their goods, some compelled to
make pilgrimage to the great block, otherwise called our Lady of
Lincoln, some to Walsingham, some to St. Romuld of Buckingham, some
to the rood of Wendover, some to St. John Shorne, &c.:  of whom
mention is made in the table before.

     Of this Thomas Harding much rehearsal hath been made before. First, 
this Thomas Harding, with Alice his wife, being abjured and enjoined
penance, with divers other more, by William Smith, bishop of Lincoln;
afterwards by the said bishop was released again, A.D. 1515, of all
such penance as was enjoined him and his wife at their abjuration,
except these three articles following; and were discharged of their
badges or signs of their faggots, &c. Only this penance following the
bishop continued sub pœna relapsus.

     "First, That neither of them, during their life, should dwell out
of the parish of Amersham.

     "Item, That both of them, during their lives, should fast bread and
ale every Corpus Christi even.

     "Item, That both of them should, during their lives, upon Corpus
Christi day, every year go on pilgrimage to Ashridge, and there make
their offerings, as other people did; but not to do penance. Also
they were licensed by the said bishop to do their pilgrimage at
Ashridge on Corpus Christi even, or Corpus Christi day, or some
other, upon any cause reasonable."

     This penance, being to them enjoined, A.D. 1515, they observed till
the year 1522, save that in the last year only the aforesaid Alice,
his wife, omitted her pilgrimage, going to Ashridge upon Corpus
Christi day. Also the said Thomas Harding, being put to his oath to
detect others, because he, contrary to his oath, dissembled, and did
not disclose them, was therefore enjoined, in penance for his
perjury, to bear upon his right sleeve, both before and behind, a
badge or patch of green cloth, or silk, embroidered like a faggot,
during his whole life, unless he should be otherwise dispensed
withal. And thus continued he from the year 1522, until the year
1532.

     At last the said Harding, in the year abovesaid, (1532,) about the
Easter holidays, when the other people went to the church to commit
their wonted idolatry, took his way into the woods, there solitarily
to worship the true living God, in spirit and in truth; where, as he
was occupied in a book of English prayers, leaning or sitting upon a
stile by the wood's side, it chanced that one did espy him where he
was, and came in great haste to the officers of the town, declaring,
that he had seen Harding in the woods looking on a book:  whereupon
immediately a rude rabble of them, like mad men, ran desperately to
his house to search for books, and in searching went so nigh, that
under the boards of his floor they found certain English books of
Holy Scripture. Whereupon this godly father, with his books, was
brought before John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, then lying at
Woburn; who, with his chaplains, calling Father Harding to
examination, began to reason with him, proceeding rather with checks
and rebukes, than with any sound arguments. Thomas Harding, seeing
their folly and rude behaviour, gave them but few words, but fixing
his trust and care in the Lord, did let them say what they would.
Thus at last they sent him to the bishop's prison, called Little-
ease, where he did lie with hunger and pain enough for a certain
space, till at length the bishop, sitting in his tribunal-seat like a
potestate, condemned him for relapse to be burned to ashes,
committing the charge and oversight of his martyrdom to Rowland
Messenger, vicar of Great Wycombe. This Rowland, at the day
appointed, with a rabble of others like to himself, brought Father
Harding to Chesham again; where, the next day after his return, the
said Rowland made a sermon in Chesham church, causing Thomas Harding
to stand before him all the preaching time; which sermon was nothing
else, but the maintaining of the jurisdiction of the bishop of Rome,
and the state of his apostolical see, with the idolatry, fantasies,
and traditions belonging unto the same. When the sermon was ended,
Rowland took him up to the high altar, and asked, whether he believed
that in the bread, after the consecration, there remained any other
substance than the substance of Christ's natural body, born of the
Virgin Mary? To this Thomas Harding answered, "The articles of our
belief do teach us, that our Saviour Christ was born of the Virgin
Mary, and that he suffered death under Pilate, and rose from death
the third day; that he then ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the
right hand of God, in the glory of his Father."

     Then was he brought into a man's house in the town, where he
remained all night in prayer and godly meditations. So the next
morning came the aforesaid Rowland again, about ten o'clock, with a
company of bills and staves, to lead this godly father to his
burning; whom a great number both of men and women did follow, of
whom many bewailed his death, and contrary, the wicked rejoiced
thereat. He was brought forth, having thrust into his hands a little
cross of wood, but no idol upon it. Then he was chained unto the
stake, and desiring the people to pray for him, and forgiving all his
enemies and persecutors, he commended his spirit to God, and took his
death most patiently and quietly, lifting up his hands to heaven,
saying, "Jesus, receive my spirit."

     When they had set fire on him, there was one that threw a billet at
him, and dashed out his brains:  for what purpose he so did, it is not
known, but, as it was supposed, that he might have forty days of
pardon, as the proclamation was made at the burning of William
Tylsworth, above mentioned; where proclamation was made the same
time, that whosoever did bring a faggot or a stake to the burning of.
a heretic, should have forty days of pardon:  whereby many ignorant
people caused many of their children to bear billets and faggots to
their burning.

     In fine, when the sacrifice and burnt-offering of this godly martyr
was finished, and he burnt to ashes, in the dell, going to Botley, at
the north end of the town of Chesham, Rowland, their ruler of the
roast, commanding silence, and thinking to send the people away with
an Ita, missa est, with a loud voice said to the people these words,
not advising belike what his tongue did speak:  "Good people! when ye
come home, do not say that you have been at the burning of a heretic,
but of a good true Christian man: " and so they departed to dinner,
Rowland, with the rabble of other priests, much rejoicing at the
burning of this good man. After dinner they went to church to even-
song, because it was Corpus Christi even, where they fell to singing
and chanting, with ringing, and piping of the organs. Well was he
that could reach the highest note, so much did they rejoice at this
good man's burning. He should have been burned on the Ascension even,
but the matter was deferred unto the even of Corpus Christi, because
they would honour their "bready Messias" with a bloody sacrifice.
Thus Thomas Harding was consumed to ashes, he being of the age of
sixty years and above.

     I find in the records of Lincoln, about the same time, and in the
same county of Buckinghamshire, in which the aforesaid Thomas Harding
did suffer, that divers others, for the like doctrine, were molested
and troubled, whose names with their causes hereunder follow: 

Mistress Alice Dolly, accused by Elizabeth Wighthill, her own
servant, and by Dr. London.

     Elizabeth Wighthill, being brought before Dr. London in the
parsonage at Staunton Harecourt, and there put to her oath, deposed
against Mistress Alice Dolly, her mistress, that the said Mistress
Dolly, speaking of John Hacker, of Coleman Street, in London, water-
bearer, said, that he was very expert in the Gospels, and all other
things belonging to divine service, and could express and declare
them, and the Pater-noster in English, as well as any priest, and it
would do one good to hear him; saying moreover, that she would in no
case that this were known, for hurting the poor man:  commanding
moreover the said Elizabeth, that she should tell no man hereof;
affirming at that same time, that the aforesaid Hacker could tell by
divers prophecies, what should happen in the realm.

     Over and besides, the aforenamed Elizabeth deposed, that the said
Mistress Dolly, her mistress, showed unto her, that she had a book
which held against pilgrimages; and after that, she caused Sir John
Booth, parson of Britwel, to read upon a book which he called Legenda
Aurea; and one saint's life he read, which did speak against
pilgrimages. And after that was read, her mistress said unto her,
"Lo, daughter! now ye may hear, as I told you, what this book
speaketh against pilgrimages."

     Furthermore, it was deposed against Mistress Dolly, by the said
Elizabeth, that she, being at Sir William Barenten's place, and
seeing there in the closet images new gilded, said to the said
Elizabeth, "Look, here be my Lady Barenten's gods: " to whom the said
Elizabeth answered again, that they were set for remembrance of good
saints. Then said she, "If I were in a house where no images were, I
could remember to pray unto saints as well as if I did see the
images." "Nay," said the other, "images do provoke devotion." Then
said her mistress, "Ye should not worship that thing that hath ears
and cannot hear, and hath eyes and cannot see, and hath mouth and
cannot speak, and hath hands and cannot feel."

     Item, The said Mistress Dolly was reported by the said party to
have a book containing the twelve articles of the Creed, covered with
boards and red covering. Also another black book, which she set most
price by, which book she kept ever in her chamber, or in her coffer,
with divers other books. And this was about A.D. 1520.

     Note here, good reader! in this time, which was above forty-six
years ago, what good matter here was, to accuse and molest good
women.

Roger Hachman, accused at North Stoke, in Oxfordshire, A.D. 1525.
Persecuted by William Smith of North Stoke, in Oxfordshire; and by
Thomas Ferrar.

     Against this Roger Hachman it was laid, by depositions brought in,
that he, sitting at the church aisle at North Stoke, said these
words, "I will never look to be saved for no good deed that ever I
did, neither for any that ever I will do, without I may have my
salvation by petition, as an outlaw shall have his pardon of the
king;" and said, that if he might not have his salvation so, he
thought he should be lost.

Robert West, priest of St. Andrew Undershaft, accused at London, A.D.
1529. Persecuted by Dr. Wharton, chancellor to Tonstal, bishop of
London.

     Against this Robert West, priest, it was objected, that he had
commended Martin Luther, and thought that he had done well in many
things, as in having a wife and children, &c.

     Item, For saying, that whereas the doctors of the church have
commanded priests to say matins and even-song, they had no authority
so to do:  for which he was abjured, and was enjoined penance.

John Ryburn, accused at Roshborough, A. D, 1530. Persecuted by Doctor
Morgan.

     It was testified against John Ryburn, by his sister Elizabeth
Ryburn, being put to her oath, that she, coming to him upon the
Assumption even, found him at supper with butter and eggs, and being
bid to sit down and eat with him, she answered, that it was no
convenient time then to eat; to whom he said again, that God never
made such fastingdays; "but you," quoth he, "are so far in limbo
patrum, that you can never turn again." And in further communication,
when she said that she would go on pilgrimage to the holy cross at
Wendover, he said again, that she did wrong, "for there is never a
step," said he, "that you set in going on pilgrimage, but you go to
the devil:  and you go to the church to worship what the priest doth
hold above his head, which is but bread; and if you cast it to the
mouse it will eat it: " and further he said, that he would never
believe that the priest hath power to make his Lord.

     Item, It was testified by another sister, named Alice Ryburn, that
she, being with her brother in a close called Brimmer's Close, beard
him say these words, "That a time shall come when no elevation shall
be made." Whereunto she answering again asked, "And what service
shall we have then?

     He said, "That service that we have now." Furthermore, the said
John Ryburn was accused upon these words, for saying that the service
of the church was nought, because it was not in English:  "For," said
he, "if we had our Pater-noster in English, we would say it nine
times against once now."

     Note here, out of the records of the register, that in this
examination of John Ryburn, first his two sisters, then his own wife,
and at last his own father, were called before John Longland, bishop
of Lincoln, and compelled by oath to depose against him.

John Eaton, and Cecily his wife, accused at Roshborough, A.D. 1530.
Persecuted by John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, and by Richard
Ryburn.

     John Eaton, and Cecily his wife, of the parish of Speen, were
detected by Richard Ryburn, that they were marked of certain in the
parish on the Sunday then last past, in the sacring time, to hold
down their heads, and that they would not look upon the sacrament.

     Item, In the feast of exaltation of the holy cross, when the bells
did ring solemnly, between matins and high mass, for saying, in a
butcher's house, "What a clampering of bells is here!"

     Item, The said John Ryburn was detected by Richard his father, for
saying these words, "The priests do wrong, for they should say their
service in English, that every man may know it."

     Item, For these words speaking to one of his sisters, "The
sacrament of the altar is not as they take it to be:  but if it be as
I trust, we shall see none of them holden up, one of these days, over
the priest's head."

     Item, For saying that the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ hath made
satisfaction for all ill deeds that were done, or should be done; and
therefore it was no need to go on pilgrimage. It was also laid to his
charge, and confessed by himself, that he had the Gospels of Jesus in
English, and that he was present in the house of John Taylor, when
one John Simons read to them a lecture out of the Gospel, of the
passion of Christ, the space of two hours.

     Item, For saying that images were but idols, and it was idolatry to
pray to them.

     For saying moreover, that at sacring time he kneeled down, but he
had no devotion, nor believed in the sacrament.

     Item, That the pope's authority and pardon cannot help man's soul,
and it was but cast away money that is given for pardon; for if we
ask pardon of our Lord Jesus Christ, he will give us pardon every
day.

     Thomas Lound, priest, who had been with Luther two years, being
afterwards cast into the Fleet at London, was a great instructor of
this John Ryburn.

John Simonds accused.

     It was laid against John Simonds, for saying that men do walk all
day in purgatory in this world, and when they depart out of this
world, there are but two ways, either to hell or to heaven.

     Item, He said, that priests should have wives.

     It was reported by the confession of the said John Simonds, that he
had converted to his doctrine eight priests, and had holpen two or
three friars out of their orders.

William Wingrave, Thomas Hawks of Hichenden, Robert Hawes of West
Wycombe, John Taylor, John Hawks, Thomas Hern of Cobshil, Nicholas
Field, Richard Dean, Thomas Clerk the younger, William Hawks of
Chesham; accused, A.D.1530. Persecuted by John Longland, bishop of
Lincoln.

     These persons with others were examined, excommunicated, and
abjured, for being together in John Taylor's house at Hichenden, and
there hearing Nicholas Field, of London, read a parcel of Scripture
in English unto them, who there expounded to them many things:  that
they that went on pilgrimage were accursed:  that it booted not to
pray to images, for they were but stocks made of wood, and could not
help a man:  that God Almighty biddeth us work as well one day as
another, saving the Sunday; for six days he wrought, and the seventh
day he rested:  that they needed not to fast so many fasting days,
except the ember days; for he was beyond the sea in Almany, and there
they used not so to fast, nor to make such holy days.

     Item, That offerings do no good, for they have them that have no
need thereof. And when it was answered again by one, that they
maintained God's service; "Nay," said Nicholas, "it maintain great
houses, as abbeys and others."

     Item, That men should say their Pater-noster and Ave Maria in
English, with the Creed; and declared the same in English.

     Item, That the sacrament of the altar was not, as it was pretended,
the flesh, blood, and bone of Christ; but a sacrament, that is, a
typical signification of his holy body.

     To William Wingrave moreover it was objected, that he should say,
that there was no purgatory:  and if there were any purgatory, and
every mass that is said should deliver a soul out of purgatory, there
should be never a soul there; for there be more masses said in a day,
than there be bodies buried in a month.

Simon Wisdom, of Burford. Persecuted by John Longland, bishop of
Lincoln.

     Simon Wisdom, of Burford, was charged in judgment, for having three
books in English; one was the Gospels in English, another was the
Psalter, the third was the Sum of the Holy Scripture in English.

James Algar, or Ayger, accused, A.D. 1530. Persecuted by Dr. Prin,
commissary to the bishop of Lincoln.

     It was articulated and objected to James Algar, first, that he,
speaking to a certain doctor of divinity, named Aglonby, said, that
every true Christian man, living after the laws of God, and observing
his commandments, is a priest as well as he, &c.

     Item, That he said that he would not his executors to deal any
penny for his soul after his death, for he would do it with his own
hands while he was alive; and that his conscience gave him, that the
soul, as soon as it departeth out of the body, goeth straight either
to heaven or to hell.

     Item, When Dr. Aglonby aforesaid had alleged to him the place in
St. Matthew, chap. xvi., Thou art Peter, &c., he answered him again
with that which followeth in the Gospel after, Get thee after me,
Satan, &c.

     Item, The said James, hearing of a certain church to be robbed,
said openly, it made no. great matter, for the church had enough
already.

John French, of Long Witham. Persecuted there, A.D. 1530.

     Against John French likewise these three articles were objected.

     First, that he believed not the body of Christ, flesh, blood, and
bone, to be in the sacrament. Secondly, That he was not confessed to
any priest of long time. Thirdly, That priests had not power to
absolve from sins, &c.:  for which he likewise, with the others, was
troubled, and at length compelled also with them to kneel down, and
to ask a blessing of his holy catholic father and mother of Rome.

     For what stand I here numbering the sand? for if all the register
books were sought, it would be an infinite thing to recite all them
which through all the other diocesees of the realm in these days,
before and since, were troubled and pursued for these and such-like
matters. But these I thought for example's sake here to specify, that
it might appear what doctrine it is, and long hath been in the
church, for the which the prelates and clergy of Rome have judged men
heretics, and so wrongfully have molested poor simple Christians.

     Now, passing from the abjurations of those poor men, we will
something speak (God willing) of the life and doings of the contrary
part, who were their persecutors, and chief rulers then of the
church; to the intent that by those rulers it may better be discerned
and judged, what manner of church that was, which then so persecuted
the true doctrine of Christ, and members of his church.



167. THOMAS WOLSEY

A brief discourse concerning the story and life of Thomas Wolsey,
late cardinal of York, by way of digression; wherein is to be seen
and noted the express image of the proud, vain glorious Church of
Rome, how, far it differeth from the true church of Christ Jesus.

     Although it be not greatly pertinent unto this our history, nor
greatly requisite, in these so weighty matters, treating of Christ's
holy martyrs, to discourse much of Thomas Wolsey, cardinal of York;
notwithstanding, forasmuch as there be many, which, being carried
away with a wrong opinion and estimation of that false glittering
Church of Rome, do think that holiness to be in it, which indeed is
not:  to the intent, therefore, that the vain pomp and pride of that
ambitious church, so far differing from all pure Christianity and
godliness, more notoriously may appear to all men, and partly also to
refresh the reader with some variety of matter, I thought
compendiously to express the ridiculous and pompous qualities and
demeanour of this aforesaid Thomas Wolsey, cardinal and legate of
Rome, in whom alone the image and life of all other such-like
followers and professors of the same church, may be seen and
observed. For like as the Lacedemonians, in times past, were
accustomed to show and demonstrate drunken men unto their children,
to behold and look upon, that through the foulness of that vice they
might inflame them the more to the study and desire of sobriety; even
so it shall not be hurtful sometimes to set forth the examples which
are not honest, that others might thereby gather the instructions of
better and more upright dealing.

     Wherefore thou shalt note here, good reader! in this history, with
all judgment, the great difference of life and Christian conversation
between this church and the other true humble martyrs and servants of
God, whom they have and do yet persecute. And first, to begin with
the first meeting and coming in of this cardinal, and his fellow
cardinal, Campeius, to England; it was about the time when Pope Leo,
intending to make war against the Turks, sent three legates together
from Rome, whereof one went into Germany, another into France;
Laurentius Campeius was appointed to come into England. When he was
come to Calais, and that the cardinal of York had understanding
thereof, he sent certain bishops and doctors, with as much speed as
he could, to meet the legate, and to show him, that if he would have
his embassage take effect, he should send in post to Rome, to have
the said cardinal of York made legate, and to be joined with him in
commission:  which thing he much affected, misdoubting lest his
authority thereby might perhaps be diminished through the coming of
the legate, and therefore required to be joined with him in like
degree of the embassage. Campeius, being a man light of belief, and
suspecting no such matter, gave credit unto his words, and sent unto
Rome with such speed, that within thirty days after, the bull was
brought to Calais, wherein they were both equally joined in
commission; during which time .the cardinal of York sent to the
legate at Calais, red cloth to clothe his servants withal, which at
their coming to Calais were but meanly apparelled.

     When all things were ready, Campeius passed the seas and landed at
Dover, and so kept on his journey toward London. At every good town
as they passed, he was received with procession, accompanied with all
the lords and gentlemen of Kent. And when he came to Blackheath,
there met him the duke of Norfolk, with a great number of prelates,
knights, and gentlemen, all richly apparelled; and in the way he was
brought into a rich tent of cloth of gold, where he shifted himself
into a cardinal's robe, furred with ermines; and so took his mule,
riding toward London. Now mark the great humility in this church of
the pope, and compare the same with the other church of the martyrs,
and see which of them is more gospel-like.

     This Campeius had eight mules of his own, laden with divers fardels
and other preparation. The cardinal of York, thinking them not
sufficient for his state, the night before he came to London, sent
him twelve mules more, (with empty coffers,) covered with red, to
furnish his carriage withal. The next day these twenty mules were led
through the city, as though they had been laden with treasures,
apparel, and other necessaries, to the great admiration of all men,
that they should receive a legate as it were a god, with such and so
great treasure and riches; for so the common people doth always judge
and esteem the majesty of the clergy, by no other thing than by their
outward shows and pomp. But in the midst of this great admiration,
there happened a ridiculous spectacle, to the great derision of their
pride and ambition:  for as the mules passed through Cheapside, and
the people were pressing about them to behold and gaze, (as the
manner is,) it happened that one of the mules, breaking his collar
that he was led in, ran upon the other mules, whereby it happened,
that they, so running together, and their girths being loosed,
overthrew divers of their burdens; and so there appeared the
cardinal's gay treasure, not without great laughter and scorn of
many, especially of boys and girls, whereof some gathered up pieces
of meat, some, pieces of bread and roasted eggs; some found
horseshoes and old boots, with such other baggage, crying out,
"Behold! here is my lord cardinal's treasure." The muleteers, being
therewithal greatly ashamed, gathered together their treasure again
as well as they could, and went forward.

     About three o'clock at afternoon, July the twenty-ninth, the
cardinal himself was brought through the city, with great pomp and
solemnity, unto Paul's church, where, when he had blessed all men
with the bishop's blessing, as the manner is, he was guided forth
unto the cardinal of York's house, where he was received by the said
cardinal; and by him on the next day, being Sunday, was conducted
unto the king, to fulfil his embassage against the Turk, which might
have destroyed all Hungary in the meantime, whiles they were studying
with what solemnity to furnish out their embassage.

     When the cardinal of York was thus a legate, he set up a court, and
called it the court of the legate, and proved testaments, and heard
causes, to the great hinderance of all the bishops of the realm. He
visited bishops, and all the clergy, exempt and not exempt; and under
colour of reformation, he got much treasure, and nothing was
reformed, but came to more mischief; for, by example of his pride,
priests and all spiritual persons waxed so proud, that they wore
velvet and silk, both in gowns, jackets, doublets, and shoes; kept
open lechery; and so highly bore themselves, by reason of his
authorities and faculties, that no man durst once reprove any thing
in them, for fear to be called heretic, and then they would made him
smoke, or bear a faggot; and the cardinal himself was so elated that
he thought himself equal with the king; and when he had said mass, he
made dukes and earls to serve him of wine, with assay taken, and to
hold the bason at the lavatories.

     Furthermore, as he was sent ambassador to the emperor at Brussels,
he had over with him the great seal of England; and was served with
his servitors kneeling on their knees; and many noblemen of England
waiting upon him, to the great admiration of all the Germans that
beheld it:  such was his monstrous pomp and pride.

     This glorious cardinal, in his tragical doings, did exceed so far
all measure of a good subject, that he became more like a prince than
a priest; for although the king bare the sword, yet he bare the
stroke, making (in a manner) the whole realm to bend at his beck, and
to dance after his pipe. Such practices and fetches he had, that when
he had well stored his own coffers, first he fetched the greatest
part of the king's treasure out of the realm, in twelve great barrels
full of gold and silver, to serve the pope's wars; and as his
avaricious mind was never satisfied in getting, so his restless head
was so busy, ruffling in public matters, that he never ceased before
he had set both England, France, Flanders, Spain, and Italy, together
by the ears.

     Thus this legate, well following the steps of his master the pope,
and both of them well declaring the nature of their religion, under
the pretence of the church, practised great hypocrisy; and under the
authority of the king he used great extortion, with excessive taxes
and loans, and valuation of every man's substance, so pilling the
commons and merchants, that every man complained, but no redress was
had. Neither yet were the churchmen altogether free from the pill-axe
and poll-axe, from the pilling and polling, I mean, of this cardinal,
who, under his power legantine, gave by preventions all benefices
belonging to spiritual persons; by which, hard it is to say, whether
he purchased to himself more riches than hatred of the spiritualty.
So far his licence stretched, that he had power to suppress divers
abbeys, priories, and monasteries; and so did, taking from them all
their goods, movables and unmovables, except it were a little
pension, left only to the heads of certain houses. By the said power
legantine he kept also general visitations through the realm, sending
Doctor John Alein, his chaplain, riding in his gown of velvet, and
with a great train, to visit all religious houses; whereat the Friars
Observant much grudged, and would in no wise condescend thereunto: 
wherefore they were openly accursed at Paul's Cross, by Friar Forest,
one of the same order; so that the cardinal at length prevailed both
against them and all others. Against whom great disdain rose among
the people, perceiving how, by visitations, making of abbots,
probates of testaments, granting of faculties, licences, and other
pollings in his courts legantine, he had made his treasure equal with
the king's, and yet every year he sent great sums to Rome. And this
was their daily talk against the cardinal.

     Besides many other matters and grievances which stirred the hearts
of the commons against the cardinal, this was one which much pinched
them, for that the said cardinal had sent out certain strait
commissions in the king's name, that every man should pay the sixth
part of his goods. Whereupon there followed great muttering amongst
the commons; in such sort that it had almost grown to some riotous
commotion or tumult, especially in the parts of Suffolk, had not the
dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, with wisdom and gentleness, stepped in
and appeased the same.

     Another thing that rubbed the stomachs of many, or rather which
moved them to laugh at the cardinal, was this; to see his insolent
presumption, so highly to take upon him, as the king's chief
councillor, to set a reformation in the order of the king's
household, making and establishing new ordinances in the same. He
likewise made new officers in the house of the duke of Richmond,
which was then newly begun. In like manner he ordained a council, and
established another household for the Lady Mary, then being princess;
so that all things were done by his consent, and by none other. All
this, with much more, took he upon him, making the king believe, that
all should be to his honour, and that he needed not to take any
pains; insomuch that the charge of all things was committed unto him: 
whereat many men smiled, to see his great folly and presumption.

     At this time, the cardinal gave the king the lease of the manor of
Hampton Court, which he had of the lord of St. John's, and on which
he had done great cost. Therefore the king again, of his gentle
nature, licensed him to lie in his manor of Richmond; and so he lay
there certain times. But when the common people, and especially such
as were King Henry the Seventh's servants, saw the cardinal keep
house in the royal manor of Richmond, which King Henry the Seventh so
much esteemed, it was a marvel to hear how they grudged, saying,
"See, a butcher's dog lies in the manor of Richmond! "These, with
many other opprobrious words, were spoken against the cardinal, whose
pride was so high, that he regarded nothing yet was he hated of all
men.

     And now, to express some part of the ruffling practices and busy
intermeddlings of this cardinal in princes' wars, first, here is to
be noted, that after long wars between England and France, 1524, (in
the which wars King Henry, taking the emperor's part against Francis,
the French king, had engaged with his money the duke of Bourbon, and
a great part of the emperor's army, to invade and disturb certain
parts of France,) it happened that the French king, coming with his
army towards Milan at the siege of Pavia, was there taken by the duke
of Bourbon, and the viceroy of Naples, and so led prisoner into 
Spain.

     Where note by the way, that all this while the cardinal held with
the emperor, hoping by him to be made pope; but when that would not
be, he went clean from the emperor to the French king, as, the Lord
willing, you shall hear.
Illustration:  	Meeting of Henry and Francis

     After this victory gotten, and the French king being taken
prisoner, who remained in custody about a year and a half; at length,
through great labour and solicitation, as well of others as
especially of the cardinal and King Henry, an order was taken, and
conditions propounded, between the French king and the emperor; among
which other divers conditions, it was agreed, that they should resist
the Turks, and oppress the Lutherans; and so was the king set at
liberty, leaving behind him his two eldest sons for pledges. But
shortly after he revoked his oath, being absolved by the bishop of
Rome, and said that he was forced to swear, or else he should never
have been delivered. This was A.D. 1526.



168. THE SACK OF ROME

     Pope Clement the Seventh, seeing the French king restored to
liberty, and misdoubting the puissance and domination of the emperor
in Italy, so near under his nose, absolved the French king from his
oath; also joined together a confederacy of Venetians and other
princes against the emperor, bearing great hatred against all them
that any thing favoured the emperor's part, especially the family of
Columna in Rome, which family was then imperial; and therefore, to
show his hatred against them, he said to Pompey, cardinal of the same
family, in threatening words, that he would take away his cardinal's
hat:  to whom it was answered again by the cardinal, that if he so
did, he would put on a helmet to overthrow the pope's triple crown: 
whereby it may appear here by the way, what holiness and virtue lieth
in the pope and cardinals of that catholic see of Rome.

     Thus the false pope, under the lying title of holiness, was the
father of much mischief and of great wars, which after ensued; for
the duke of Bourbon, and others of the emperor's captains, having
intelligence of the pope's purpose and confederacy, gathered their
army together, and after much bloodshed and fighting about Milan,
Hawd, and Cremona, at length they approached and bent their siege
against Rome, and after three sharp assaults, obtained the city, with
the whole spoil thereof:  where also they besieged the aforesaid pope
with his cardinals, in the mount of Adrian, and took him prisoner,
A.D. 1527. As touching the cause of the besieging of Rome, now ye
have beard:  for the manner of taking of Rome, and of the pope, the
order thereof is thus described in Hall and others.
 The emperor's army, departing from Florence to the
city of Sienna, where they lost their ordnance, took counsel there to
go to Rome, and so much they travelled by night and day, commonly
passing forty miles day and night, (their good will was such,) that
the sixth day of May, with banners displayed, they came before the
city of Rome, being Saturday the same day; and on Sunday the Romans
made bulwarks, ramparts, and other defences, and laid ordnance on the
walls, and shot at them without fiercely.

     The duke of Bourbon determined that it was not best to lie still
without, and be slain with ordnance, considering that they were all
naked people, and without great ordnance; wherefore he determined to
take the chance, and to give the assault, and so manfully they
approached the walls between the Burgo Novo and old Rome. But the
Romans valiantly defended them with hand-guns, pikes, stones, and
other weapons, so that the enemies were fain to retreat. Then the
Romans were glad, and set many fair banners on their towers and
bulwarks, and made great shouts; which the duke of Bourbon seeing,
cried, "To a new assault." Then the drumflades blew, and every man
with a ladder mounted; and, at the first encounter, the Romans put
them a little back again, which the duke of Bourbon perceiving, cried
"God and the emperor!" Then every man manfully set on. There was a
sore fight, many an arrow shot, and many a man felled; but at last
the emperor's men got the wall:  and between every assault fell a
mist, so that they within could not see what part they without would
assail; which was profitable to the emperor's party. At the three
assaults were slain three hundred Switzers of the pope's guard. In
this last assault was the duke of Bourbon struck in the thigh with a
hand-gun, of the which he shortly after died in a chapel of St. Sist,
whither his soldiers bad brought him; and this chance
notwithstanding, the army entered into Rome, and took the pope's
palace, and set up the emperor's arms.

     The same day that these three assaults were made, Pope Clement
passed little on the emperor's army; for he had accursed them on the
Saturday before, and in his curse he called the Almains Lutherans;
and the Spaniards, Murreins, or Moors:  and when he was hearing of
mass, suddenly the Almains entered into the church, and slew his
guard and divers other. He, seeing that, fled in all haste by a privy
way to the castle of St. Angelo; and all they that followed him that
way, and could not enter, were slain, and if he in that fury had been
taken, he had been slain. The cardinals and other prelates fled to
the castle of St. Angelo, over the bridge, where many of the common
people were overpressed and trodden down, and as they gave way to the
cardinals and other estates that passed towards the castle for
succour.

     The cardinal of Senes, of Sesarine, of Todi, of Jacobace, and of
the Valle, tarried so long, that they could not get to the castle for
the multitude of the people; wherefore they were compelled to take
another house, called the palace of St. George, where they kept
themselves for awhile as secretly as they might. You must understand,
that through the city of Rome runneth a famous river called Tiber,
and on the one side of the river standeth the castle of St. Angelo,
or the borough of St. Angelo; and the other side is called Burgo
Novo, or the New Borough. This bridge is called the bridge of Sixtus,
which lieth directly before the castle. At the end of this bridge was
a wonderful strong bulwark, well ordnanced and well manned. The
emperor's men, seeing that they could do nothing to the pope, nor to
that part of the city, but by the bridge, determined to assault the
bulwark:  and so, as men without fear, came on the bridge, and the
Romans so well defended them, that they slew almost four thousand
men. Seeing this, the prince of Orange, and the marquis of Gnasto,
with all speed gave assault, and notwithstanding that the Romans shot
great ordnance, hand-guns, quarels, and all that might be shot; yet
the imperial persons never shrank, but manfully entered the bulwark,
and slew and threw down out of the loops all the Romans that they
found, and after razed the bulwark to the ground. The pope was in the
castle of St. Angelo, and beheld this fight; and with him were four-
and-twenty cardinals, of which one, called the cardinal Sanctorum
Quatuor, or the cardinal of Pouch, was slain, and with him were one
thousand prelates and priests, five hundred gentlemen, and five
hundred soldiers:  wherefore immediately the captains determined to
lay siege to the castle of St. Angelo, lest they within might issue
out, and turn them to damage; wherefore suddenly a siege was planted
round about the castle. In the mean season, the soldiers fell to
spoil. Never was Rome so pillaged, either by the Goths or Vandals: 
for the soldiers were not content with the spoil of the citizens, but
they robbed the churches, brake up the houses of close religious
persons, and overthrew the cloisters, and spoiled virgins, and
maltreated married women. Men were tormented if they had not to give
to every new asker or demander:  some were strangled, some were
punished by dreadful mutilation, to cause them to confess their
treasure. This woodness continued a great while, and some men might
think that when they had gotten so much, then they would cease and be
quiet, but that was not so, for they played continually at dice, some
five hundred, some a thousand ducats at a cast; and he that came to
play laden with plate, went away almost naked, and then fell to
rifling again. Many of the citizens, which could not patiently suffer
that vexation, drowned themselves in the Tiber. The soldiers daily,
that lay at the siege, made jests of the pope. Sometimes they had one
riding like the pope, with a base woman behind him; sometimes he
blessed, and sometimes he cursed, and sometimes they would with one
voice call him antichrist:  and they went about to undermine the
castle, and to have thrown it down on his head; but the water that
environeth the castle disappointed their purpose.

     In this season the duke of Urbino, with fifteen thousand men, came
to aid the pope; but hearing that Rome was taken, he tarried forty
miles from Rome, till he heard other word. The marquis of Saluzzo,
and Sir Frederic de Bodso, with fifteen thousand footmen, and a
thousand horsemen, were at Viturbo the tenth day of May, where they,
hearing that the city of Rome was taken, also tarried. The cardinal
of Colume came with an army of Neapolitans to help the emperor's men,
but when he saw the cruelty of the soldiers, he did little to help
them, but he hated them much.

     The bishop of Rome was thus besieged till the eighth of the ides of
July; at which day he yielded himself for necessity, and penury of
all things in the castle:  and then he was restored to give graces,
and grant bulls as he did before; but he tarried still in the castle
of St. Angelo, and had a great number of Almains and Spaniards to
keep him; but the Spaniards bare most rule in the castle, for no man
entered nor came out of the castle but by them. When the month of
July came, corn began to fail in Rome, and the pestilence began to
wax strong; wherefore the great army removed to a place called
Narvia, forty miles from Rome, leaving behind them such as kept the
bishop of Rome.

     When they were departed, the Spaniards never were contented till
they had gotten the Almains out of the castle of St. Angelo, and so
they had the whole custody of the pope. And thus much for the sacking
of Rome.



169. THOMAS WOLSEY (contd.)

     When the cardinal here in England heard how his father of Rome was
taken prisoner, he began to stir coals, and hearing of his captivity,
he laboured with the king all that he might, to stir him up to fight
with the said pope against the emperor, and to be a defender of the
church; which if he would do, the cardinal persuaded him that he
should receive great reward at God's hand. To whom the king answered
again, and said in this manner:  "My lord! I more lament this evil
chance, than my tongue can tell; but where you say I am the defender
of the faith, I assure you that this war between the emperor and the
pope, is not for the faith, but for temporal possessions and
dominions. And now, since Pope Clement is taken by men of war, what
should I do? My person nor my people cannot rescue him; but if my
treasure may help him, take that which seemeth to you most
convenient."

     Thus the cardinal, when he could -not obtain at the king's hands
what he would, in stirring him up to mortal war, made out of the
king's treasure twelve-score thousand pounds, which he carried over
the sea with him. After this, the cardinal sent his commission as
legate, to all the bishops, commanding fastings and solemn
processions to be had, wherein they did sing the Litany after this
sort, Sancta Maria! ora pro Clemente papa:  Sancte Petre, ora pro
Clemente papa; and so forth all the Litany.

     This cardinal, passing the seas with the aforesaid sums of money,
departed out of Calais, accompanied with Cuthbert Tonstal, bishop of
London, the lord Sandes, the king's chamberlain, the earl of Derby,
Sir Henry Guildford, and Sir Thomas More, with many other knights and
squires, to the number of twelve hundred horse; having in his
carriage fourscore waggons, and threescore mules and sumpter horses.

     It were long to discourse in this place the manifold abuses and
treasons which he practised when he came to the French court at
Amiens, converting the great sums of money, which before you heard he
had obtained of the king for the relief and ransom of Pope Clement,
(which at that time was prisoner in the emperor's army,) and
bestowing the same in the hiring of soldiers, and furnishing out the
French king's army; appointing also certain English captains, in the
king of England's name, to go against the emperor, to rescue the
pope; all which army was paid with the king of England's money.

     Besides that, he privily, by his letters, caused Clarence king at
arms, to join with the French herald, and openly to defy the emperor;
whereby there began great displeasure to arise between the emperor
and the king, but that the emperor, of his politic nature, would take
no occasion of displeasure against the king of England.

     Now again he uttered another of his practices; for, upon the said
defiance, the cardinal, surmising and whispering in the king's ear
that the emperor had evil treated and imprisoned the king's
ambassadors in Spain, caused Hugo de Mendoza, the emperor's
ambassador in England, to be attached, and put in safe keeping, and
his house with all his goods to be seized; which so remained, until
that manifest letters came of the gentle entreaty of the king's
ambassadors in Spain; and then was again set at liberty. When the
ambassador complained hereof to the cardinal, he laid all the fault
upon Clarence; saying also, that Clarence had defied the emperor
without the king's knowledge, at the request of the herald of France: 
wherefore at his return he should lose his head at Calais. Whereof
Clarence, being advertised by the captain of Bayonne, in his return
took shipping at Boulogne, and so privily came into England; and by
means of certain of his friends of the king's privy-chamber, he was
brought into the king's presence, before the cardinal knew of it;
where he showed unto the king the cardinal's letters of commission,
and declared the whole order and circumstance of their gentle
entreaty. When the king heard the whole circumstance thereof, and had
a while mused thereupon, he said, "O Lord Jesus! he that I trusted
most, told me all these things contrary. Well, Clarence! I will no
more be so light of credence hereafter; for now I see well, that I
have been made believe the thing that was never done: " and from that
time forward the king never put any more confidence or trust in the
cardinal.

     The cause why the cardinal should hear the emperor all this malice 
and grudge, after some writers, it appeareth to be this:  At what time
as Pope Clement was taken prisoner, (as is before said,) the cardinal
wrote unto the emperor, that he should make him pope. But when he had
received an answer that pleased him not, he waxed furious mad, and
sought all means to displease the emperor, writing very sharply unto
him many menacing letters, that if he would not make him pope, he
would make such a ruffling betwixt Christian princes, as was not this
hundred years before, to make the emperor repent; yea, though it
should cost the whole realm of England.

     Whereunto the emperor made answer in a little book, imprinted both
in Spanish and Dutch, answering unto many menacings of the cardinal,
and divers of his articles; but especially to that his ruffling
threat, wherein he menaced him, that if he would not make him pope,
he would set such a ruffling betwixt Christian princes as was not
this hundred years, though it should cost the whole realm of England: 
whereunto the emperor, answering again, biddeth him look well about
him, lest through his doings and attempts he might bring the matter
in that case, that it should cost him the realm of England indeed.

     You have heard before, how that when Pope Clement was prisoner in
the emperor's army, the cardinal required the king, because he did
bear the title of Defender of the Faith, that be would rescue the
pope; also what the king's answer was thereunto, and what sums of
money he had obtained of the king. Now, because you shall not also be
ignorant, by what means, and upon what occasion, this title of
Defender of the Faith was given unto the king, we think it good
somewhat to say in this place. When Martin Luther had uttered the
abomination of the pope and his clergy, and divers books were come
into England, our cardinal here, thinking to find a remedy for that,
sent immediately unto Rome for this title of Defender of the Faith: 
which afterwards the vicar of Croydon preached, that the king's Grace
would not lose it for all London and twenty miles about it. Neither
is it marvel, for it cost more than London and forty miles about it,
considering the great sums which you have heard the cardinal obtained
of the king for the pope's relief, besides the effusion of much
innocent blood.

     When this glorious title was come from Rome, the cardinal brought
it unto the king's Grace at Greenwich; and though that the king had
it already, and had read it, yet against the morning were all the
lords and gentlemen that could in so short space be gathered, sent
for, to come and receive it with honour. In the morning the cardinal
gat him through the backside, unto the Friars Observant, and part of
the gentlemen went round about, and welcomed him from Rome; part met
him half way, and some at the court gate. The king himself met him in
the hall, and brought him up into a great chamber, where was a seat
prepared on high for the king and the cardinal to sit on, while the
bull was read; which pomp all men of wisdom and understanding laughed
to scorn.

     This done, the king went to his chapel to hear mass, accompanied by
many nobles of his realm, and ambassadors of sundry princes. The
cardinal being revested to sing mass, the earl of Essex brought the
bason of water, the duke of Suffolk gave the assay, and the duke of
Norfolk held the towel; andso he proceeded to mass. When mass was
done, the bull was again published, the trumpets blew, the shawms and
sackbuts played in honour of the king's new style. Then the king went
to dinner, in the midst whereof the king of heralds and his company
began the largess, crying, "Henricus, Dei Gratia, Rex Angliæ et
Franciæ Defensor Fidei, et Dominus Hiberniæ." Thus were all things
ended with great solemnity.

     Not much unlike to this was the receiving of the cardinal's hat;
which when a ruffian had brought unto him to Westminster under his
cloak, he clothed the messenger in rich array, and sent him back
again to Dover; appointing the bishop of Canterbury to meet him, and
then another company of the lords and gentlemen, I wot not how often
before it came to Westminster; where it was set upon a cupboard, and
tapers round about it, so that the greatest duke in the land must
make courtesy thereunto, and to his empty seat, he being away.

     And forasmuch as we are in hand with the acts and doings of
Cardinal Wolsey, among many other things which of purpose we
overpass, this is not to be exempted out of memory, touching his
uncourteous, or rather churlish, handling of Richard Pacy, dean of
St. Paul's. This Pacy, being the king's secretary for the Latin
tongue, was of such ripeness of wit, of learning, and eloquence, also
in foreign languages so expert, that for the one he was thought most
meet to succeed after John Colet, in the deanery of Paul's; beside
which he was also preferred to the deanery of Exeter. For the other
he was sent in the king's affairs ambassador to Venice; which
function there he so discharged, that it is hard to say whether he
procured more commendation or admiration among the Venetians, both
for dexterity of his wit, and especially for the singular promptness
in the Italian tongue, wherein he seemed nothing inferior, neither to
Peter Vanne here in England, the king's secretary for the Italian
tongue, nor yet to any other, which were the best in that tongue in
all Venice. For opinion and fame of learning, he was so notoriously
accepted, not only here in England with Linacre, Grocine, More, and
other, but also known and reported abroad in such sort, that in all
the great heap of Erasmus's Epistles, he wrote almost to none so
many, as he wrote to this Richard Pacy.

     As the said Pacy was resident ambassador at Venice, the king,
having war the same time with Francis the French king (as is afore
rehearsed) through the conducting of the duke of Bourbon, whom he
then charged with his expenses, sent commandment to Pacy to give
attendance to the duke of Bourbon, concerning the receipt of that
money, and other necessities and exploits to that expedition
appertaining. In the mean while, as the French king with his army,
and the duke of Bourbon, were approaching in the battle together,
near about the city of Pavia, it so happened (some think through the
crafty packing of the cardinal) that the king's money was not so
ready as it was looked for:  by reason whereof the duke of Bourbon,
perceiving his soldiers about to shrink from him to the French king
for lack of payment, called to him the ambassador, complaining unto
him, how the king of England had deceived him, and broken promise
with him, to his great dishonour and utter undoing, &c. Pacy then,
being sure of the king's will, and suspecting the crafty fetch of the
cardinal, desired the duke not to take discomfort, nor any diffidence
of the king's assured promise, excusing the delay of the money as
well as he could, by interception, or other causes by the way of
incident, rather than for any lack of fidelity on the king's behalf: 
adding, moreover, that if it would please him happily to proceed, as
he had courageously begun, he should not stay for the king's money.
So sure he was of the king's mind therein, that he would supply the
lack of that payment upon his own credit, among his friends at
Venice:  and so did; whereupon the soldiers being sufficiently
satisfied with payment of their wages, proceeded forth with the duke
unto the battle. In the which battle the aforesaid French king, the
same time, before the city of Pavia, was taken prisoner, as is before
declared. Which being eftsoons known to the king of England, Pacy had
both condign thanks for his faithful service, and also his money
repaid again with the uttermost, as he well deserved. But as the
laud, and the renowned praise, of men for their worthy prowesses,
commonly in this world never go unaccompanied with some privy canker
of envy and disdain following after, so the singular industry of
Pacy, as it won much commendation with many, so it could not avoid
the secret sting of some serpents. For the conceived hatred of this
cardinal so kindled against him, that he never ceased, till first he
brought him out of the king's favour, and at last also out of his
perfect wits.

     The occasion how he fell beside himself was this, for that the
cardinal, after the death of Pope Adrian, hoping no less but that he
should have been advanced unto the papacy, and yet missing thereof,
he supposed with himself the fault chiefly to rest in Pacy's
negligence, by whose great wit and learning, and earnest means and
suit, he thought easily he might have achieved and compassed the
triple crown. Wherefore, he, seeing it otherwise come to pass, and
inflamed against Pacy for the same, wrought such ways and means, that
by the space almost of two years, Pacy, continuing at Venice, had
neither writing from the king, nor his council, what he should do;
nor yet any manner of allowance for his diet, although he wrote and
sent letters for the same to England very often:  for the cardinal had
altogether incensed the king against him. Whereupon the said Pacy
took such an inward thought and conceit, that his wits began to fail
him; he being notwithstanding in such favour among the senators of
Venice, that neither for gold nor silver he could there have lacked.
By some it is reported that the Venetian legate here in England,
coming to the cardinal, required if he would command any thing to the
English ambassador at Venice? To whom he should answer again in high
words, saying, Paceus decepit regem. Which words coming to Pacy's
ears, so deeply pierced his stomach, that he fell quite beside
himself. I heard it moreover of another thus testified, who had a
brother at the same time dwelling with Pacy:  that the cardinal, about
the returning of Pacy from Venice, sent him a letter so powdered,
(with what spices I cannot tell,) that at the reading thereof Pacy,
then being in the fields, fell suddenly in such a mighty running for
the space of two miles, that his servants had much ado to take him,
and bring him home.

     This piteous case of Pacy was not a little lamented by the whole
senate and chief learned men in Venice; insomuch that the king was
not only certified thereof by Thomas Lupset, (who then was chief man
about Pacy, and his secretary for that embassage,) but also the said
senate of Venice wrote in such sharp and vehement wise unto their
ambassador, then being in England, that he should signify unto the
king, touching Pacy's case, that thereby the king, knowing the truth,
and the whole circumstance of the matter, was not a little sorrowful
therefore. Whereupon Pacy was forthwith sent for home, and when he
came to England, he was commanded by the king to be specially well
tended, and to lack no keeping:  insomuch that within a small process
of time he was pretty well come again to his wits, and began to study
the Hebrew tongue with Wakefield; so that (the cardinal then being
absent) such ways were found by his friends, that he was brought to
the king, lying then at Richmond, where he and the king secretly
communed together by the space of two hours and more, not without
great rejoicing to the king, as it was perceived, to see him so well
amended, and returned to himself again; giving likewise strait charge
and commandment, that he should lack nothing. The cardinal being then
not present, when he heard of this, fearing lest he had disclosed
somewhat to the king, which he would not have known, and doubting
that the king should cast his favour again unto Pacy, began within a
while after to quarrel, and pick matters, and to lay certain things
to Pacy's charge; whereas he rather should have cleared himself of
those things which Pacy laid unto him before the king, which was
contrary to all good form and order of justice. For where the king
had willed the cardinal to purge himself of those things which Pacy
had rightly charged him withal, he, sitting in judgment, with the
duke of Norfolk, and other states of the realm, not as a defendant,
but as a judge in his own cause, so bare out himself and weighed down
Pacy, that Pacy was commanded to the Tower of London as prisoner,
where he continued by the space of two years, or thereabouts, and
afterwards, by the king's commandment, was discharged. But he, being
there prisoner, was therewith so deadly wounded and stricken, that he
fell worse from his wits than ever he was before, being in such a
frenzy or lunacy, that to his dying day he never came perfectly to
himself again. Notwithstanding this in him was no perpetual frenzy,
but came by fits; and when the fit was past, he could look on his
book, and reason and talk handsomely, but that now and then he showed
his disease. And thus much between the cardinal and Pacy.

     By this story of Pacy, and also by other passages above mentioned,
ye may partly conceive how greedy this cardinal was to be made pope.
Touching which matter here by the way something to treat, first is to
be understood, that forasmuch as Pacy either would not, or could not,
serve the cardinal's purpose herein, he thought to accomplish his
desire by other means, and namely by Stephen Gardiner, who was then
shortly after sent ambassador to Rome by the king and the cardinal,
in the time of Pope Clement the Seventh; and that for two special
causes, one was about the divorcement, the other for promoting the
cardinal to be pope. As touching the divorcement we will speak (the
Lord willing) hereafter. In the mean time, as concerning the
advancement of the cardinal, great labour was made, as in letters may
appear, sent from the cardinal to the said Stephen Gardiner; in which
letters he did solicit the said Gardiner, by all means, to pursue the
suit, willing him to stick for no cost, so far as six or seven
thousand pounds would stretch; for more, he said, he would not give
for the triple crown. Mark here, Christian reader! what a holy
catholic church this is, which rather may be called a bourse, or mart
of merchants, than any true form of a church.

     Many both of his, and also the king's letters, I could here insert;
but, for growing of the volume, I let them pass. One, for example's
sake, sent by the cardinal to Gardiner, shall at this time suffice
concerning this matter. The copy of the cardinal's ambitious letter
here in form followeth: 

     "Master Stephen, albeit ye shall be sufficiently, with your
colleagues, by such instructions as be given to Monsieur Vincent,
informed of the king's mind and mine, concerning my advancement unto
the dignity papal, not doubting but that for the singular devotion
which you bear towards the king and his affairs, both general and
particular, and perfect love which ye have towards me, ye will omit
nothing that may be excogitated to serve and conduce to that purpose;
yet I thought convenient, for the more fervent expression of my mind
in that behalf, to write unto you (as to the person whom I do most
entirely trust, and by whom this thing shall be most pithily set
forth) these few words following of mine own hand.

     "I doubt not but ye do profoundly consider, as well the state
wherein the church and all Christendom doth stand now presently, as
also the state of this realm, and of the king's secret matter; which
if it should be brought to pass by any other means than by the
authority of the church, I account this prince and realm utterly
undone. Wherefore it is expedient to have such a one to be pope and
common father of all princes, as may, can, and will, give remedy to
the premises. And albeit I account myself much unable, and that it
shall be now incommodious in this mine old age to be the said common
father; yet when all things be well pondered, &c., the qualities of
all the cardinals well considered, there shall be none found that can
and will set remedy in the aforesaid things, but only the cardinal of
York, whose good will and zeal is not to you of all men unknown. And
were it not for the re-integration of the state of the church and see
apostolic to the pristine dignity, and for the conducing of peace
amongst Christian princes, and especially to relieve this prince and
realm from the calamities that the same be now in, all the riches or
honour of the world should not cause me to accept the said dignity,
although the same with all commodities were offered unto me.

     "Nevertheless, conforming myself to the necessity of the time, and
the will and pleasure of these two princes, I am content to appone
all my wit and study, and to set forth all means and ways, for the
attaining of the said dignity:  for the achieving and attaining
whereof, forasmuch as thereupon dependeth the health and wealth, not
only of these two princes and their realms, but of all Christendom,
nothing is to be omitted that may conduce to the said end and
purpose. Wherefore, Master Stephen, since you be so plainly
advertised of my mind and intent, I shall pray you to exert your
utmost energies to bring the matter to an issue, sparing neither
expense, nor promises, nor toils. Suit your conduct to men's minds
and tempers, as they may be inclined, whether in public or private
affairs. You and your colleagues have hereby unlimited power, and
whatever you do, be assured it will gratify the king and me. We
intrust all, in one word, to your faith and genius. I have only to
pray that God may prosper all your exertions. Farewell.

"Ex ædibus meis Westmonast. vii. Febr.
Tuæ salutis et amplitudinis cupidissimus,
T. Ebor."

     In the so great labours, pursuits, and travails of the king and of
the cardinal, thou hast for thine instruction, loving reader, to note
and learn, how man purposeth one thing, and how God disposeth
another. For the king's purpose was to have the cardinal and legate
of York placed in the see papal, thinking by that means, if this
cardinal had been pope, the cause of his divorce more easily might be
compassed, which, otherwise, he thought impossible to contrive. But
God omnipotent, who only is director of all affairs, brought it
otherwise to pass, not as the king devised, but after his own wisdom;
so that both the divorcement was concluded, and yet neither Cardinal
Wolsey made pope, nor yet Pope Clement was dead. Yea, so he ruled the
matter, that notwithstanding Pope Clement was alive, yet both the
divorce proceeded, and also the pope's authority was thereby utterly
extinct and abolished out of this realm of England, to the singular
admiration of God's wondrous works, and perpetual praise to his
merciful goodness:  of which divorcement, and suppressing of the
pope's authority, we have likewise to make declaration; but first, as
we have begun with the cardinal of York, so we will make an end of
him. That done, we will (God willing) address ourselves to other
matters of more importance.

     As the ambassadors were thus travailing in Rome to promote the
cardinal to be pope, although the pope was not yet dead, in the mean
time the cardinal played the popish persecutor here at home. For
first, he sitting in his pontificalibus in the cathedral church of
Paul's, under his cloth of estate of rich cloth of gold, caused Friar
Barnes, an Augustin Friar, to bear a faggot, for certain points which
he called heresy. Also he caused at the same time two merchants of
the Stilyard likewise to bear faggots for eating flesh on a Friday;
at the which time the bishop of Rochester made a sermon in reproof of
Martin Luther, who had before written against the power of the bishop
of Rome. This bishop in his sermon spake so much of the honour of the
pope and his cardinals, and of their dignity and pre-eminence, that
he forgot to speak of the gospel which he took in hand to declare;
which was about A.D. 1526.

     After this, the said cardinal likewise, A.D. 1528, and in the month
of November, sitting at Westminster as legate, called before him the
whole clergy, and there promised that all abusions of the church
should be amended; but there nothing else was done, save only he
caused to be abjured, Arthur Bilney, Geffery Lome, and Garret, for
speaking against the pope's authority, and his pompous pride:  of whom
more shall be said (the Lord assisting us) hereafter. And this was
A.D. 1528.

     The year next following, which was A.D. 1529, began the question of
the king's marriage to be revived; whereupon Cardinal Campeius was
sent again into England from Rome, for the hearing and debating of
the matter; who then, with Cardinal Wolsey, consulting with the king,
although at first he seemed with his fellow cardinal to incline unto
the king's disposition, yet afterwards, perceiving the sequel of the
case, whether it tended so far as peradventure might be the occasion
of a blot to the court of Rome, and might shake perhaps the chair of
the pope's omnipotent authority, as well in other cases like, if this
one case were thoroughly decided by learning and truth of God's word: 
he therefore, slipping his neck out of the collar, craftily shifted
himself out of the realm before the day came appointed for
determination, leaving his subtle fellow behind him, to weigh with
the king in the mean time, while the matter might be brought up to
the court of Rome. The king, thus seeing himself disappointed, foiled
with false promises, and craftily doubled withal by the cardinals,
and at last, after so many delays and long expectation, nothing to be
concluded, was sore aggrieved in his mind with them, but especially
with Cardinal Wolsey, whom he had before so highly exalted, and
promoted to so many great dignities, as to the archbishopric of York,
the bishopric of Winchester, of Durham, the abbey of St. Alban's;
besides the chancellorship of England, and many other high rooms and
preferments in the realm; which caused him clearly to cast him out of
his favour, so that after that time he never came more to the king's
presence.

     Then followed first a council of the nobles, called the first of
October; during the which council all the lords and other the king's
council, agreeing together, resorted to Windsor to the king, and
there informed the king, that all things which he had done almost, by
his power legantine, were in the case of præmunire, and provision;
and that the cardinal had forfeited all his lands, tenements, goods,
and chattels to the king:  wherefore the king, willing to order him
according to the order of his laws, caused his attorney, Christopher
Hales, to sue out a writ of præmunire against him, in the which he
licensed him to make an attorney.

     And further, the seventeenth of November, he sent the two dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk to his place at Westminster, to fetch away the
great seal of England; which he was loth to deliver, if there had
been any remedy; but in conclusion, he delivered it to the two dukes,
which delivered the same to Dr. Taylor, master of the rolls, to carry
it to the king; which he so did the next day.
Illustration:  Cardinal Wolsey and the Dukes

     Besides this, the king sent Sir William Fitzwilliams, knight of the
garter, and treasurer of his house, and Dr. Stephen Gardiner, newly
made secretary, to see that no goods should be embezzled out of his
house; and further ordained, that the cardinal should remove to Esher
beside Kingston, there to tarry the king's pleasure, and to have all
things delivered to him which were necessary for him, but not after
his old pompous and superfluous fashion; for all his goods were
seized to the king's use. When the seal was thus taken from the
cardinal, the dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, with many earls, bishops,
and barons, came unto the Star Chamber, the nineteenth day of
October; where the duke of Norfolk declared, that the king's
Highness, for diverse and sundry offences, had taken from him his
great seal, and deposed him from all offices; and lest men might
complain for lack of justice, he had appointed him and the duke of
Suffolk, with the assent of the other lords, to sit in the Star
Chamber, to hear and determine causes indifferently; and that of all
things the king's pleasure and commandment was, that they should keep
their hands close from any rewards-taking, or maintenance:  and so
that week they sat in the Star Chamber, and determined causes.

     A few days after, in the same month, the cardinal removed out of
his house called York Place, with one Cross, say[ing] that he would
he had never borne more; meaning that by his cross which he bare as
legate, which degree-taking was his confusion, as you see openly; and
so he took his barge, and went to Putney by water, and there took his
horse and rode to Esher, where he remained till Lent after.

     During which time, he, being called on for an answer in the King's
Bench to the præmunire, for giving benefices by prevention, in
disturbance of men's inheritance, and divers other open causes in the
præmunire, according to the king's licence, constituted John Scute
and Edmond Jenny, apprentices of the law, his attorneys, which, by
his own warrant, signed with his hand, confessed all things
concerning the said suit; for they were too open to be cloaked or
hidden:  and so judgment was given, that he should forfeit all his
lands, tenements, goods, and chattels, and should be out of the
king's protection:  but for all that, the king sent him a sufficient
protection, and of his gentleness left to him the bishoprics of York
and Winchester, and gave to him plate and stuff convenient for his
degree; and the bishopric of Durham he gave to Dr. Tonstal, bishop of
London, and the abbey of St. Alban's he gave to the prior of Norwich: 
and to London he promoted Dr. John Stokesley, then ambassador to the
universities for the marriage, as you heard before. For all this
kindness showed to the cardinal, yet still he maligned against the
king, as you shall hereafter perceive:  but first we will proceed in
the course of these matters, as they passed in order.

     The next year following, which was A.D. 1530, in the month of
November, was summoned a general parliament, to be holden at
Westminster. In the which year, about the twenty-third day of
October, the king came to his manor of Greenwich, and there much
consulted with his council, for a meet man to be his chancellor, so
that in no wise he were a man of the spiritualty; and so, after long
debate, the king resolved upon Sir Thomas More, knight, chancellor of
the duchy of Lancaster, a man well learned in the tongues, and also
in the common law; whose wit was fine, and full of imaginations; by
reason whereof he was a little too much given to mocking, more than
became the person of Master More. And then on the Sunday, the twenty-
fourth day of the same month, the king made him his chancellor, and
delivered him the great seal; which lord chancellor, the next morrow
after, was led into the chancery by the two dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk, and there sworn, and then the mace was borne before him.

     Of this fall of the cardinal, and of the placing of Sir Thomas More
in the chancellorship, Erasmus, in an epistle to John Vergera, thus
writeth: 

     "The cardinal of York hath so offended the king's mind, that he,
being turned out of his goods and all his dignities, is committed,
not to prison, but to a certain lordship of his, with thirty servants
or keepers to give attendance upon him. Many and sundry complaints
are commenced against him, so that he is not like to escape with his
life. Such is the dalliance of fortune, of a schoolmaster to be made
a king:  for so he reigned, more like a king than the king himself. He
was dreaded of all men; he was loved but of a few, almost of none. A
little before he was apprehended, he caused Richard Pacy to be cast
into the Tower:  also he threatened my lord archbishop of Canterbury.
Solomon saith, that before the fall of man his spirit shall be
elevated. The archbishop of Canterbury was called or restored to be
chosen lord chancellor, which is the chiefest office in all that
realm; but he excused himself by his age, as being not able to wield
such a function:  wherefore the said office was bestowed upon Thomas
More, no less to the rejoicing of many, than the other was displaced
from it. These news my servant brought me out of England," &c.

     You heard before how a council of the nobles was appointed by the
king in the month of October, to assemble in the Star Chamber, about
the cardinal's matter; and also how a parliament was summoned to
begin in the month of November, in the year following, A.D. 1530. At
the beginning of which parliament, after that Master More, the new
chancellor, had finished his oration, the commons were commanded to
choose them a speaker, who was Thomas Audley, esquire, and attorney
of the duchy of Lancaster. Thus the parliament, being begun the sixth
day of the aforesaid month of November, at Westminster, where the
king with all the lords were set in the parliament chamber, the
commons, after they had presented their speaker, assembling in the
nether house, began to commune of their griefs, wherewith the
spiritualty had before-time grievously oppressed them, contrary both
to all right, and to the law of the realm; and especially were sore
moved with these six great causes: 

Grievances objected against the clergy of England.

     I. The first, for the excessive fines which the ordinaries took for
probates of testaments, insomuch that Sir Henry Guildford, knight of
the garter, and comptroller of the king's house, declared in the open
parliament, of his fidelity, that he and others being executors to
Sir William Compton, knight, paid for the probate of his will, to the
cardinal and the archbishop of Canterbury, a thousand marks sterling.
After this declaration, were showed so many extortions done by
ordinaries for probates of wills, that it were too much to rehearse.

     II. The second cause was, the great polling and extreme exaction
which the spiritual men used, in taking of corpses, presents, or
mortuaries:  for the children of the dead should all die for hunger
and go a-begging, rather than they would of charity give to them the
silly cow which the dead man owed, if he had but only one:  such was
the charity of them!

     III. The third cause was, that priests, being surveyors, stewards,
and officers, to bishops, abbots, and other spiritual heads, had and
occupied farms, granges, and grazing, in every country, so that the
poor husbandmen could have nothing but of them; and yet, for that,
they should pay dearly.

     IV. The fourth cause was, that the abbots, priors, and spiritual
men, kept tan-houses, and bought and sold wool, cloth, and all manner
of merchandise, as other temporal merchants did.

     V. The fifth cause was, because the spiritual persons, promoted to
great benefices, and having their livings of their flock, were lying
in the courts of lords' houses, and took all of their parishioners,
and nothing spent on them at all:  so that for lack of residence, both
the poor of the parish lacked refreshing, and universally all the
parishioners lacked preaching and true instructions of God's word, to
the great peril of their souls.

     VI. The sixth cause was, because one priest, being little learned,
had ten or twelve benefices, and was resident on none, and many well-
learned scholars in the university, who were able to preach and
teach, had neither benefice nor exhibition.

     These things before this time might in no wise be touched, nor yet
talked of by any man, except he would be made a heretic, or lose all
that he had:  for the bishops were chancellors, and had all the rule
about the king, so that no man durst once presume to attempt any
thing contrary to their profit or commodity.

     But now, when God had illuminated the eyes of the king, and the
time so served that men more boldly durst express with voice, such
grudges as they had long conceived in their heart against the clergy,
the burgesses of the parliament appointed certain of the commons'
house, men learned in the law, to draw one bill of the probates of
testaments; another for mortuaries; and the third for non-residence,
pluralities, and taking farms by spiritual men.

     And first, to the bill of mortuaries being drawn, and being also
passed the commons' house, and sent up to the higher, the spiritual
lords showed a fair face, saying, that assuredly priests and curates
took more than they should, and therefore it were well done to take
some reasonable order. Thus they spake, because it touched them but
little.

     After this, within two days, was sent up the second bill,
concerning probates of testaments; which bill, because it touched
their profit somewhat near, both the archbishop of Canterbury, and
all other bishops in general, began to frown and grunt, insomuch that
Doctor John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, standing up in the
parliament chamber, openly protested, that such bills were sent up
from the commons' house, tending to no other thing, but to the
destruction of the church; which church being down, the glory then of
the whole kingdom (said he) must needs fall:  desiring therefore the
lords, for God's sake, to take example by the kingdom of Bohemia. For
as it was then with the people there, so now what say the commons
here, but "Down with the church: " And all this (said he) seemeth to
be only for lack of faith. When these words were reported to the
commons of the lower house, (what the bishop had said, in noting all
their doings to be for lack of faith,) they took the matter
grievously, so to be esteemed of the bishop for no better than
heretics; understanding, moreover, how that he, by those slanderous
words, went about to persuade the lords temporal against them, and so
to overthrow the two bills by them passed before, as ye have heard.

     Whereupon, after long debate, it was at length agreed by the said
commons, that Thomas Audley, their speaker, with thirty of the chief
of that house, should be sent to the king, being then in his palace
at Westminster, before called York Place; where they eloquently
declared, what a dishonour to the king and the realm it was, to say
that those who were elected for the wisest men of all the shires,
cities, and boroughs, within the realm of England, should be declared
in so noble and open presence, to lack faith, which was equivalent to
say that they were infidels, and no Christians; as ill as Turks or
Saracens:  so that what pain or study soever they took for the
commonwealth, or what acts or laws soever they made or established,
should be taken as laws made by paynims and heathen people, and not
worthy to be kept by Christian men:  wherefore they most humbly
besought the king's Highness to call the said bishop before him, and
to cause him to speak more discreetly of such a number as were in the
commons' house.

     The king, not being well contented with the saying of the bishop,
yet gently answered the speaker, and sent them away; and immediately
sent for the archbishop of Canterbury, and six other bishops, and
Rochester also, signifying unto them the grudge of the commons. The
bishop of Rochester, excusing himself, answered, that he, in so
saying, meant only the doings of the Bohemians to be for lack of
faith, and not the doings of them that were in the commons' house: 
which saying was confirmed by the bishops there present, who had him
in great reputation. And so by that only saying the king accepted his
excuse, and therefore sent word to the commons, by Sir William
Fitzwilliams, knight, treasurer of his household:  which blind excuse
pleased the commons nothing at all.

     After this, divers assemblies were kept between certain of the
lords, and certain of the commons, for the bills of the probates of
testaments, and mortuaries. The temporalty laid to the spiritualty
their own laws and constitutions; and the spiritualty sore defended
them by prescription and usage:  to whom it was thus answered by a
gentleman of Gray's Inn; "The usage hath ever been of thieves, to rob
on Shooter's Hill:  ergo, is it lawful?" With this answer the
spiritual men were sore offended, because their doings were called
robberies; but the temporal men stood still by their sayings,
insomuch that the said gentleman said to the archbishop of
Canterbury, that both the exaction of probates of testaments, and the
taking of mortuaries, as they were used, were open robbery and theft.
After long disputation, the temporal lords began to lean to the
commons; but, for all that, the bills remained unconcluded awhile.

     It followeth shortly after in the parliament, that a bill was
assented to by the lords of the higher house, and sent down to the
commons in the lower house, and by them also with much labour agreed
unto, of whom the most part were the king's servants. In that bill it
was required and concluded, that the king should be released of all
such loan of money which he had borrowed of his subjects in the
fifteenth year of his reign. The passing of this bill went sore
against the stomachs of the poor commons; for many rested upon it,
counting and passing it over, one to another, for good debt, as if it
had been ready money in their purses. Wherefore the king, to gratify
them again, granted to them a general pardon of all offences, only
certain great offences and debts excepted. Also he aided them for the
redress of their griefs against the spiritualty, and caused two new
bills to be made indifferently, both for the probates of the
testaments, and mortuaries; which bills were so reasonable, that the
spiritual lords assented to them all, though they were sore against
their minds:  and especially the probates of testaments sore
displeased the bishops, and the mortuaries sore displeased the
parsons and vicars.

     After these acts thus agreed, the commons made another act for
pluralities of benefices, non-residence, buying and selling, and
taking of farms by spiritual persons; which act so displeased the
spiritualty, that the priests railed on the commons of the lower
house, and called them heretics and schismatics:  for which divers
priests were punished.

     This act was sore debated above, in the parliament chamber, and the
lords spiritual would in no wise consent. Wherefore the king,
perceiving the grudge of his commons, caused eight lords and eight of
his commons to meet in the Star Chamber at an afternoon, and there
was sore debating of the cause, insomuch that the temporal lords of
the upper house, who were there, took part with the commons against
the spiritual lords, and by force of reason caused them to assent to 
the bill, with a little qualifying; which bill the next day was
wholly agreed to in the lords' house, to the great rejoicing of the
lay-people, and to the great displeasure of the spiritual persons.

     During the time of the said parliament, there was brought down to
the commons the book of articles which the lords had put up to the
king against the cardinal. The chief articles were these.

     "I. First, That he, without the king's assent, had procured to be
legate, by reason whereof he took away the right of all bishops and
spiritual persons.

     "II. In all writings that he wrote to Rome, or to any other prince,
he wrote, I and my king; as who would say, that the king were his
servant.

     "III. That he slandered the Church of England to the court of Rome: 
for his suggestion to be legate, was to reform the Church of England,
which (as he wrote) was facta in reprobum sensum.

     "IV. He, without the king's assent, carried the king's great seal
with him into Flanders, when he was sent ambassador to the emperor.

     "V. Without the king's consent, he sent commission to Sir Gregory
de Cassalis, knight, to conclude a league between the king and the
duke of Ferrara.

     "VI. That he, having a French disorder, presumed to come and
breathe on the king.

     "VII. That he caused the cardinal's hat to be put on the king's
coin.

     "VIII. That he had sent innumerable substance to Rome, for the
obtaining of his dignities, to the great impoverishment of the realm: 
with many other things which are touched more at large in
chronicles."

     These articles, with many more, being read in the commons' house,
were confessed by the cardinal, and signed with his hand. Also there
was showed another writing, sealed with his seal, by the which he
gave to the king all his movables and unmovables.

     You have heard hitherto declared, how the cardinal was attainted in
the præmunire, and how he was put out of the office of the
chancellor, and lay at Esher:  which was A.D. 1530. The next year
after, in the Lent season, the king, by the advice of his council,
licensed him to go into his diocese of York, and gave him commandment
to keep him in his diocese, and not to return southward, without the
king's special licence in writing.

     So he made great provision to go northward, and apparelled his
servants newly, and bought many costly things for his household. But
divers of his servants at this time departed from him to the king's
service, and in especial Thomas Cromwel, one of his chief council,
and chief doer for him in the suppression of abbeys. After all things
necessary for his journey were prepared, he took his journey
northward, till he came to Southwell, which was in his diocese, and
there he continued that year, ever grudging at his fall, as you shall
hear hereafter but the lands which he had given to his colleges in
Oxford and Ipswich, were now come to the king's hands, by his
attainder in the præmunire; and yet the king, of his gentleness, and
for favour that he bare to good learning, erected again the college
in Oxford; and where it was named the Cardinal's College, he called
it the King's College; and endowed it with fair possessions, and
ordained new statutes and ordinances; and for because the college of
Ipswich was thought to be nothing profitable, therefore he left that
dissolved.
Illustration:  A Gateway

     Notwithstanding that the cardinal of York was thus attainted in
the præmunire, (as is above mentioned,) yet the king, being good unto
him, had granted him the bishoprics of York and Winchester, with
great plenty of substance, and had licensed him to lie in his diocese
of York, where he so continued the space of a year. But after, in the
year following, which was 1531, he, being in his diocese, wrote to
the court of Rome, and to divers other princes, letters in reproach
of the king, and, as much as in him lay, he stirred them up to
revenge his cause against the king and his realm:  insomuch that
divers opprobrious words against the king were spoken to Doctor
Edward Keerne, the king's orator at Rome; and it was said to him,
that, for the cardinal's sake, the king should have the worse speed
in the suit of his matrimony. The cardinal, also, would speak fair to
the people, to win their hearts, and declared ever that he was
unjustly and untruly ordered; which fair speaking made many men
believe that he said true:  and to gentlemen he gave great gifts to
allure them unto him. And to be had in more reputation among the
people, he determined to be installed or enthronised at York with all
the pomp that might be; and caused a throne to be erected in the
cathedral church, in such a height and fashion, as was never seen;
and sent to all the lords, abbots, priors, knights, esquires, and
gentlemen of his diocese, to be at his manor of Cawood on the sixth
of November, and so to bring him to York with all manner of pomp and
solemnity.
Illustration:  Cardinal Wolsey in Procession

     The king, which knew his doings and privy conveyance, all this
year dissembled the matter, to see what he would do at length, till
that he (seeing his proud heart so highly exalted, that he would be
so triumphantly enstalled, without making the king privy, yea, and in
a manner in disdain of the king) thought it not meet nor convenient
to suffer him any longer to continue in his malicious and proud
purposes and attempts:  wherefore he directed his letters to the earl
of Northumberland, willing him with all diligence to arrest the
cardinal, and to deliver him to the earl of Shrewsbury, great steward
of the king's household. When the earl had seen the letters, he with
a convenient number came to the manor of Cawood on the fourth of
November; and when he was brought to the cardinal in his chamber, he
said to him, "My lord! I pray you take patience, for here I arrest
you." "Arrest me?" said the cardinal. "Yea," said the earl, "I have a
commandment so to do." "You have no such power," said the cardinal,
"for I am both a cardinal, and a legate de latere, and a peer of the
college of Rome, and ought not to be arrested by any temporal power;
for I am not subject to that power:  wherefore if you arrest me, I
will withstand it." "Well," said the earl, "here is the king's
commission, (which he showed him,) and therefore I charge you to
obey." The cardinal somewhat remembered himself, and said, "Well, my
lord! I am content to obey; but although that I, by negligence, fell
into the punishment of the præmunire, and lost by the law all my
lands and goods, yet my person was in the king's protection, and I
was pardoned that offence; wherefore I marvel why I now should be
arrested, and specially considering that I am a member of the see
apostolic, on whom no temporal man ought to lay violent hands. Well,
I see the king lacketh good counsel." "Well," said the earl, "when I
was sworn warden of the Marshes, you yourself told me that I might
with my staff arrest all men under the degree of a king; and now I am
stronger, for I have a commission so to do, which you have seen." The
cardinal at length obeyed; and was kept in a privy chamber, and his
goods seized, and his officers discharged; and his physician, called
Doctor Augustine, was likewise arrested, and brought to the Tower by
Sir Walter Welsh, one of the king's chamber. On the sixth of November
he was conveyed from Cawood to Sheffield Castle, and there delivered
to the earl of Shrewsbury's keeping, till the king's pleasure were
known. Of this attachment was much communing among the common people,
whereof many were glad; for he was not in the favour of the
commonalty.

     When the cardinal was thus arrested, the king sent Sir William
Kingston, knight, captain of the guard, and constable of the Tower of
London, with certain yeomen of the guard, to Sheffield, to fetch the
cardinal to the Tower. When the cardinal saw the captain of the
guard, he was sore astonished, and shortly became sick; for then he
perceived some great trouble towards him, and for that cause, men
said, that he willingly took so much quantity of a strong purgation,
that his nature was not able to bear it. Also the matter that came
from him was so black, that the staining thereof could not be gotten
out of his blankets by any means. But Sir William Kingston comforted
him, and by easy journeys brought him to the abbey of Leicester on
the twenty-seventh of November; where, for very feebleness of nature,
caused by purgations and vomits, be died the second night following,
and in the same abbey lieth buried.

     It is testified by one, yet being alive, in whose arms the said
cardinal died, that his body, being dead, was black as pitch; also
was so heavy, that six could scarce bear it. Furthermore, it did so
stink above the ground, that they were constrained to hasten the
burial thereof in the night season, before it was day. At the which
burial, such a tempest with such a stench there arose, that all the
torches went out; and so he was thrown into the tomb, and there was
laid.

     By the ambitious pride and excessive worldly wealth of this one
cardinal, all men may easily understand and judge what the state and
condition of all the rest of the same order (whom we call spiritual
men) was in those days, as well in all other places of Christendom,
as especially here in England, where the princely possessions and
great pride of the clergy did not only far pass and exceed the common
measure and order of subjects, but also surmounted over kings and
princes, and all other estates, as may well appear by his doings and
order of his story, above described.

     Amongst other acts of the aforesaid cardinal, this is not to be
forgotten, that he founded a new college in Oxford, for the furniture
whereof he had gathered together all the best learned he could hear
of, amongst which number were these:  Clarke, Tyndale, Sommer, Frith,
and Taverner, with other more. Which, holding an assembly together in
the college, were accounted to be heretics, (as they called them,)
and thereupon were cast into a prison of the college, where salt-fish
lay, through the stink whereof the most part of them were infected;
and the said Clarke, being a tender young man, and the most singular
in learning amongst them all, died in the same prison; and other in
other places in the town also, of the same infection deceased.



170. MUMMUTH AND HITTON

     And thus, having detained the reader enough, or rather too
much, with this vain-glorious cardinal, now we will reduce our story
again to other more fruitful matter, and, as the order of time
requireth, first beginning with Master Humphrey Mummuth, a virtuous
and a good alderman of London, who in the time of the said cardinal
was troubled, as in the story here followeth.

The trouble of Humphrey Mummuth, alderman of London.

     Master Humphrey Mummuth was a right godly and sincere alderman
of London, who, in the days of Cardinal Wolsey, was troubled and put
in the Tower, for the gospel of Christ, and for maintaining them that
favoured the same.

     Stokesley, then bishop of London, ministered articles unto him,
to the number of four and twenty:  as for adhering to Luther and his
opinions; for having and reading heretical books and treatises; for
giving exhibition to William Tyndale, Roy, and such other; for
helping them over the sea to Luther; for ministering privy help to
translate, as well the Testament, as other books into English; for
eating flesh in Lent; for affirming faith only to justify; for
derogating from men's constitutions; for not praying to saints, not
allowing pilgrimage, auricular confession, the pope's pardons: 
briefly, for being an advancer of all Martin Luther's opinions, &c.

     He, being of these articles examined, and cast into the Tower,
at last was compelled to make his suit or purgation, writing to the
aforesaid cardinal, then lord chancellor, and the whole council, out
of the Tower; in the contents whereof he answered to the criminous
accusation of them which charged him with certain books received from
beyond the sea; also for his acquaintance with Master Tyndale.
Whereupon he said, that he denied not but that, four years then past,
he had heard the said Tyndale preach two or three sermons at St.
Dunstan's in the West; and afterward, meeting with the said Tyndale,
had certain communication with him concerning his living; who then
told him that he had none at all, but trusted to be in the bishop of
London's service:  for then he laboured to be his chaplain. But, being
refused of the bishop, so came again to the said Mummuth, this
examinate, and besought him to help him:  who the same time took him
into his house for half a year; where the said Tyndale lived (as he
said) like a good priest, studying both night and day. He would eat
but sodden meat by his good will, nor drink but small single beer. He
was never seen in that house to wear linen about him, all the space
of his being there. Whereupon the said Mummuth had the better liking
of him, so that he promised him ten pounds (as he then said) for his
father's and mother's souls, and all Christian souls; which money
afterwards he sent him over to Hamburgh, according to his promise.
And yet not to him alone he gave this exhibition, but to divers
others more likewise, which were no heretics:  as to Dr. Royston, the
bishop of London's chaplain, he exhibited forty or fifty pounds; to
Dr. Wodiall, provincial of the Friars Augustine, as much or more; to
Dr. Watson, the king's chaplain; also to other scholars, and divers
priests:  besides other charges bestowed upon religious houses, as
upon the nunnery of Denny, above fifty pounds sterling bestowed, &c.

     And as touching his books, as Enchiridion, the Pater-noster, De
Libertate Christiana, an English Testament:  of whom, some William
Tyndale left with him; some he sent unto him; some were brought into
his house, by whom he could not tell:  these books (he said) did lie
open in his house, the space of two years together, he suspecting no
harm to be in them. And moreover the same books being desired of
sundry persons, as of the abbess of Denny, a friar of Greenwich, the
father confessor of Sion, he let them have them, and yet he never
heard friar, priest, or lay-man, find any fault with the said books.
Likewise to Doctor Watson, to Doctor Stockhouse, and to Master
Martin, parson of Totingbecke, he committed the perusing of the books
of Pater-noster, and De Libertate Christiana, which found no great
fault with them; but only in the book De Libertate Christiana, they
said, there were things somewhat hard, except the reader were wise.

     Thus he, excusing himself, and moreover complaining of the loss
of his credit by his imprisonment in the Tower, and of the detriments
of his occupying, who was wont yearly to ship over five hundred
cloths to strangers, and set many clothiers awork in Suffolk, and in
other places, of whom he bought all their cloths, which almost were
now all undone; by this reason at length was set at liberty, being 
forced to abjure, and after was made knight by the king, and sheriff
of London.

     Of this Humphrey Mummuth we read of a notable example of
Christian patience, in the sermons of Master Latimer, which the said
Latimer heard in Cambridge from Master George Stafford, reader of the
divinity lecture in that university; who, expounding the place of St.
Paul to the Romans, that we shall overcome our enemy with well doing,
and so heap hot coals upon his head, &c., brought in an example,
saying, that he knew in London a great rich merchant (meaning this
Humphrey Mummuth) which had a very poor neighbour; yet for all his
poverty, he loved him very well, and lent him money at his need, and
let him come to his table whensoever he would. It was even at that
time when Doctor Colet was in trouble, and should have been burned,
if God had not turned the king's heart to the contrary. Now the rich
man began to be a Scripture-man; he began to smell the gospel. The
poor man was a papist still.

     It chanced on a time, when the rich man talked of the gospel,
sitting at his table, where he reproved popery, and such kind of
things; the poor man, being there present, took a great displeasure
against the rich man, insomuch that he would come no more to his
house:  he would borrow no more money of him, as he was wont to do
before times, yea, and conceived such hatred and malice against him,
that be went and accused him before the bishops. Now the rich man,
not knowing of any such displeasure, offered many times to talk with
him, and to set him at quiet. It would not be. The poor man had such
a stomach, that he would not vouchsafe to speak with him. If he met
the rich man in the street, he would go out of his way. One time it
happened that he met him so in a narrow street, that he could not
avoid but come near him:  yet for all that, this poor man (I say) had
such a stomach against the rich man, that he was minded to go
forward, and not to speak with him. The rich man, perceiving that,
caught him by the hand, and asked him, saying, "Neighbour! what is
come into your heart to take such displeasure with me? What have I
done against you? Tell me, and I will be ready at all times to make
you amends."

     Finally, he spake so gently, so charitably, so lovingly and
friendly, that it wrought so in the poor man's heart, that by and by
he fell down upon his knees, and asked him forgiveness. The rich man
forgave him, and so took him again to his favour, and they loved as
well as ever they did afore.

Thomas Hitten, at Maidstone, A.D. 1530. Persecuted by William Warham,
archbishop of Canterbury, and by Fisher, bishop of Rochester.

     Touching the memorial of Thomas Hitten remaineth nothing in
writing, but only his name; save that William Tyndale, in his Apology
against More, and also in another book, entitled The Practice of
Prelates, doth once or twice make mention of him, by way of
digression. He was (saith he) a preacher at Maidstone, whom the
bishop of Canterbury, William Warham, and Fisher, bishop of
Rochester, after they had long kept and tormented him in prison, with
sundry torments, and that notwithstanding he continued constant; at
the last they burned him at Maidstone, for the constant and manifest
testimony of Jesus Christ, and of his free grace and salvation, A.D.
1530.



171. THOMAS BILNEY

Thomas Bilney, and Thomas Arthur, who abjured at Norwich. Persecuted
by Cardinal Wolsey; Nixe, bishop of Norwich; the friars of Ipswich;
Friar Bird; Friar Hodgkins; Doctor Stokes; Sir Thomas More; Friar
Brusierd; Friar John Huggen, provincial of the Dominics; Friar
Jeffrey Julles; Friar Jugworth; Master William Jecket, gentleman;
William Nelson; and by Thomas Williams, A.D. 1531.

     In the story above passed of Cardinal Wolsey, mention was made
of certain whom the said cardinal caused to abjure, as Bilney,
Jeffrey Lome, Garret, Barnes, and such others, of whom we have now
(the Lord directing us) specially to treat. This Thomas Bilney was
brought up in the university of Cambridge, even from a child
profiting in all kind of liberal sciences, even unto the profession
of both laws. But at the last, having gotten a better schoolmaster,
even the Holy Spirit of Christ, who endued his heart, by secret
inspiration, with the knowledge of better and more wholesome things,
he came at thelast unto this point, that, forsaking the knowledge of
man's laws, he converted his study to those things which tended more
unto godliness than gainfulness.

     Finally, as he himself was greatly inflamed with the love of
true religion and godliness, even so again was in his heart an
incredible desire to allure many unto the same, desiring nothing
more, than that he might stir up and encourage any to the love of 
Christ, and sincere religion. Neither were his labours vain; for he
converted many of his fellows unto the knowledge of the gospel,
amongst which number were Thomas Arthur, and Master Hugh Latimer;
which Latimer at that time was cross-keeper at Cambridge, bringing it
forth upon procession days. At last, Bilney, forsaking the
university, went into many places, teaching and preaching, being
associated with Arthur, which accompanied him from the university.
The authority of Thomas Wolsey, cardinal of York, of whom ye have
heard before, at that time was great in England, but his pomp and
pride much greater; which did evidently declare unto all wise men the
manifest vanity, not only of his life, but also of all the bishops
and clergy:  whereupon Bilney, with other good men, marvelling at the
incredible insolency of the clergy, which they could now no longer
suffer or abide, began to shake and reprove this excessive pomp of
the clergy, and also to pluck at the authority of the bishop of Rome.

     Then it was time for the cardinal to awake, and speedily to
look about his business; neither lacked he in this point any craft or
subtlety of a serpent, for he understood well enough, upon how
slender a foundation their ambitious dignity was grounded, neither
was he ignorant that their Luciferous and proud kingdom could not
long continue against the manifest word of God; especially if the
light of the gospel should once open the eyes of men. For otherwise
he did not greatly fear the power and displeasure of kings and
princes. Only this he feared, the voice of Christ in his gospel; lest
it should disclose and detect their hypocrisy and deceits, and force
them to come into an order of godly discipline:  wherefore he thought
good speedily, in time, to withstand these beginnings; whereupon he
caused the said Bilney and Arthur to be apprehended and cast into
prison, as before you have heard.

     After this, on the twenty-seventh day of November, 1527, the
said cardinal, accompanied with a great number of bishops, as the
archbishop of Canterbury, Cuthbert of London, John of Rochester,
Nicholas of Ely, John of Exeter, John of Lincoln, John of Bath and
Wells, Harry of St. Asaph, with many others, both divines and
lawyers, came into the chapter-house of Westminster, where the said
Master Thomas Bilney, and Thomas Arthur, were brought before them;
and the said cardinal there inquired of Master Bilney, whether he
had, privately or publicly, preached or taught to the people the
opinions of Luther or any others condemned by the church, contrary to
the determination of the church:  whereunto Bilney answered, that
wittingly he had not preached or taught any of Luther's opinions, or
any others contrary to the catholic church. Then the cardinal asked
him, whether he had not once made an oath before, that he should not
preach, rehearse, or defend any of Luther's opinions, but should
impugn the same every where? He answered that he had made such an
oath; but not lawfully. Which interrogatories so ministered, and
answers made, the cardinal caused him to swear, to answer plainly to
the articles and errors preached and set forth by him, as well in the
city and diocese of London, as in the diocese of Norwich and other 
places, and that he should do it without any craft, qualifying, or
leaving out any part of the truth.

     After he was thus sworn and examined, the said cardinal
proceeded to the examination of Master Thomas Arthur there present,
causing him to take the like oath that Master Bilney did. Which done,
he asked him whether he had not once told Sir Thomas More, knight,
that in the sacrament of the altar was not the very body of Christ?
Which interrogatory he denied. Then the cardinal gave him time to
deliberate till noon, and to bring in his answer in writing. After
noon the same day, what time the examination of the aforesaid Thomas
Arthur was ended, the cardinal and bishops, by their authority ex
officio, did call in for witnesses before Master Bilney, certain men;
namely, John Huggen, chief provincial of the Friars Preachers
throughout all England, Jeffrey Julles, and Richard Jugworth,
professors of divinity of the same order. Also William Jecket,
gentleman, William Nelson, and Thomas William, which were sworn that,
all favour, hate, love, or reward set apart, they should, without
concealing any falsehood, or omitting any truth, speak their minds,
upon the articles laid against him, or preached by him, as well
within the diocese of London, as the diocese of Norwich:  and because
he was otherwise occupied about the affairs of the realm, he
committed the hearing of the matter to the bishop of London, and to
other bishops there present, or to three of them, to proceed against
all men, as well spiritual as temporal, as also against schedules,
writings, and books, set forth and translated by Martin Luther,
lately condemned by Pope Leo the Tenth, and by all manner of probable
means to inquire and root out their errors and opinions; and all such
as were found culpable, to compel them to abjuration according to the
law, orif the matter so required, to deliver them unto the secular
power, and to give them full power and authority to determine upon
them.

     The twenty-seventh day of November, in the year aforesaid, the
bishop of London, with the bishops of Ely and Rochester, came unto
the bishop of Norwich's house, where likewise, ex officio, they did
swear certain witnesses against Master Thomas Arthur, in like sort as
they had done before against Master Thomas Bilney, and so proceeded
to the examination of Master Arthur:  which being ended upon certain
interrogatories, the bishop of London warned him, by virtue of his
oath, that he should not reveal his examinations, nor his answers,
nor any part or parcel thereof.

     The second day of December, the bishops assembled again in the
same place, and swore more witnesses against Master Bilney:  that
done, they called for Master Arthur, unto whose charge they laid
these articles following: 

     I. That he exhorted the people, in his prayers, to pray
especially for those that now be in prison. -- Which article he
denied.

     II. That he said, "Though men be restrained to preach now-a-
days, (which is against God's laws,) yet I may preach; first, by the
authority of my lord cardinal; for I have his licence:  secondly, by
the authority of the university:  thirdly, by the pope:  fourthly, by
the authority of God, by which authority every man may preach, and
there is neither bishop nor ordinary, nor yet the pope, that may make
any law to hinder any man to preach the gospel." -- This article he
confessed that he spake.

     III. When he spake of laws, he brought a similitude of crosses,
set up against the walls of London, that men should not offend there.
"When there was but one cross, or a few more, men did reverence them,
and offended not there; but when there was in every corner a cross
set, then men of necessity were compelled to offend upon the crosses.
So, in like manner, when there was but a few holy and devout laws in
the church, then men were afraid to offend them. Afterwards they made
many laws for their advantage; and such as were pecuniary, those they
do observe; and such as are not pecuniary, those they call palea, and
regard them not:  and so now-a-days there are so many laws, that
whether a man do ill or well, he shall be taken in the law." -- He
confessed that he spake the very same, or the like words.

     IV. He said, "Good people! if I should suffer persecution for
the preaching of the gospel of God, yet there are seven thousand more
that would preach the gospel of God as I do now. Therefore, good
people! good people! (which words he often rehearsed, as it were
lamenting,) think not that if these tyrants and persecutors put a man
to death, the preaching of the gospel therefore is to be forsaken." -
- This article he confessed that he spake in like words and sense,
saving that he made no mention of tyrants.

     V. That every man, yea, every layman, is a priest. -- He
confessed that he spake such words, declaring in his sermon, that
every Christian man is a priest, offering up the sacrifice of prayer;
and if they did murmur against the order of the priesthood, they 
murmur against themselves.

     VI. That men should pray to no saints in heaven, but only to
God; and they should use no other mediator for them, but Christ Jesus
our Redeemer only. -- This article he denied.

     VII. He preached that they should worship no images of saints,
which were nothing but stocks and stones. -- This he also denied.

     VIII. He did preach upon Whit Sunday last, within the
university of Cambridge, such or like words and sentences:  that a
bachelor of divinity, admitted of the university, or any other person
having or knowing the gospel of God, should go forth and preach in
every place, and let for no man, of what estate or degree soever he
were:  and if any bishop did accurse them for so doing, their curses
should turn to the harm of themselves. -- He confessed this.

     Which answers thus made and acknowledged, the said Master
Arthur did revoke and condemn the said articles against him
administered, and submitted himself to the punishment and judgment of
the church .

     The third of December, the bishop of London, with the other
bishops assembling in the place aforesaid, after that Bilney had
denied utterly to return to the Church of Rome, the bishop of London,
in discharge of his conscience, (as he said,) lest he should hide any
thing that had come to his hands, he did really exhibit unto the
notaries, in the presence of the said Master Bilney, certain letters,
to wit, five letters or epistles, with one schedule in one of the
epistles, containing his articles and answers folded therein, and
another epistle folded in manner of a book, with six leaves; which,
all and every one, he commanded to be written out and registered, and
the originals to be delivered to him again.

     This was done in the presence of Master Bilney, desiring a copy
of them, and he bound the notaries with an oath, for the safe keeping
of the copies, and true registering of the same:  which articles and
answers, with three of the same epistles, with certain depositions
deposed by the aforesaid witnesses, here follow truly drawn; partly
out of his own handwriting, and partly out of the register: 

     I. Whether they did believe with their hearts, that the
assertions of Luther, which are impugned by the bishop of Rochester,
were justly and godly condemned; and that Luther, with his adherents,
was a wicked and detestable heretic?

     II. Whether they did believe that the general councils and
ecclesiastical constitutions, once received, and not abrogated again,
ought to be observed of all men, even for conscience' sake, and not
only for fear?

     III. Whether they did believe that the pope's laws were
profitable and necessary to the preferment of godliness, not
repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, neither by any means to be
abrogated, but to be reverenced by all men?

     IV. Whether they did believe that the catholic church may err
in the faith or no? and whether they think that catholic church to be
a sensible church, which may be demonstrated and pointed out as it
were with a finger; or that it is only a spiritual church,
intelligible and known only unto God?

     V. Whether they think that the images of saints are Christianly
set in the churches, and ought to be worshipped of all true
Christians?

     VI. Whether that a man may believe, without hurt to his faith,
or note of heresy, the souls of Peter and Paul, and of our Lady,
either to be, or not to be, in heaven; and that there is yet no
judgment given upon the souls departed?

     VII. Whether that a man may believe, without spot of heresy,
that our Lady remained not always a virgin?

     VIII. Whether holy-days and fasting-days, ordained and received
by the church, may be broken by any private man, at his will and
pleasure, without sin or obstinacy?

     IX. Whether we are bound to be obedient unto prelates, bishops,
and kings, by God's commandment, as we are unto our parents?

     X. Whether they believe that the church doth well and godly in
praying to the saints?

     XI. Whether they think that Christ only ought to be prayed
unto, and that it is no heresy, if any man affirm that saints should
not be prayed unto?

     XII. Whether they do think all true Christians to be by like
right priests, and all those to have received the keys of binding and
loosing at the hands of Christ, which have obtained the Spirit of
God, and only such, whether they be laymen or priests?

     XIII. Whether they believe with their hearts, that faith may be
without works and charity?

     XIV. Whether they believe that it is more agreeable to the
faith, that the people should pray in their own tongue, than in a
learned unknown tongue; and whether they commend the prayer in a
strange tongue or no?

     XV. Whether they would have the masses and Gospels openly to be
read in churches in the vulgar tongue, rather than in the Latin
tongue?

     XVI. Whether they commend that children should only be taught
the Lord's Prayer, and not the Salutation of the Virgin, or Creed?

     XVII. Whether they do think the wooden beads, which the common
people do use, worthy to be denied or not?

     XVIII. Whether they do think the whole Scripture ought to be
translated into English, or that it should be more profitable for the
people, than as it is now read?

     XIX. Whether they would have the organs, and all manner of
songs, to be put out of the church of God?

     XX. Whether they do think that it pertaineth to the bishops to
punish any man with bonds or imprisonment, or that they have any
temporal power and authority?

     XXI. Whether they think that constitution to be godly, that no
man should preach in another man's diocese without letters of
commendation and licence obtained of the bishop?

     XXII. Whether they think the vows of religious men, and private
religion, to be constituted and ordained by the Spirit of God;
neither by any means to be repugnant to a free and perfect Christian
life?

     XXIII. Whether they believe that we should pray for the dead,
or believe that there is a purgatory; or that we are bound by the
necessity of faith, to believe neither of them:  but that it is free
without sin, either to believe it, or not to believe it?

     XXIV. Whether they believe that moral philosophy and natural,
do prevail any thing for the better understanding of the Scriptures,
and for the exposition and defence of the truth?

     XXV. Whether they think that the pope's indulgences and pardons
are rather to be rejected than received?

     XXVI. Whether it be contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his
apostles, that Christians should by any means contend in the law, to
seek any manner of restitution?

     XXVII. Whether they believe all things pertaining to salvation
and damnation to come of necessity, and nothing to be in our own
wills?

     XXVIII. Whether they believe God to be the author of all evil,
as well of the fault, as of the punishment?

     XXIX. Whether they think mass only to be profitable to him
which saith it, and whether every man may alter or leave out the rite
and order of the mass without hurt of faith?

     XXX. Whether they believe that there can be any moral virtues
without the grace of Christian living; or that the virtues which
Aristotle hath set out, are rather feigned?

     XXXI. Whether they think it heresy to teach the people, that it
is free to give tithes unto priests, or to any other poor man?

     XXXII. Whether they do think it more Christian-like to take
away the images out of the churches, or to permit them to adorn them
and honour them?

     XXXIII. Whether they think it the part of a Christian man, that
preachers should exhort men to pilgrimage, or to the worshipping of
relics?

     XXXIV. Whether that thou, Thomas Bilney being cited upon heresy
to appear before my lord cardinal, and, before the day of thy
appearance, not having made thy purgation upon those points that thou
wast cited, hast preached openly in divers churches of the city and
diocese of London, without sufficient licence from the bishop or any
other?

     Concerning the answers unto these articles, gentle reader!
forasmuch as in the most part of them, Bilney with Arthur seemed to
consent and agree, (although not fully and directly, but by way and
manner of qualifying,) yet because he did not expressly deny them, it
shall not be needful here to recite them all, save only such, wherein 
he seemed to dissent from them.

Bilney's answers to the interrogatories aforesaid.

     To the first and second articles he answered affirmatively. To
the third he said, "I believe that many of the pope's laws are
profitable and necessary, and do prevail unto godliness, neither in
any point are repugnant unto the Scriptures, nor by any means are to
be abrogate, but of all men to be observed and reverenced. But
touching all those laws, I cannot determine:  for as for such as I
have not read, I trust notwithstanding they are good also; and as for
those that I have read, I did never read them to the end and purpose
to reprove them, but, according to my power, to learn and understand
them. And as touching the multitude of laws, St. Augustine in his
time did much complain; and Gerson also, who marvelled that we could
by any means live in safety amongst so many snares of constitutions,
when our forefathers, being pure before their fall, could not observe
one only precept."

     To the fourth article he said, that "the catholic church can by
no means err in faith, for it is the whole congregation of the elect,
and so known only unto God, which knoweth who are his:  otherwise no
man should be ascertained of another man's salvation, or of his own,
but only through faith and hope. For it is written, No man knoweth
whether he be worthy of hatred or love. It is also sensible, and may
be demonstrate so far forth as it is sufficient to establish us in
all things that are to be believed and done:  for I may truly say of
the general council being congregate in the Holy Ghost, Behold here
the catholic church; denominating the whole, by the most worthy
part."

     To the fifth article he answered affirmatively.

     To the sixth article he answered, that he did not believe that
they are in heaven; being so taught by the Scriptures, and holy
fathers of the church.

     To the seventh article he said, that it is not to be thought
contrary.

     To the eighth article, whether a man may not observe the feasts
and fasts of the church prescribed; he thought that there is no man
but he ought to observe them.

     To the ninth article he said, that we are likewise bound, as
unto parents.

     To the fourteenth article he answered thus:  "The fourteenth
chapter of St. Paul, in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, moveth
me to believe, that it is best that the people should have the Lord's
Prayer and the Apostles' Creed in English, so that the devotion might
the more be furthered by the understanding thereof; and also that
thereby they might be the more prompt and expert in the articles of
their faith, of the which, it is to be feared, a great number are
ignorant. Surely I have heard many say, that they never heard speak
of the resurrection of the body:  and being certified thereof, but
they became much more apt and ready unto goodness, and more fearful
to do evil."

     To the fifteenth article he said, he would "wish that the
Gospels and Epistles should be read in English; For I would (saith
Paul) rather have five words, &c., that the church might he edified,
&c.; and Chrysostom exhorteth his hearers to look upon books, that
they might the better commit unto memory those things which they had
heard; and St. Bede did translate St. John's Gospel into English."

     Touching the eighteenth article, for the translation of the
Scripture into English, concerning the whole, he did partly doubt;
notwithstanding he wished that the Gospels and Epistles of the day
might be read in English, that the people might be made the more apt
to hear sermons. But here some will say, there might also be danger
for error:  whereunto he answered, "But good and vigilant pastors
might easily help that matter, by adding the plain interpretation of
the fathers in the margins in English, upon the dark and obscure
places, which would put away all doubts. Oh how great profit of souls
should the vigilant pastors get thereby! Which contrariwise, through
their slothfulness, bring great ruin and decay."

     To the five-and-twentieth article, as touching pardons, he
said, that "as they be used, and have too long been, it were better
that they should be restrained, than that they should be any longer
used as they have been, to the injury of Christ's passion."

     Touching the six-and-twentieth article he said, that "it is not
against the doctrine of Christ and his apostles to contend in the
law, so it be done with charity, if St. Augustine, and the reverend
father Marcus Marulus, did not err, which granted that liberty to the
weak Christians:  albeit the true Christians ought to give ear unto
St. Paul's saying, Why do ye not rather suffer injury? and to Christ
himself, which saith, He that would contend with thee in the law, and
take away thy coat, give him thy cloak also."

     Touching the eight-and-twentieth, he answered, that "God is the
author of the punishment only, but not of the offence, as Basil the
Great teacheth in his sermon upon these words of the prophet, Non est
malum in civitate quod non fecit Dominus. And St. Augustine in
another place, as I remember, prayeth, that he be not led into that
temptation, that he should believe God to be the author of sin and
wickedness."

Here ensueth a brief summary or collection of certain depositions,
deposed by the several witnesses aforenamed, upon certain
interrogatories ministered unto them for the inquiry of Master
Bilney's doctrine and preaching.

     First it was deposed, that in his sermon in Christ's church in
Ipswich, he should preach and say, "Our Saviour Christ is our
Mediator between us and the Father:  what should we need then to seek
any saint for remedy? Wherefore, it is great injury to the blood of
Christ, to make such petitions, and blasphemeth our Saviour.

     "That man is so imperfect of himself, that he can in no wise
merit by his own deeds."

     Also, that "the coming of Christ was long prophesied before,
and desired by the prophets:  but John Baptist, being more than a
prophet, did not only prophesy, but with his finger showed him,
saying, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the
world. Then, if this were the very Lamb, which John did demonstrate,
which taketh away the sins of the world, what injury is it to our
Saviour Christ, that to be buried in St. Francis' cowl should remit
four parts of penance! What is then left to our Saviour Christ, which
taketh away the sills of the world? This I will justify to be a great
blasphemy to the blood of Christ."

     Also, that "it was a great folly to go on pilgrimage, and that
preachers, in times past, have been antichrists; and now it hath
pleased God somewhat to show forth their falsehood and errors."

     Also, that "the miracles done at Walsingham, at Canterbury, and
there, in Ipswich, were done by the devil, through the sufferance of
God, to blind the poor people:  and that the pope hath not the keys
that Peter had, except he follow Peter in his living."

     Moreover, it was deposed against him, that he was notoriously
suspected as a heretic, and twice pulled out of the pulpit in the
diocese of Norwich.
Illustration:  Bilney pulled out of the pulpit

     Also it was deposed against him, that he should, in the parish
church of Wilsdon, exhort the people to put away their gods of silver
and gold, and leave their offerings unto them; for that such things
as they offered have been known oftentimes afterward to have been
given to the vilest of women. Also that Jews and Saracens would have
become Christian men long ago, had it not been for the idolatry of
Christian men, in offering of candles, wax, and money, to stocks and
stones.

     Over and besides these cavilling matters articulated and
deposed against him, here follow certain other articles whereupon he
was detected, gathered out of his sermon which he preached in the
parish church of St. Magnus, in Whitsun week, A.D. 1527.

     First he said, "Pray you only to God, and to no saints,"
rehearsing the Litany; and when he cameto Sancta Maria, ora pro
nobis, that is, Holy Mary pray for us, he said, "Stay there."

     He said, that "Christian men ought to worship God only, and no
saints."

     He said, that "Christian people should set up no light before
the images of saints:  for saints in heaven need no light, and the
images have no eyes to see."

     He said, "As Hezekiah destroyed the brazen serpent that Moses
made by the commandment of God; even so should kings and princes now-
a-days destroy and burn the images of saints set up in churches.

     "These five hundred years there hath been no good pope, and in
all the times past, we can find but fifty:  for they have neither
preached, nor lived well, or conformably to their dignity; wherefore,
till now, they have borne the keys of simony. Against them, good
people! we must preach and teach unto you, for we cannot come to
them; it is great pity they have sore slandered the blood of Christ.

     "The people have used foolishly of late pilgrimages, which for
them had been better they had been at home.

     "Many have made certain vows, which be not possible for them to
fulfil, and those nothing meritorious.

     "The preachers before this have been antichrists, and now it
hath pleased our Saviour Christ to show their false errors, and to
teach another way and manner of the holy gospel of Christ, to the
comfort of your souls.

     "I trust that there shall and will come other besides me, which
shall show and preach to you the same faith and manner of living that
I do show and preach to you, which is the very true gospel of our
Saviour Christ, and the mind of the holy fathers, whereby you shall
be brought from their errors, wherein you have been long seduced; for
before this there have been many that have slandered you, and the
gospel of our Saviour Christ."

     These and many other such-like depositions were deposed against
him by the deponents and witnesses before sworn, which wholly to
recite would be too long and tedious; wherefore these shall suffice
at this time, being the principal matters, and in manner the effect
of all the rest. But now, before we return again to the order of his
examination, we think it good here to infer a certain dialogue,
containing a communication between a friar named John Brusierd, and
Master Thomas Bilney, which we have thought meet for this place,
because it was done in Ipswich, and also about the time of these
examinations:  the copy whereof we have written with the friar's own
hand in Latin, the translation whereof in English here ensueth.

     Brusierd. "Although you have blasphemed most perniciously the
immaculate flock of Christ with certain blasphemies of yours, yet,
being moved partly with your gentle petitions, partly pitying your
case and towardly disposition, I am come hither to talk with you
secretly, before the rumour be disclosed, upon the consideration of
the threefold errors which I see in you. First, for that when you
began to shoot the dart of your pestiferous error more vehemently
than you ought, against the breast of the ignorant multitude, you
seemed to pour upon the ground the precious blood of Christ, as with
a certain vehement violence, out of the miserable vessel of your
heart. Whereas you said that none of the saints do make intercession
for us, nor obtain for us any thing, you have perilously blasphemed
the efficacy of thewhole church, consecrated with the precious blood
of Christ. Which thing you are not able to deny, especially seeing
the same so incessantly doth knock at the gates of heaven, through
the continual intercession of the saints, according as in the
sevenfold Litany manifestly appeareth to be seen."

     Bilney. "I marvel at you, and doubtless cannot marvel enough,
but that the strong and vain custom of superstitious men, thinking
themselves not to be heard but in much babbling, doth put an end to
my admiration:  for our heavenly Father knoweth what we have need of
before we ask. Also it is written, There is one mediator of God and
men, the man Christ Jesus. If then there be but one mediator of God
and men, the man Christ Jesus, where is our blessed Lady? where are
then St. Peter and other saints?"

     Brusierd. "I suppose that no man is ignorant but that the
divines of the primitive church have all affirmed to be one mediator
between God and man. Neither could any at that time praise or pray to
the saints, when as yet they, living in the calamities of this body,
and wrestling with the contrary winds of this world, were not yet
come to the port of rest whereunto they were travelling. Paul, I
grant, did rightly affirm to be but one mediator of God and man, what
time as yet there was no saint canonized, or put into the calendar.
But now, seeing the church doth know, and doth certainly believe,
through the undoubted revelations of God, that the blessed Virgin and
other saints are placed in the bosom of Abraham, she, therefore, like
a good mother, hath taught, and that most diligently, us her
children, to praise the omnipotent Jesus in his saints; and also to
offer up by the same saints our petitions unto God. Thereof it is the
psalmist. saith, Praise ye the Lord in his saints. Rightly also do we
say and affirm, that saints may pray for us. One man may pray for
another; ergo, much more may saints who do enjoy the fruition of his
High Majesty. For so it is written, God is my witness, whom I serve
in my spirit, in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I
remember you in my prayers always for you, &c."

     Bilney. "I marvel, doubtless, that you, a man learned, are not
yet delivered out of the confused dungeon of heresy, through the help
of the holy gospel; especially seeing that in the same gospel it is
written, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you ask the
Father in my name he will give it unto you:  he saith not, Whatsoever
ye ask the Father in the name of St. Peter, St. Paul, or other
saints; but in my name. Let us ask therefore help in the name of him,
which is able to obtain for us of his Father whatsoever we ask, lest
with all the clergy, did pray for corporal infirmity, it appeareth
manifestly that we ought to worship the saints, and also to give
honour in a manner to their images:  further also, to pray to Almighty
God and all saints for corporal infirmity, that we may be delivered
from the same, so that they may say the like for us, which is said in
the Gospel, Send them away, because they cry after us. And although
there be infinite places inexpugnable to be alleged out of the Holy
Scripture, wherewith we might easily resist this your error, yet
standing herewith content, as sufficient at this present, we will
proceed now to your second pestiferous error, wherein you, like an
ingrate child, go about to tear out the bowels of your mother. For in
that you say and affirm, blasphemously, the bishop of Rome to be the
very antichrist, and that his privilege have no force against the
gates of hell; in so saying, what do you, but, like a most unkind and
unnatural child, spoil your loving mother of all her treasures, and
wound her, being spoiled; and being wounded, pluck out her bowels
most miserably upon the earth? But forasmuch as there is nothing so
absurd, or so heretical, but shall be received by some itching ears,
I would therefore now hear you declare, how he sitteth in the temple
of God as God, being exalted and worshipped alove all that is named
God; or how that he showeth himself as Lord, in power and signs and
wonders deceitful."

     Bilney. "Although incredulity doth not suffer you,
notwithstanding your learning, to understand these things, yet I will
go about something to help your incredulity herein, through the help
of the Lord:  beseeching you that, setting all superstition apart, you
will understand those things that are above. Do ye know the table of
the ten commandments?"

     Brusierd. "According as the catholic doctors do expound them, I
know them meanly; but how you do expound them I cannot tell."

     Bilney. "And do you know also the constitutions of men, which
are devised only by the dreams of men; whereunto men are so straitly
bound, that, under pain of death, they are compelled to observe
them?"

     Brusierd. "I know certain sanctions of the holy fathers; but
such as you speak of, to be devised by men's dreams, I know none."

     Bilney. "Now then let us set and compare these two together,
and so shall you easily understand the bishop of Rome, whom they call
the pope, to sit in the temple of God as God, and to be extolled
above all that is named God. It is written, The temple of Lord is
holy, which is you. Therefore the conscience of man is the temple of
the Holy Ghost; in peradventure hereafter, in the end of the world,
at the strait judgment, we shall hear, Hitherto in my name ye have
asked nothing."

     Brusierd. "Where ye marvel (with what mind, I cannot tell) that
I, being a learned man, (as you say,) am not delivered yet from the
confused dungeon of heresy, through the help of the gospel; much more
do you, that are far better learned than I, cause me to marvel at
your foolish admiration. Neither can I choose but laugh at you, as
one being rapt to the third heaven of such high mysteries, and yet
see not those things which be done here, in the lower parts of
terrene philosophy:  for what a ridiculous thing is it, for a man to
look so long upon the sun, that he can see nothing else but the sun,
nor cannot tell whither to turn him? Moreover, what student is there
in all Cambridge, be he never so young, that knoweth not that the
argument of authority, brought out negatively, hath no force?"

     Bilney. "So as the Pharisees took Christ, you take my words,
much otherwise than I meant."

     Brusierd. "Your words, which wander far from the scope of
Scripture, I do not like. What is in your meaning, and lieth inwardly
in your mind, I cannot tell."

     Bilney. "Such as invocate the help either of Christ, or of any
other saint, for any corporal infirmity, to be delivered from the
same, may be well resembled to delicate patients, who, being under
the hand of physicians, and having medicines ministered against their
diseases, not abiding the pain thereof, rap all asunder:  wherefore I
say, no man ought to implore the help of God, or of any saint, for
corporal infirmity."

     Brusierd. "O most pernicious and perilous heresy of all that
ever I heard! Thus you, fleeing the smoke, fall into the fire and
avoiding the danger of Scylla, you run upon Charybdis. O heart of
man, wrapped in palpable darkness! I wish, Master Bilney, that you
would but once search and fetch out the first origin of these
Rogation days:  for so we read in the church story, that they were
first ordained by Pope Gregory, with fasting, prayers, and holy
processions, against the pestilence, by the infection of the air,
then reigning among the people; at what time, the people then going
in the procession, a certain image like to our blessed Lady, painted
by the hands of St. Luke the evangelist, did go before them; about
the which image, in honour of the Virgin, angels did sing this
anthem:  'O queen of heaven, be glad!' to which anthem the pope also
adjoined this, 'Pray to the Lord for us.' Wherefore, seeing the
angels did worship the image of the glorious Virgin Mary, in the
honour of her; and seeing moreover the holy father, Pope Gregory,
which temple I will prove the pope to sit as God, and to be exalted
above all that is called God. For whoso contemneth the decalogue, or
the table of the commandments of God, there is but a small punishment
for him; neither is that punishment to death:  but contrariwise, he
that shall contemn or violate the constitutions, which you call the
sanctions of men, is counted by all men's judgment guilty of death.
What is this, but for the high bishop of Rome to sit and reign in the
temple of God, (that is, in man's conscience,) as God?"

     Brusierd. "Although this exposition seemeth unworthy for
Christian ears, yet I would hear you further, how he showeth himself
in signs and wonders deceitful."

     Bilney. "These wonders, which they call miracles, be wrought
daily in the church, not by the power of God, as many think; but by
the illusion of Satan rather, who, as the Scripture witnesseth, hath
been loose now abroad five hundred years, according as it is written
in the book of the Apocalypse, After a thousand years Satan shall be
let loose, &c. Neither are they to be called miracles of true
Christian men, but illusions rather, whereby to delude men's minds;
to make them put their faith in our Lady, and in other saints, and
not in God alone, to whom be honour and glory for ever."

     Brusierd. "But that I believe and know that God and all his
saints will take everlasting revenge-meat upon thee, I would surely,
with these nails of mine, be thy death, for this horrible and
enormous injury against the precious blood of Christ. God saith, I
will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live.
And thou blasphemest him, as though he should lay privy snares of
death for us secretly, that we should not espy them; which if it were
true, we might well say with Hugh de Saint Victore in this manner:  If
it be an error, it is by thee, O God, that we are deceived; for these
be confirmed with such signs and wonders, which cannot be done but by
thee. But I am assured it is untrue and heretical, and therefore I
will leave this matter, and will talk with you concerning the merits
of saints; for once I remember, in a certain sermon of yours, you
said, that no saint, though his suffering were never so great, and
his life most pure, deserved any thing for us with God, either by his
death or life:  which is contrary to St. Augustine."

     Bilney. "Christ saith one thing, St. Augustine another:  whether
of these two shall we believe? for Christ, willing to deliver us out
of this dark dungeon of ignorance, gave forth a certain parable of
ten virgins, of which five were fools, and five were wise. By the
five foolish virgins, wanting the oil of good works, he meant all us
sinners:  by the wisevirgins, he meant the company of all holy saints.
Now let us hear what the five wise virgins answered to the five
foolish, craving oil of them; No, say they, lest peradventure we have
not sufficient for us and for you. Get you rather to them that sell,
and buy of them to serve your turn. Wherefore, if they had not oil
sufficient for themselves, and also for the others, where then be the
merits of saints wherewith they can deserve both for themselves and
for us, certes I cannot see."

     Brusierd. "You wrest the Scriptures from the right
understanding to a reprobate sense, that I am scarce able to hold
mine eyes from tears, hearing with mine ears these words of you. Fare
ye well!"

The submission of Master Thomas Bilney.

     The fourth day of December, the bishop of London, with the
other bishops, his assistants, assembled again in the chapter-house
of Westminster; whither also Master Bilney was brought, and was
exhorted and admonished to abjure and recant; who answered, that he
would stand to his conscience. Then the bishop of London, with other
bishops, did publish the depositions of the witnesses, with his
articles and answers, commanding that they should be read. That done,
the bishop exhorted him again to deliberate with himself, whether he
would return to the church, and renounce his opinions, or no; and
bade him to depart into a void place, and there to deliberate with
himself. Which done, the bishop asked him again if he would return?
who answered, Let justice and judgment be done in the name of the
Lord. And being divers times admonished to abjure, he would make no
other answer, but Fiat justitia, &c., and, This is the day God made;
let us rejoice and be glad in it. Then the bishop, after
deliberation, putting off his cap, said, In nomine Patris et Filii et
Spiritus Sancti, Amen:  Exurgat Deus et dissipentur inimici ejus. And
making a cross on his forehead and his breast, by the counsel of the
other bishops he gave sentence against Master Bilney, being there
present, in this manner:  "I, by the consent and counsel of my
brethren here present, do pronounce thee, Thomas Bilney, who hast
been accused of divers articles, to be convicted of heresy; and for
the rest of the sentence we take deliberation till to-morrow."

     The fifth day of December, the bishops assembled there again,
before whom Bilney was brought; whom the bishop asked, if he would
yet return to the unity of the church, and revoke his heresies which
he had preached. Whereupon Bilney answered that he would not be a
slander to the gospel, trusting that he was not separate from the
church; and that if the multitude of witnesses might be credited, he
might have thirty men of honest life on his part, against one to the
contrary brought in against him. Which witnesses, the bishop said,
came too late; for after publication they could not be received by
the law. Then Bilney alleging the story of Susan and Daniel, the
bishop of London still exhorted him to return to the unity of the
church, and to abjure his heresies, and permitted him to go into some
secret place, there to consult with his friends, till one o'clock in
the afternoon of the same day.

     At afternoon, the bishop of London again asked him whether he
would return to the church, and acknowledge his heresies. Bilney
answered, that he trusted he was not separate from the church; and
required time and place to bring in witnesses:  which was refused.
Then the bishop once again required of him, whether he would return
to the catholic church:  whereunto he answered, that if they could
teach and prove sufficiently, that he was convicted, he would yield
and submit himself:  and he desired again to have time and space to
bring in again his refused witnesses; and other answer he would give
none.

     Then the bishop put Master Bilney aside, and took counsel with
his fellows; and afterwards calling in Master Bilney, asked him
again, whether he would abjure? But he would make no other answer
than before. Then the bishop, with the consent of the rest, did
decree and determine, that it was not lawful to hear a petition which
was against the law:  and inquiring again, whether he would abjure, he
answered plainly, No; and desired to have time to consult with his
friends, in whom his trust was. And being once again asked whether he
would return, and instantly desired thereunto, or else the sentence
must be read, he required the bishop to give him licence to
deliberate with himself until the next morrow, whether he might
abjure the heresies wherewith he was defamed or no. The bishop
granted him that he should have a little time to deliberate with
Master Dancaster; but Bilney required space till the next morrow, to
consult with Master Farmer and Master Dancaster, but the bishop would
not grant him his request, for fear lest he should appeal. But at
last the bishop, inclining unto him, granted him two nights' respite
to deliberate; that is to say, till Saturday at nine o'clock in the
forenoon:  and then to give a plain determinate answer, what he would
do in the premises.

     The seventh day of December, in the year and place aforesaid,
the bishop of London with the other bishops being assembled, Bilney
also personally appeared; whom the bishop of London asked, whether he
would now return to the unity of the church, and revoke the errors
and heresies whereof be stood accused, detected, and convicted. Who
answered, that now he was persuaded by Master Dancaster and others
his friends, he would submit himself, trusting that they would deal
gently with him, both in his abjuration and penance. Then he desired
that he might read his abjuration; which the bishop granted. When be
had read the same secretly by himself, and was returned, being
demanded what he would do in the premises, he answered, that he would
abjure and submit himself; and there openly read his abjuration, and
subscribed, and delivered it to the bishop, which then did absolve
him, and, for his penance, enjoined him, that he should abide in a
prison appointed by the cardinal, till he were by him released:  and,
moreover, the next day he should go before the procession, in the
cathedral church of St. Paul, bareheaded, with a faggot on his
shoulder; and should stand before the preacher at Paul's Cross all
the sermon time.

     Here, forasmuch as mention is made before of five letters or
epistles, which this good man wrote to Cuthbert Tonstal, bishop of
London, and by the said bishop delivered unto the registrars, we
thought good to insert certain thereof, such as could come to our
hands:  the copy of which letters, as they were written by him in
Latin, because they are in the former edition to be seen and read in
the same Latin wherein he wrote them, it shall suffice in this book
to express the same only in English. Concerning the first epistle,
which containeth the whole story of his conversion, and seemeth more
effectual in the Latin than in the English; we have exhibited it in
the second edition, and therefore here have only made mention of the
same briefly. The same in English is as followeth

     "To the reverend father in Christ, Cuthbert, bishop of London,
Thomas Bilney wisheth health in Christ, with all submission due unto
such a prelate: 

     "In this behalf, most reverend father in Christ, I think myself
most happy that it is my chance to be called to examination before
your Reverence, for that you are of such wisdom and learning, of such
integrity of life, which all men do confess to be in you, that even
yourself cannot choose, (if you do not too lightly esteem God's gifts
in you,) as often as you shall remember the great things which God
hath done unto you, but straightways secretly in your heart, to his
high praise, say, He that is mighty hath done great things unto me,
and holy is his name. I rejoice that I have now happened upon such a
judge, and with all my heart give thanks unto God, who ruleth all
things.

     "And albeit (God is my witness) I know not myself guilty of any
error in my sermons, neither of any heresy or sedition, which divers
do slander me of, seeking rather their own lucre and advantage than
the health of souls:  notwithstanding I do exceedingly rejoice, that
it is so foreseen by God's divine providence, that I should be
brought before the tribunal seat of Tonstal, who knoweth as well as
any other, that there will never be wanting a Jannes and a Jambres,
who will resist the truth; that there shall never be lacking some
Elymas, who will go about to subvert the straight ways of the Lord;
and finally, that some Demetriuses, Pithonises, Balaams, Nicolaitans,
Cains, and Ishmaels, will be always at hand, which will greedily hunt
and seek after that which pertaineth unto themselves, and not that
which pertaineth to Jesus Christ. How can it then be, that they can
suffer Christ to be truly and sincerely preached? for if the people
begin wholly in every place once to put their confidence in Christ,
which was for them crucified, then straight-ways that which they have
hitherto embraced instead of Christ, shall utterly decay in the
hearts of the faithful.

     "Then they shall understand that Christ is not in this place,
or in that place, but the kingdom of God to be in themselves. Then
shall they plainly see, that the Father is not to be worshipped,
neither in the mount of Samaria, nor at Jerusalem, but in all places,
in spirit and in truth:  which thing if it come once to pass, the
beasts of the field will think all their gain and lucre lost. In whom
the saying of Ezekiel is fulfilled:  My sheep are dispersed because
they had no shepherd, and are devoured of the beast of the field, and
strayed abroad:  my flock hath erred and wandered in every mountain,
and upon every high hill, and is dispersed throughout all the earth;
and there is no man which hath sought to gather them together; no,
there was no man which once sought after them. But if any man would
seek to reduce those which were gone astray, into the fold of Christ,
that is, the unity of faith, by and by there rise up certain against
him, which are named pastors, but indeed are wolves; which seek no
other thing of their flock, but the milk, wool, and flesh, leaving
both their own souls, and the souls of their flock, unto the devil.

     "These men, I say, rise up like unto Demetrius, crying out,
This heretic dissuadeth and seduceth much people every where, saying,
that they are not gods which are made with hands. These are they,
these I say, most reverend father! are they, which, under the
pretence of persecuting heretics, follow their own licentious lives;
enemies unto the cross of Christ, which can suffer and bear any thing
rather than the sincere preaching of Christ crucified for our sins.
These are they unto whom Christ threateneth eternal damnation, where
he saith, Woe be unto you, scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites! which
shut up the kingdom of heaven before men, and you yourselves enter
not in, neither suffer those which would enter, to come in. These are
they that have come in another way to the charge of souls, as it
appeareth; For if any man, saith Christ, come in by me, he shall be
saved; and shall come in, and go out, and find pasture. These men do
not find pasture, for they never teach and draw others after them,
that they should enter by Christ, which alone is the door whereby we
must come unto the Father; but set before the people another way,
persuading them to come unto God through good works, oftentimes
speaking nothing at all of Christ, thereby seeking rather their own
gain and lucre, than the salvation of souls:  in this point being
worse than those which upon Christ (being the foundation) do build
wood, hay, and straw. These men confess that they know Christ, but by
their deeds they deny him.

     "These are those physicians upon whom that woman that was
twelve years vexed with the bloody flux had consumed all that she
had, and felt no help, but was still worse and worse, until such time
as she came at last unto Christ; and after she had once touched the
hem of his vesture, through faith she was so healed, that by and by
she felt the same in her body. O mighty power of the most Highest!
which I also, miserable sinner, have often tasted and felt, which, 
before I could come unto Christ, had even likewise spent all that I
had upon those ignorant physicians, that is to say, unlearned hearers
of confession; so that there was but small force of strength left in
me, (which of nature was but weak,) small store of money, and very
little wit or understanding:  for they appointed me fastings,
watchings, buying of pardons, and masses; in all which things (as I
now understand) they sought rather their own gain, than the salvation
of my sick and languishing soul.

     "But at the last I heard speak of Jesus, even then when the New
Testament was first set forth by Erasmus; which understanding to be
eloquently done by him, and being allured rather by the Latin than
for the word of God, (for at that time I knew not what it meant,) I
bought it even by the providence of God, as I do now well understand
and perceive:  and at the first reading (as I well remember) I chanced
upon this sentence of St. Paul, (O most sweet and comfortable
sentence to my soul!) in 1 Tim. i. 15, It is a true saying, and
worthy of all men to be embraced, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners; of whom I am the chief and principal. This one
sentence, through God's instruction and inward working, which I did 
not then perceive, did so exhilarate my heart, being before wounded
with the guilt of my sins, and being almost in despair, that
immediately I felt a marvellous comfort and quietness, insomuch that
my bruised bones leaped for joy.

     "After this, the Scripture began to be more pleasant unto me
than the honey or the honeycomb; wherein I learned, that all my
travails, all my fasting and watching, all the redemption of masses
and pardons, being done without trust in Christ, who only saveth his
people from their sins; these, I say, I learned to be nothing else
but even (as St. Augustine saith) a hasty and swift running out of
the right way; or else much like to the vesture made of fig leaves,
wherewithal Adam and Eve went about in vain to cover themselves, and
could never before obtain quietness and rest, until they believed in
the promise of God, that Christ, the seed of the woman, should tread
upon the serpent's head:  neither could I be relieved or eased of the
sharp stings and bitings of my sins, before I was taught of God that
lesson which Christ speaketh of in John iii.:  Even as Moses exalted
the serpent in the desert, so shall the Son of man be exalted, that
all which believe on him should not perish, but have life
everlasting.

     "As soon as (according to the measure of grace given unto me of
God) I began to taste and savour of this heavenly lesson, which no
man can teach but only God, who revealed the same unto Peter, I
desired the Lord to increase my faith; and at last I desired nothing
more, than that I, being so comforted by him, might be strengthened
by his Holy Spirit and grace from above, that I might teach the
wicked his ways, which are mercy and truth; and that the wicked might
be converted unto him by me, which sometime was also wicked; which
thing, whilst with all my power I did endeavour before my lord
cardinal and your fatherhood, Christ was blasphemed in me, (and this
is my only comfort in these my afflictions,) whom with my whole power
I do teach and set forth, being made for us by God his Father, our
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and finally
our satisfaction; who was made sin for us, (that is to say, a
sacrifice for sin,) that we, through him, should be made the
righteousness of God; who became accursed for us, to redeem us from
the curse of the law; who also came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. The righteous, I say, who falsely judge and
think themselves so to be, (for all men have sinned, and lack the
glory of God, whereby he freely forgiveth sins unto all believers,
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus,) because that all
mankind was grievously wounded in him who fell amongst thieves,
between Jerusalem and Jericho. And therefore, with all my whole
power, I teach, that all men should first acknowledge their sins, and
condemn them, and afterwards hunger and thirst for that righteousness
whereof St. Paul speaketh, The righteousness of God, by faith in
Jesus Christ, is upon all them which believe in him; for there is no
difference:  all have sinned, and lack the glory of God, and are
justified freely through his grace, by the redemption which is in
Jesus Christ:  the which whosoever doth hunger or thirst for, without
doubt they shall at length be so satisfied, that they shall not
hunger and thirst for ever.

     "But, forasmuch as this hunger and thirst was wont to be
quenched with the fulness of man's righteousness, which is wrought
through the faith of our own elect and chosen works; as pilgrimages,
buying of pardons, offering of candles, elect and chosen fasts, and
oftentimes superstitious; and finally all kind of voluntary
devotions, (as they call them,) against which God's word speaketh
plainly in Dent. iv. 2, saying, Thou shalt not do that which seemeth
good unto thyself; but that which I command thee for to do, that do
thou, neither adding to, neither diminishing any thing from it.
Therefore, I say, oftentimes I have spoken of those works, not
condemning them, (as I take God to be my witness,) but reproving
their abuse; making the lawful use of them manifest even unto
children; exhorting all men not so to cleave unto them, that they,
being satisfied therewith, should loathe or wax weary of Christ, as
many do:  in whom I bid your fatherhood most prosperously well to
fare.

     "And this is the whole sum. If you will appoint me to dilate
more at large the things here touched, I will not refuse to do it, so
that you will grant me time (for to do it out of hand I am not able
for the weakness of my body); being ready always, if I have erred in
any thing, to be better instructed."

Another letter of Master Thomas Bilney, to Cuthbert Tonstal, bishop
of London.

     "Albeit I do not remember, reverend father in Christ! whether I
have either spoken or written that the gospel hath not been sincerely
preached now of long time, which your Lordship seemeth to have
gathered, either by some Momus and sinister hearers of my sermons,
who (like Malchus, having their right ear cut off) only bring their
left ear to sermons; or else by some words or writings of mine, which
have rashly passed me, rather than upon any evil intent; yet,
forasmuch as in this behalf your Reverence doth command me, and that
of a good mind I trust, (for how can I think in Tonstal any craft or
doubleness to dwell?) I will briefly declare unto you what I have
learned of God, through Christ, in the Scriptures; and how that the
doctors, even of great fame and renown, have not taught the same of
late in their sermons; referring, or rather submitting, all things
unto your fatherly judgment, which is more quick and sharp than that
it can by any means be blinded; and so sincere, that it will not in
any point seek slander or discord. Therefore I do confess, that I
have often been afraid that Christ hath not been purely preached now
a long time:  for who hath been now, a long season, offended through
him? Who hath now these many years suffered any persecution for the
gospel's sake? Where is the sword which he came to send upon the
earth? And finally, where are the rest of the sincere and uncorrupt
fruits of the gospel? which, because we have not a long time seen, is
it not to be feared, that the tree which bringeth forth those fruits
hath now a long time been wanting in our region or country? Much less
is it to be believed, that it hath been nourished amongst us. Have we
not seen all things quiet and peaceable a long time? But what saith
the church? My grief most bitter is turned to peace, &c. But the
malignant church saith, Peace, peace; and there is no peace, but only
that whereof it is written, When the mighty armed man keepeth his
gates, he possesseth all things in quiet; but when he seeth that he
shall be vanquished of a stronger than he himself is, he spoileth and
destroyeth all things.

     "What now-a-days beginneth again to be attempted, I dare not
say. God grant us grace that we do not refuse and reject (if it be
Christ) him that cometh unto us, lest that we do feel that terrible
judgment against us:  Because, saith he, they have not received the
love of truth, that they might be saved; therefore God will send upon
them the blindness of error, that they shall give credit unto lies. O
terrible sentence, (which God knoweth whether a great number have not
already incurred,) That all they might be judged which have not given
credit unto the truth, but consented unto iniquity. The time shall
come, saith he, when that they will not suffer the true doctrine to
be preached."

     "And what shall we then say of that learning, which hath now so
long time reigned and triumphed, so that no man hath once opened his
mouth against it? shall we think it sound doctrine? Truly iniquity
did never more abound, nor charity was ever so cold. And what should
we say to be the cause thereof? Hath the cause been for lack of
preaching against the vices of men, and exhorting to charity? That
cannot be, for many learned and great clerks sufficiently can witness
to the contrary. And yet, all these notwithstanding, we see the life
and manners of men do greatly degenerate from true Christianity, and
seem to cry out indeed, that it is fulfilled in us, which God in
times past threatened by his prophet Amos, saying, Behold, the day
shall come, saith the Lord, that I will send hunger upon the earth: 
not hunger of bread, neither thirst of water, but of hearing the word
of God. And the people shall be moved from sea to sea, and from the
west unto the east; and shall run about seeking for the word of God,
but shall not find it. In those days the fair virgins and young men
shall perish for thirst, &c.

     "But now, to pass over many things whereby I am moved to fear
that the word of God hath not been purely preached, this is not the
least argument, that they which come, and are sent, and endeavour
themselves to preach Christ truly, are evil spoken of for his name,
which is the rock of offence, and stumbling-block unto them which
stumble upon his word, and do not believe on him on whom they are
builded.

     "But you will ask, Who are those men, and what is their
doctrine? Truly, I say, whosoever entereth in by the door, Christ,
into the sheepfold:  which thing all such men shall do, as seek
nothing else but the glory of God, and salvation of souls. Of all
such it may be truly said, that whom the Lord sendeth, he speaketh
the word of God. And why so? Because he representeth the angel of the
church of Philadelphia, unto whom St. John writeth, saying, This
saith he which is holy and true; which hath the keys of David; which
.openeth and no man shutteth; shutteth and no man openeth. Behold,
saith he, (speaking in the name of Christ, which is the door and
door-keeper,) I have set before thee an open door, that is to say, of
the Scriptures, opening thy senses, that thou shouldest understand
the Scriptures; and that, because thou hast entered in by me which am
the door:  For whosoever entereth in by me, which am the door, shall
be saved; ye shall go in and come out, and find pasture:  for the
door-keeper openeth the door unto him, and the sheep hear his voice.
But contrariwise, they which have not entered in by the door, but
have climbed in some other way, by ambition, avarice, or desire of
rule, they shall even in a moment go down into hell, except they
repent. And by them is the saying of Jeremy verified; All beauty is
gone away from the daughter of Zion, because her princes are become
like rams, not finding pasture. And why so? because like thieves and
robbers they have climbed another way, not being called nor sent.

     "And what marvel is it if they do not preach, when they are not
sent, but run for lucre; seeking their own glory, and not the glory
of God, and salvation of souls? And this is the root of all mischief
in the church, that they are not sent inwardly of God; for without
this inward calling it helpeth nothing, before God, to be a hundred
times elect, and consecrate by a thousand bulls, either by pope,
king, or emperor. God beholdeth the heart, whose judgments are
according to truth, howsoever we deceive the judgment of men for a
time; which also at the last shall see their abomination. This, I
say, is the original of all mischief in the church, that we thrust in
ourselves into the charge of souls, whose salvation and the glory of
God (which is, to enter in by the door) we do not thirst nor seek
for, but altogether our own lucre and profit.

     "Hereupon it cometh, that we know not how to preach Christ
purely; For how should they preach Christ, saith the apostle, except
they be sent? for otherwise many thieves and robbers do preach him,
but with their lips only, for their heart is far from him:  neither
yet do we suffer those which do know how to preach, but persecute
them, and go about to oppress the Scriptures now springing, under the
pretence of godliness; fearing, as I suppose, lest the Romans should
come and take our place. Ah! thou wicked enemy Herod! why art thou
afraid Christ should come? He taketh not away mortal and earthly
kingdoms, which giveth heavenly kingdoms. O blindness! O our great
blindness! yea, more than that of Egypt; of which if there be any
that would admonish the people, by and by saith Pharaoh, Moses and
Aaron! why do ye cause the people to cease from their labours? and
truly called their labours. Get you to your burdens. Lay more work
upon them, and cause them to do it, that they hearken not unto lies.
Thus the people was dispersed throughout all the land of Egypt, to
gather up chaff; I say, to gather up chaff. Who shall grant unto us,
that God shall say, I have looked down, and beholden the affliction
of my people which is in Egypt, and have heard their sighs, and am
come down to deliver them? But whither hath this zeal carried me?
whether after knowledge or not, I dare not say:  it appertaineth to
you, reverend father! to judge thereupon.

     "Now you do look that I should show unto you at large, (as you
write,) how that they ought sincerely to preach, to the better
edifying hereafter of your flock. Here, I confess, I was afraid that
you had spoken in some derision, until that I well perceived that you
had written it with your own hand.

     Then again I began to doubt, for what intent Tonstal should
require that of Bilney:  an old soldier, of a young beginner; the
chief pastor of London, of a poor silly sheep. But for what intent
soever you did it, I trust it was of a good mind; and albeit that I
am weak of body, yet, through the grace of Christ given unto me, I
will attempt this matter, although it do far pass my power:  under the
which burden if I be oppressed, yet I will not deceive you, for that
I have promised nothing but a prompt and ready will to do that which
you have commanded.

     "As touching that pertaineth to preaching of the gospel, I
would to God you would give me leave privately to talk with you, that
I might speak freely that which I have learned in the Holy Scriptures
for the consolation of my conscience; which if you will so do, I
trust you shall not repent you. All things shall be submitted unto
your judgment; who (except I be utterly deceived) will not break the
reed that is bruised, and put out the flax that is smoking; but
rather, if I shall be found in any error, (as indeed I am a man,)
you, as spiritual, shall restore me through the spirit of gentleness,
considering yourself, lest that you also be tempted:  for every
bishop, which is taken from among men, is ordained for men, not
violently to assault those which are ignorant, and do err; for he
himself is compassed in with infirmity, that he, being not void of
evils, should learn to have compassion upon other miserable people.

     "I desire you that you will remember me tomorrow, that by your
aid I may be brought before the tribunal seat of my lord cardinal;
before whom I had rather stand, than before any of his deputies.

     Yours, THOMAS BILNEY."

A letter of Master Bilney, to Tonstal, bishop of London, fruitful and
necessary for all ministers to read.

     "Most reverend father! salutations in Christ. You have required
me to write unto you at large, wherein men have not preached as they
ought, and how they should have preached better. This is a burden too
heavy for my strength, under the which if I shall faint, it belongeth
to you, which have laid this burden upon my shoulders, to ease me
thereof. As touching the first part, they have not preached as they
ought, which, leaving the word of God, have taught their own
traditions; of the which sort there are not a few, as it is very
evident, in that they do report those which preach the word of God
sincerely, to teach new doctrine. This is also no small testimony
thereof, that in all England you shall scarce find one or two that
are mighty in the Scriptures; and what marvel is it, if all godly
things do seem new unto them unto whom the gospel is new and strange,
being nursed in men's traditions now a long time? Would to God these
things were not true which I utter unto you! but alas, they are too
true.

     "They have also preached evil, which either have wrested the
Scriptures themselves, or have rashly gathered them out of old rotten
papers, being wrested by others:  and how should it be but that they
should wrest them, or else how should they judge them, being falsely
interpreted by others, when they have not once read over the Bible
orderly? Of this sort there is truly a very great number, from which
number many great rabbins or masters shall hardly excuse themselves;
whom the people have hitherto reverenced instead of gods. And these
are they that now serve their bellies, seeking their own glory, and
not the true glory of God, which might be set forth even by Balaam's
ass; much less then ought we to contemn such abjects, which preach
the word of God. We have, saith St. Paul, this treasure in brickle
vessels, that the glory of the power might be of God, and not of us.
God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise;
and the weak things God hath chosen to confound the mighty; and vile
things of the world, and despised, hath he chosen, and things that
are not, to bring to nought things that are, that no flesh should
glory in his sight. But now all men in a manner will be wise, and
therefore they are ashamed of the simple gospel; they are ashamed
truly to say with Paul, and to perform it indeed, I brethren, when I
came unto you, did not come with excellency of words, or of wisdom,
preaching the testimony of Christ; for I esteemed not myself to know
any thing amongst you, but only Jesus Christ, and him crucified. O
voice of a true evangelist! But now we are ashamed of this foolish
preaching, by the which it hath pleased God to save all those that
believe in him; and being puffed up with our own fleshly mind, we
choose rather proudly to walk in those things which we have not seen,
preaching fables and lies, and not the law of God, which is
undefiled, converting souls.

     "But how should they teach the law of God, which they have not
once read in the books, much less learned at the mouth of God? But in
a pastor and a bishop this is required:  Thou, son of man! saith God,
lay up in thy heart all my words which I do speak unto thee, &c.:  and
shortly after he saith, Thou, son of man! I have ordained and given
thee a watchman unto the house of Israel. I have given thee, saith
he; not coming in by ambition, nor thrusting in thyself, nor climbing
in anotherway, but I gave thee when thou lookedst not for it, that
thou shouldst attend thereupon, and give warning from the top of the
watch-tower, if any enemies should approach. I have given thee unto
the house of Israel, and not the house of Israel unto thee, that thou
shouldst acknowledge thyself to be the servant of the sheep, and not
their Iord; for I have not given the sheep for the shepherd, but the
shepherd for the sheep. He that sitteth down, is greater than he that
doth minister and serve unto him:  which thing was well known of him
who truly said, We are your servants for Christ's cause.

     "But for what purpose have I given thee unto the house of
Israel? -- that thou shouldst only minister the sacraments?
consecrate wood, stones, and churchyards? (This, I take God to
witness, with great sighs and groans I write unto you, pouring out
before you the grief of my heart.) No, truly. What then? First
followeth the office of the bishop, Thou shalt hear the word out of
my mouth. This is but a short lesson, but such as all the world
cannot comprehend, without they be inwardly taught of God.

     "And what else meaneth this, Out of my mouth thou shalt hear
the word, but that thou shalt be taught of God? Therefore as many as
are not taught of God, although they be ever so well exercised in the
Scriptures by man's help, yet are they not watchmen given by God; and
much less they that do not understand and know the Scriptures. And
therefore such as these be, lest they should keep silence, and say
nothing, are always harping upon the traditions and doctrines of men,
that is, lies:  for he that speaketh of himself, speaketh lies. Of
these it is written, They would be doctors of the law, not
understanding what they speak, neither of whom they speak. Such of
necessity they must all be, who speak that with their mouth, which
they do not believe, because they are not inwardly taught of God,
neither are persuaded in their hearts that it is true:  and therefore
they are to be accounted as sheep, although they boast themselves to
be shepherds. But contrariwise, touching the true and learned pastors
given by God, it may be truly said, We speak that which we know, and
that which we have seen (even with the infallible eyes of our faith)
we do witness:  and these are neither deceived, neither do deceive.
Moreover, the deceivers proceed to worse and worse, erring
themselves, and bringing others also to error; and because they are
of the world, the world doth willingly hear them. They are of the
world, saith St. John, and therefore they speak those things which
are of the world, and the world giveth ear unto them.

     "Behold, reverend father! this is the touchstone of our daily
preaching. Hath not the world given ear unto them now a long time
with great pleasure and delight? But the flesh could never suffer the
preaching of the cross, nor yet the wisdom of the flesh, which is an
enemy unto God, neither is subject unto his law, nor can be. And why
then are they accused to be heretics and schismatics, who will not
seek to please men, but only to their edifying? being mindful of that
place of Scripture, God hath dispersed the bones of them which please
men, saying unto them, Speak unto us pleasant things. But now,
letting these matters pass, we will come unto the second point,
wherein you ask how a man should preach better? Forsooth, if we had
heard Him of whom the Father spake, saying, This is my dearly beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him; who also, speaking of
himself, said, It was meet that Christ should suffer, and rise again
the third day from death, and that in his name repentance and
remission of sins should be preached unto all people. What other
thing is that, than the same which the other evangelists do write, Go
ye into the whole world, and preach the gospel unto every creature: 
he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved? What can be more
pleasant, sweet, or acceptable unto afflicted consciences, being
almost in despair, than these most joyful tidings?

     "But here, whether Christ have been a long time heard, I know
not, for that I have not heard all the preachers of England, and if I
had heard them, yet till it was within this year or two, I could not
sufficiently judge of them. But this I dare be bold to affirm, that
as many as I have heard of late preach, (I speak even of the most
famous,) they have preached such repentance, that if I had heard such
preachers of repentance in times past, I should utterly have been in
despair. And to speak of one of those famous men, (not uttering his
name,) after he had sharply inveighed against vice, (wherein he
pleased every godly man, forasmuch as it could not be sufficiently
cried out upon,) he concluded, "Behold," said he, "thou hast lien
rotten in thine own lusts, by the space of these sixty years, even as
a beast in his own dung, and wilt thou presume in one year to go
forward toward heaven, and that in thine age, as much as thou wentest
backward from heaven toward hell in sixty years?" Is not this, think
you, a goodly argument? Is this the preaching of repentance in the
name of Jesus? or rather to tread down Christ with antichrist's
doctrine? For what other thing did he speak in effect, than that
Christ died in vain for thee? He will not be thy Jesus or Saviour;
thou must make satisfaction for thyself, or else thou shalt perish
eternally! Then doth St. John lie, who saith, Behold the Lamb of God!
which taketh away the sins of the world; and in another place, His
blood hath cleansed us from all our sins; and again, He is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world:  besides an infinite
number of other places. What other thing is this, than that which was
spoken by the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of Peter, saying, There shall
be false teachers that shall deny the Lord Jesus, who hath redeemed
them? And what followeth upon such doctrine of devils, speaking lies
through hypocrisy? A conscience despairing, and without all hope, and
so given over unto all wicked lusts, according to the saying of St.
Paul, After that they be come to this point, that they sorrow no
more, they give themselves over unto wantonness, to commit all kind
of filthiness, even with a greedy desire. For seeing that it is
impossible for them to make satisfaction to God, either they murmur
against God, or else they do not believe him to be so cruel, as they
do preach and declare him to be.

     "The want of paper will not suffer me to write any more, and I
had rather to speak it in private talk unto yourself; whereunto if
you would admit me, I trust you shall not repent you thereof:  and
unto me (Christ I take to my witness) it would be a great comfort, in
whom I wish you, with all your flock, heartily well to fare.

     "Your prisoner, and humble beadman unto God for you,

     THOMAS BILNEY."

     Thus have you the letters, the abjuration, and the articles of
Thomas Bilney. After this abjuration, made about A.D. 1529, the said
Bilney took such repentance and sorrow, that he was near the point of
utter despair, as by the words of Master Latimer is credibly
testified; whose words for my better discharge, I thought here to
annex, written in his seventh sermon preached before King Edward,
which be these:  "I knew a man myself, Bilney, little Bilney, that
blessed martyr of God, who, what time he had borne his faggot, and
was come again to Cambridge, had such conflicts within himself,
(beholding this image of death,) that his friends were afraid to let
him be alone. They were fain to be with him day and night, and
comfort him as they could, but no comforts would serve. And as for
the comfortable places of Scripture, to bring them unto him, it was
as though a man should run him through the heart with a sword. Yet
for all this he was revived, and took his death patiently, and died
well against the tyrannical see of Rome."

     Again, the said Master Latimer, speaking of Bilney in another
of his sermons preached in Lincolnshire, hath these words following: 
"That same Master Bilney, which was burnt here in England for God's
word's sake, was induced and persuaded by his friends to bear a
faggot at the time when the cardinal was aloft, and bare the swinge.
Now when the same Bilney came to Cambridge again, a whole year after,
he was in such anguish and agony, that nothing did him good, neither
eating nor drinking, nor even any other communication of God's word;
for he thought that all the whole Scriptures were against him, and
sounded to his condemnation:  so that I many a time communed with him
(for I was familiarly acquainted with him); but all things whatsoever
any man could allege to his comfort, seemed to him to make against
him. Yet for all that afterwards he came again. God endued him with
such strength and perfectness of faith, that he not only confessed
his faith in the gospel of our Saviour Jesus Christ, but also
suffered his body to be burned for that same gospel's sake, which we
now preach in England," &c.

     Furthermore, in the first sermon of the said Master Latimer
before the duchess of Suffolk, he, yet speaking more of Bilney,
inferreth as followeth "Here I have," said he, "occasion to tell you
a story which happened at Cambridge. Master Bilney, or rather Saint
Bilney, that suffered death for God's word's sake, the same Bilney
was the instrument whereby God called me to knowledge. For I may
thank him, next to God, for that knowledge that I have in the word of
God; for I was as obstinate a papist as any was in England, insomuch
that when I should he made bachelor of divinity, my whole oration
went against Master Philip Melancthon, and against his opinions.
Bilney heard me at that time, and perceived that I was zealous
without knowledge, and came to me afterwards in my study, and desired
me, for God's sake, to hear his confession. I did so, and to say the
truth, by his confession I learned more than afore in many years. So
from that time forward I began to smell the word of God, and forsake
the school-doctors, and such fooleries," &c. And much more he hath of
the same matter, which ye may see hereafter in the life of Master
Latimer.

     By this it appeareth how vehemently this good man was pierced
with sorrow and remorse for his abjuration, the space almost of two
years; that is, from the year 1529 to the year 1531. It followed then
that he, by God's grace and good counsel, came at length to some
quiet of conscience, being fully resolved to give over his life for
the confession of that truth which before he had renounced. And thus,
being fully determined in his mind, and setting his time, he took his
leave in Trinity Hall, at ten o'clock at night, of certain of his
friends, and said, that he would go to Jerusalem; alluding belike to
the words and example of Christ in the Gospel, going up to Jerusalem,
what time he was appointed to suffer his passion. And so Bilney,
meaning to give over his life for the testimony of Christ's gospel,
told his friends that he would go up to Jerusalem, and so would see
them no more; and immediately departed to Norfolk, and there preached
first privily in households, to confirm the brethren and sisters, and
also to confirm the anchoress, whom he had converted to Christ. Then
preached he openly in the fields, confessing his fact, and preaching
publicly the doctrine which he before had abjured, to be the very
truth, and willed all men to beware by him, and never to trust to
their fleshly friends, in causes of religion. And so, setting forward
on his journey toward the celestial Jerusalem, he departed from
thence to the anchoress in Norwich, and there gave her a New
Testament of Tyndale's translation, and the Obedience of a Christian
Man; whereupon he was apprehended and carried to prison, there to
remain till the blind bishop Nie sent up for a writ to burn him.

     In the mean season, the friars and religious men, with the
residue of their doctors and civil canon, resorted to him, busily
labouring to persuade him not to die in those opinions, saying, he
should be damned body and soul if he so continued; among whom, first,
were sent to him of the bishop, Dr. Call, minister (as they call him)
or provincial of the Grey Friars; and Dr. Stokes, an Augustine friar,
who lay with him in prison in disputation, till the writ came that he
should be burned. Dr. Call, by the word of God, through the means of
Bilney's doctrine and good life, whereof he had good experience, was
somewhat reclaimed to the gospel's side. Dr. Stokes remained
obdurate, and doth yet to this day; whose heart also the Lord (if it
be his will) reform, and open the eyes of his old age, that he may
forsake the former blindness of his youth. Another great doer against
him was one Friar Bird with one eye, provincial of the White Friars.
This Bird was a suffragan in Coventry, and afterwards bishop of
Chester, and was he that brought apples to Bonner, mentioned in the
story of Hawkes. Another was a Black Friar, called Hodgkins, who,
after being under the archbishop of Canterbury, married, and
afterwards, in Queen Mary's time, put away his wife. These four
orders of friars were sent (as is said) to bait Bilney; who,
notwithstanding, as he had planted himself upon the firm rock of
God's word, was at a point; and so continued unto The end.

     But here now cometh in Sir Thomas More, trumping in our way
with his painted card, and would needs take up this Thomas Bilney
from us, and make him a convert after his sect. Thus these coated
cards, though they could not by plain Scriptures convince him, being
alive; yet now, after his death, by false play they will make him
theirs, whether he will or no. This Sir Thomas More, in his railing
preface before his book against Tyndale, doth challenge Bilney to his
catholic church, and saith, that not only at the fire, but many days
before, both in words and writing, he revoked, abhorred, and detested
his heresies before holden. And how is this proved? By three or four
mighty arguments, as big as mill-posts, fetched out of Utopia, from
whence thou must know, reader, can come no fictions, but all fine
poetry.

     First, he saith, that certain Norwich men, writing to London,
and denying that Bilney did recant, afterwards, being thereupon
examined, were compelled to grant, that he, at his examination, read
a bill; but what it was they could not tell, for they stood not so
near to hear him. And albeit they stood not so near, yet some of them
perceived certain things there spoken, whereby they thought that he
did revoke. Some again added to those things spoken certain additions
of their own, to excuse him from recantation.

     First, to answer hereunto, and to try out this matter somewhat
roundly with Master More, let us see with what conveyance he
proceedeth in this narration. "At his first examination," saith he,
"he waxed stiff in his opinions, but yet God was so good a Lord unto
him, that he was fully converted to the true catholic faith," &c. And
when might this goodly conversion begin?" Many days," quoth he,
"before his burning." Here is no certain day assigned, but many days
left at large, that he might have the larger room to walk invisible.
Well then, but how many days these could be, I would fain learn of
Master More, when he was not many days in their hands; no longer than
they could send up to London for a writ to burn him. Belike then
shortly after his apprehension, at the first coming of the friars
unto him, by and by he revolted. A strange matter, that he, which two
years before had lain in such a burning hell of despair for his first
abjuration, and could find no other comfort but only in returning to
the same doctrine again which before be had denied, utterly resigning
himself over to death, and taking his leave of his friends, and
setting his face with Christ purposely to go to Jerusalem,
voluntarily there to fall into the hands of the scribes and Pharisees
for that doctrine's sake, should now so soon, even at the first
brunt, give over to the contrary doctrine again. It is not likely.
"God was so good a Lord unto him," saith Master More. That God was a
good Lord unto him, very true it is:  but that God did so turn him
indeed, to be a member of that Romish Church, that hath not Master
More yet sufficiently proved. To affirm without proof or
demonstration in matters of story, it is not sufficient. But what
hath been done indeed, that must be proved by good evidence, and
special demonstration of witnesses, that we may certainly know it so
to be.

     It followeth moreover in Master More:  "And there lacked not
some," saith he, "that were sorry for it." No doubt but if our Bilney
had so relented, some would have been very sorry therefore. But what
one man in all this sum, in all Norwich, was sorry, that Master More
must specify unto us before we believe him; so well are we acquainted
with his poetical fictions. But how else should this narration of
Master More seem to run with probability, if it were not watered with
such additions? He addeth moreover, and saith, "And some wrote out of
Norwich to London, that he had not revoked his heresies at all, but
still did abide in them." This soundeth rather to come more near to a
truth; and here is a knack of Simon's art, to interlard a tale of
untruth with some parcel of truth now and then among it, that some
things being found true, may win credit to the rest which is utterly
false. And why then be not the letters of these Norwich men believed,
for the not recanting of Bilney?" Because," saith he, L0 afterward
they, being called to examination, it was there proved plainly to
their faces, that Bilney revoked." By whom was it proved?" By those,"
saith he, "which at his execution stood by, and heard him read his
revocation himself," &c. What men were these? or what were their
names? or what was any one man's name in all the city of Norwich,
that heard Bilney recant? There Master More will give us leave to
seek them out if we can, for he can name us none. Well, and why could
not the other part hear Bilney read his revocation as well as these?"
Because," saith More, "he read so softly that they could not hear
him."

     Well, all this admitted, that Bilney read his revocation so
softly that some could hear, some could not hear him, then this would
be known, what was the cause why Bilney read his revocation so
softly; which must needs be either for lack of good will to read, or
good voice to utter. If good will were absent in reading that
revocation, then it appeareth that he recanted against his own mind
and conscience:  if it were by imbecility of voice and utterance, then
how followeth it, Master More! in this your narration, where you say,
that the said persons which could not hear him read the bill, yet,
not withstanding could hear him rehearse certain other things spoken
by him the same time in the fire, whereby they could not but perceive
well, that he revoked his errors, &c. Ah Master More! for all your
powder of experience, do ye think to cast such a mist before men's
eyes, that we cannot see how you juggle with truth, and take you
tardy in your own narration? unless peradventure you will excuse
yourself, per licentiam poeticam, after the privilege of poets and
painters.

     Now if this vein of yours, which so extremely raileth and
fareth against the poor martyrs and servants of Christ, be so
copious, that you dare take in hand any false matter to prove, and to
make men believe, that Bilney died a papist, yet the manner of
handling hereof would have required some more artificial conveyance;
that men, although they see the matter to be false, yet might commend
the workmanship of the handler, which (to say the truth) neither
hanged with itself, nor beareth any semblance of any truth. But
because Master More is gone and dead, I will cease any further to
insult upon him, lest I may seem to incur the same vice of his. Yet
forasmuch as his books be not yet dead, but remain alive to the hurt
of many, having therefore to do, not with him, but with his book-
disciples, this would I know, how hangeth his gear together? Bilney
was heard, and yet not heard; he spake softly, and yet not softly!
Some said he did recant; some said he did not recant. Over and
besides, how will this be answered, that forasmuch as the said Bilney
(as he saith) revoked many days before his burning, and the same was
known to him at London, then how chanced the same could not be as
well known to them of Norwich? who (as his own story affirmeth) knew
nothing thereof before the day of his execution; then, seeing a
certain bill in his hand, which some said was a bill of his
revocation, some other heard it not. All this would be made plain,
especially in such a matter as this is, which he knew himself
peradventure to be false:  at least, he knew would be doubted,
suspected, and coutraried of a great multitude.

     I pass now to his second reason, where he reporteth that the
said Bilney, forthwith upon his judgment and degradation, kneeled
down in the presence of all the people, and asked of the chancellor
absolution from the sentence of excommunication; holding him well
content with his death, which he confessed himself to have deserved, 
&c.

     As touching the patient receiving of his death, I do well
assent, although I do not think that he had deserved any such for his
doctrine. And as for his kneeling down in the presence of the people,
upon his judgment and degradation, as I do not denythat he might so
do, so I suppose again the cause of his kneeling not to be unto the
chancellor, to ask absolution from his excommunication. And if he
were assoiled from his excommunication, yet doth it not thereupon
follow that he recanted, no more than before, when he came to Master
Latimer in his study, humbly to be confessed and assoiled from his
sins, as the blindness of that time then led him. But whether he
kneeled down, and was assoiled or no, neither was I there to see him,
nor yet Master More himself; and therefore, with the like authority
as he affirmeth, I may deny the same, unless he brought better
demonstration for his assertion than he doth, having no more for
himself, but only his own, aürõs l'qn. And yet nevertheless, admit he
did so, being a man of a timorous conscience, of a humble spirit, and
not fully resolved touching that matter of the church, yet it
followeth not thereby, (as is said,) that he revoked his other
articles and doctrine by him before professed.

     The like answer may also be shaped to his third reason, where
he saith, that certain days after his judgment, he made great labour
that he might receive the blessed body of Christ in form of bread,
which the chancellor, after a great sticking awhile, at length did
grant, perceiving his devotion thereto, &c. Whereunto I answer as
before, that it is not impossible, but that Bilney might both hear
mass, and desire to receive the sacrament:  for in that matter it may
be that he was not resolved otherwise than common custom then led
both him and many others. Neither do I find in all the articles
objected against Bilney, that ever he was charged with any such
opinion, concerning either the mass or the sacrament; which maketh me
think that he was yet ignorant, and also devout as others then were.

     Also fourthly, be it admitted, as Master More saith, that in
receiving of the sacrament, he, holding up his hands, should say the
collect, Domine Jesu Christe:  and coming to these words, Ecclesiæ tuæ
pacem et concordiam, he knocked upon his breast, divers times
repeating the same words, &c.:  all this being granted to Master More,
yet it argueth no necessary alteration of his former doctrine, which
he preached and taught before. And yet if I listen here to stand
dallying with Master More, in the state inficial, and deny what he
affirmeth, how will he make good that which he saith? He saith, that
Bilney, kneeling before the chancellor, desired absolution:  then,
coming to mass fully devoutly, required to receive the body of Christ
in form of bread, repeating divers times the words of the collect,
Domine Jesu Christe, &c. By what argument proveth he all this to be
so? Master More in his preface before the book against

     Tyndale so saith:  ergo it is certain. If Master More had never
made fictions in his writings beside, or had never broken the head of
verity in so many places of his books as I could show him, then might
this argument go for somewhat. But here I ask, Was this Master More
present at the judgment of Bilney? No. Or else, what registers had he
for his direction? None. Or else, by what witnesses will he avouch
this to be certain? Go and seek these witnesses, good reader! where
thou canst find them; for Master More nameth none. Only because
Master More so saith, that is sufficient! Well, give this to Master
More:  although he hath cracked his credit so often, and may almost be
bankrupt, yet let his word go for payment at this time, and let us
imagine all to be oracles that he saith; yet nevertheless here must
needs remain a scruple:  for what will Master More, or (because he is
gone) what will his disciples say to this; that if Bilney was before
assoiled upon his judgment, (as they pretend,) how was he then
afterwards degraded? what assoiling is this, to be forgiven first,
and then to be punished after? Again, if he were (as they surmise)
converted so fully to the catholic faith, and also assoiled, why then
did the chancellor stick so greatly for a while, to housel him with
the body of Christ in form of bread? I am sure that if Christ had
been here himself in form of his own flesh, he would nothing have
stuck to receive him, being so converted at the first. To be short: 
If Bilney was so graciously reduced to the holy mother the Catholic
Church, repenting his errors, and detesting his heresies, and now
being in no purgatory, but being a very saint in heaven, as ye say he
is, why then did ye burn him whom ye yourselves knew should be a
saint? Thus if ye burn both God's enemies and God's saints too, what
cruel men are you!

     But here you will allege perhaps your law of relapse, by the
which the first fall is pardonable, but the second fall into heresy
is in no case pardonable; for so standeth your law, I grant. But how
this law standeth with the true church of Christ, and with his word,
now let us reason. For this being a law not of politic or civil
government, (where such laws be expedient for public necessity,) but
only being a mere law ecclesiastical, what a cruel mother church is
this, that will not and cannot forgive her children, rising and
repenting the second fault or error committed, but needs must burn
their bodies, that their souls may be saved from the painful passion
of purgatory, whom nevertheless they know forthwith shall be blessed
in heaven! If God do save them, why do you burn them? If God do
pardon them, why do you condemn them? And if this be the law of your
church, according to your doctrine, to burn them at the second time,
though they be amended; how then doth this church agree with the word
of Christ, and the nature of his true spouse, which only seeketh
repentance and amendment of sinners? which once being had, she gladly
openeth her bosom, and motherly receiveth them whensoever they
return. Wherefore, if Bilney did return to your church, (as ye did
say,) then was your church a cruel mother, and unnatural, which would
not open her bosom unto him, but thrust him into the fire, when he
had repented.

     Furthermore, how will you defend this law by the word of God,
who, in express words, teaching all bishops and pastors, by the
example of Christ the great bishop of our souls, (being compassed
about with temptations, that he might have the more compassion of
them that be infirm,) exhorteth. all other spiritual persons by the
like example, saying, For every bishop which is taken from among men,
is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, to offer gifts and
sacrifice for sins, that he may be merciful to the ignorant, and to
such as err; forasmuch as he himself is compassed about with
infirmity, &c. Besides which scripture, add also, that some doctors
of the canon law, if they be well scanned, will not deny, but that
they which be fallen in relapse, whether it be vere, or ficte, yet if
they earnestly return from their errors before the sentence be given,
they may be sent to perpetual prison to some monastery, &c.
Wherefore, if Bilney did so earnestly retract and detest his former
opinions, so many days (as More saith) before his suffering, then
needed not he to suffer that death as he did, but might have been
sent to perpetual prison.

     Thus, although I need not to stand longer upon this matter,
being so plain, and having said enough, yet (briefly to repeat that
which before hath been said) this I say again:  first, if Thomas
Bilney was assoiled from excommunication, and after that heard his
mass so devoutly, and at the end of the mass was confessed, and
consequently after confession was houseled, and lastly, asked mercy
for contemning of the church, as Master More doth bear us in hand,
(to see now how this tale hangeth together,) why then did the
chancellor stick so greatly to give him the sacrament of the altar,
whom he himself had assoiled, and received to the sacrament of
penance before; which is plain against the canon law? Again, the said
Thomas Bilney, if he were now received to the mother church by the
sacraments of penance and of the altar, why then was he afterward
degraded, and cut from the church, since the canon permitteth no
degradation, but to them only which be incorrigible? Furthermore, the
said Bilney, if he, being converted so many days before (as More
pretendeth) to the Catholic faith, was now no heretic, how then did
the sentence pronounce him for a heretic? or finally, how could they,
or why would they, burn him being a Catholic, especially since the
canon law would bear with him, to be judged rather to perpetual
prison in some monastery, as is afore touched, if they had pleased?

     Wherefore, in three words to answer to Master More:  first, All
this tale of his may be doubted, because of the matter not hanging
together:  secondly, It may also well be denied, for the insufficiency
of probation and testimony:  thirdly, If all this were granted, yet
neither hath Master More any great advantage against Bilney, to prove
him to have recanted; nor yet Master Cope against me, which, by the
authority of Master More, seeketh to bear me down, and disprove my
former story. For be it granted that Bilney, at his death, did hold
with the mass, with confession, and with the authority of the Romish
Church, being a humble-spirited man, and yet no further brought; yet
all this notwithstanding proveth not that he recanted. Forasmuch as
he never held nor taught any thing before against the premises,
therefore he could not recant that which he never did hold.

     For the better demonstration hereof I will recite out of the
registers some part of his teaching and preaching, as was objected
against him by one Richard Neal, priest; who, amongst other
witnesses, deposed against him for preaching in the town of Wilsdon,
these words following: 

     "Put away your golden gods, your silver gods, your stony gods,
and leave your offerings, and lift up your hearts to the sacrament of
the altar." Also the said Master Bilney said in his sermon, "I know
certain things have been offered in such places, which have been
afterwards given to abandoned women; and I call them abandoned women,
that be naught of their living," &c.

     Item, By another witness, named William Cade, it was deposed
against him, thus to preach, "Jews and Saracens would have become
Christian men long ago, had not idolatry of Christian men been, by
offering of candles, wax, or money to the stocks and stones of
images, set and standing in the churches," &c.

     Item, By the said deponent against Bilney:  that "the priests 
take away the offerings, and hang them about their women's necks:  and
after that, they take them again from the women if they please them
not, and hang them upon the images; and is not that a great relic,
when it is hanged there again?"

     Item, By the said deponent it was testified against Bilney: 
that "going on pilgrimage is naught, and that no man should use it,
for it were better not, and rather to tarry at home, and give
somewhat in alms, and offer your hearts, wills, and minds, to the
sacrament, and leave your idolatry to saints."

     Item, By William Nelmis of Wilsdon, that Bilney should preach,
"They gild their gods, and bear them about, and men say they do
speak; and if they do speak, it is the devil that speaketh in them,
and not God," &c.

     Item, By Thomas Daly of Wilsdon, that Bilney thus preached: 
"You come hither on pilgrimage to stocks and stones. You do naught;
keep you at home, and worship the sacrament at home," &c.

     Item, By friar John Huggen, that Bilney thus preached at
Ipswich:  "The coming of our Saviour Christ was long desired, and by
divers and many prophets prophesied, that he should come. But John
the Baptist, more than a prophet, did not only prophesy, but with his
finger showed, Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of
the world! Then if this were the very Lamb, which John did
demonstrate and show, which taketh away the sins of the world, what
injury is this bull of the bishop of Rome to our Saviour Jesus
Christ, that to be buried in the cowl of St. Francis should or may
remit four parts of the penance! What is left to our Saviour Jesus
Christ which taketh away the sins of the world? This will I justify
to be a great blasphemy against the blood of Christ," &c.

     Item, By another friar, Julles, that Bilney thus preached:  "I
trust there shall and will come others beside me, the which shall
show and preach to you the same faith and manner of living that I do,
which is the very true gospel of our Saviour, whereby you shall be 
brought from your errors, wherein you have been so long seduced:  for
before this, there have been many that have slandered you and the
gospel of our Saviour Christ; of whom speaketh our Saviour Christ,
Matt. xviii."

     Add moreover to these the testimony of Richard Seman, that
Bilney in Ipswich should preach these words:  "Our Saviour Christ is
our Mediator between us and the Father:  what then should we need to
seek for remedy to any saint inferior to Christ? Wherefore to make
such petition to any, but to our Saviour Christ, trusting thereby to
have remedy, doth great injury to the blood of Christ, and deformeth
our Saviour Christ; like as if a man should take and strike off the
head, and set it under the foot, and to set the foot above.

     Thus much, being partly touched before, I thought here to
insinuate again out of the registers, touching the opinions of Thomas
Bilney; whereby may appear the whole sum of his preaching and
doctrine to proceed chiefly against idolatry, invocation of saints,
vain worship of images, false trust to men's merits, and such other
gross points of religion, as seemed prejudicial and derogatory to the
blood of our Saviour Jesus Christ. As touching the mass, and
sacrament of the altar, as he never varied from himself, so he never
differed therein from the most gross catholics. And as concerning his
opinion of the Church of Rome, how blind it was at that time, may
sufficiently appear by his own hand in Latin, which I have to show,
as followeth:  "Credo plerasque leges pontificias utiles esse,
necessarias, et ad pietatem quoque plurimum promoventes, nec sacris
Scripturis repugnantes, imo ab omnibus plurimum observandas, &c. De
omnibus non possum pronunciare, utpote quas non legi, et quas legi,
nunquam in hoc legi, ut reprehenderem, sed ut discerem intelligere,
ac pro virili facere, et docere. De multiplicitate legum questus est
suo tempore St. Augustinus, et item Gearsonus, qui miratur quomodo
non post lapsum inter tot laqueos constitutionum tuti esse possimus,
quum primi parentes adhuc puri, et ante lapsum, et unicum præceptum
non observarint," &c. Moreover, concerning the authority of the keys,
thus he writeth, answering to his twelfth article, "Soli sacerdotes,
ordinati rite per pontifices, habent claves, quarum virtute ligant et
solvunt (clave non errante) quod et facere eos non dubito, quamlibet
sint peccatores. Nam sacramentorum efficatiam non minuit, nedum
tollit ministrorum indignitas, quamdiu ab Ecclesia tolerantur," &c.

     By these words of Bilney, written by him in Latin, although it
may be thought how ignorant and gross he was, after the rudeness of
those days, yet by the same, notwithstanding, it may appear, how
falsely he is noted and slandered by Master More, and Cope my friend,
to have recanted the articles, which he did never hold or maintain
otherwise in all his life. And therefore, (as I said,) though it be
granted to Master More, or in his absence to my friend Cope, that
Bilney was assoiled, was confessed, and houseled before his burning,
yet all this argueth not that he recanted.

     Now that I have sufficiently, I trust, put off the reasons of
Master More and others, whereby they pretend falsely to face us out,
that Bilney the second time again recanted at his death, it
remaineth, on the other part, that I likewise do infer my probations,
whereby I have to argue and convince, that Bilney did not the second
time recant, as he is untruly slandered. And first, I will begin even
with the words and testimony of Master More's own mouth, who, being
lord chancellor, when message was sent to him for a writ of discharge
to burn Bilney, spake in this wise to the messengers that came, "Go
your ways," saith he, "and burn him first; and then afterwards come
to me for a bill of my hand." Which words may give us evidence
enough, that Bilney was not thought then to have recanted, for then
the lord chancellor would not have been so greedy and hasty, no
doubt, to have him despatched. And how standeth this with Master
More's words now, which beareth us in hand, that he recanted many
days before his burning?

     The like evidence we may also take by the verdict of the bishop
himself that burned him, whose words were these, (after he had burned
him, and then heard tell of Doctor Shaxton,) "Christ's mother!" said
he, (that was his oath,) "I fear I have burnt Abel and let Cain go,"
&c.; as who would say, "I had thought before, that I had punished
Cain, and let Abel go; but now I fear I have burnt Abel, and let Cain
escape." Hereby it is plain to understand what the bishop's judgment
of Bilney, before his burning; that is, that he was a Cain, and the
other an Abel:  but after the burning of Bilney, the bishop hearing
now of Shaxton, turneth his judgment, and correcteth himself,
swearing now the contrary; that is, lest he had burned Abel, and let
Cain go.

     Furthermore, where the bishop feared, in burning Bilney, that
he had burned Abel, what doth this fear of the bishop import, but a
doubting of his mind uncertain? for who feareth that whereof he is
sure? Wherefore the case is plain, that Bilney at his burning did not
recant, as More reporteth. For then the bishop, knowing Bilney to die
a catholic convert, and a true member of the church, would not have
feared, nor doubted, but would have constantly affirmed Bilney to
have died a true Abel indeed. And to conclude this matter, if Bilney
died an Abel, then the bishop, by his own confession, must needs
prove himself to be a Cain, which slew him. What more clear probation
could we bring, if there were a thousand, or what need we any other,
having this alone?

     Now, for testimony and witness of this matter to be produced,
forasmuch as Master More allegeth none to prove that Bilney at his
death did recant, I will assay what testimony I have on the contrary
side, to avouch and prove that Bilney did not recant.

     And forasmuch as Bilney was a Cambridge man, and the first
framer of that university in the knowledge of Christ, and was burned
at Norwich, being not very far distant from Cambridge; there is no
doubt but that amongst so many friends as he had in that university,
some went thither to hear and see him. Of these one was Thomas Allen,
then fellow of Pembroke-hall, who, returning the same time from
Bilney's burning, declared to Doctor Turner, dean of Wells, being yet
alive, (a man whose authority neither is to be neglected, nor credit
to be distrusted,) that the said Bilney took his death most
patiently, and suffered most constantly, without any recantation for
the doctrine which he before had professed.

     In the city of Norwich, Necton and many others be now departed,
who were then present at the burning of Bilney:  nevertheless some be
yet alive, whose witnesses, if need were, I could fetch with a little
labour, and will (God willing) as time shall require. In the mean
time, at the writing hereof here was one Thomas Russel, a right
honest occupier, and a citizen of Norwich, who likewise, being there
present on horseback at the execution of this godly man, beholding
all things that were done, did neither hear him recant any word, nor
yet heard of his recantation.

     I could also add hereunto the testimony of another, being
brother to the archbishop of Canterbury, named Master Baker, a man
yet alive, who, being the same time present at the examination of
Bilney, both heard him and saw him, when a certain friar called him
heretic; whereunto Bilney, replying again, made answer, "If I be a
heretic," said he, "then are you an antichrist, who of late have
buried a certain gentlewoman with you, in St. Francis's cowl,
assuring her to have salvation thereby." Which fact, although the
friar the same time did deny, yet this cannot be denied but Bilney
spake these words, whereby he may easily be judged to be far from the
mind of any recantation; according as by the said gentleman it is
also testified, that after that, he never heard of any recantation
that Bilney either meant or made.

     If I should recite all that here might be brought, I might
sooner lack room in my book to contain them, than names enough to
fill up a grand jury. But what need I to spend time about witness,
when one Master Latimer may stand for a thousand, one martyr to bear
witness to another? And though my friend Cope, pressing me with the
authority of Master More, saith, that he will believe him before me;
yet I trust he will not refuse to credit this so ancient a seignior,
Father Latimer, being both in Bilney's time, and also by Bilney
converted, and familiarly with him acquainted; who being the same
time at Cambridge, I suppose would inquire as much, and could know
more of this matter than Master More.

     Touching the testimonial of which Latimer I have noted before,
how he, in three sundry places of his sermons, hath testified of
"good Bilney," of "thatblessed Bilney," of "Saint Bilney;" how he
died patiently, "against the tyrannical see of Rome," &c. And in
another sermon also, how the said Bilney "suffered his body to be
burned for the gospel's sake," &c. Item, in another place, how "the
said Bilney suffered death for God's word's sake."

     I may be thought perhaps of some to have stayed too long about
the discourse of this matter; but the caused that moved, and half
constrained, me thereunto, was Sir Thomas More, sometime lord
chancellor of England, and now a great arch-pillar of all our English
papists; a man otherwise of a pregnant wit, full of pleasant
conceits; also for his learning above the common sort of his estate: 
esteemed industrious no less in his studies, than well exercised in
his pen; who, if he had kept himself in his own shop, and applied the
faculty, being a layman, whereunto he was called, and had not
overreached himself to prove masteries in such matters wherein he had
little skill, less experience, and which pertained not to his
profession, he had deserved not only much more commendation, but also
longer life.

     But forasmuch as he, not contented with his own vocation, hath,
with Uzzah, reached out his unmeet hand to meddle with God's ark-
matters, wherein he had little cunning; and while he thinketh to help
religion, destroyeth religion, and is an utter enemy to Christ, and
to his spiritual doctrine, and his poor afflicted church:  to the
intent therefore that he, being taken for a special ringleader and a
chief stay in the pope's church, might the better he known what he
is, and that the ignorant and simple may see what little credit is to
be given unto him, as well in his other false facing out of matters,
as namely in this present history of Bilney's recantation, I have
diligently searched out and procured the true certificate of Master
Bilney's burning, with all the circumstances and points thereto
belonging, testified not by somesays and by hearsays, (as Master More
useth,) but truly witnessed, and faithfully recorded, by one, who, as
in place and degree he surmounteth the estate of Master More, (though
he were lord chancellor,) so being also both a spiritual person, and
there present the same time, coming for the same purpose the day
before to see his burning, was a present beholder of things there
done, ???????? ??? ?????? [Greek: autoptes kai martys] of his
martyrdom, whose credit I am sure will counterpoise with the credit
of Master More. The order of which martyrdom was this as followeth: 

     Thomas Bilney, after his examination and condemnation before
Dr. Pelles, doctor of law, and chancellor, first was degraded by
suffragan Underwood, according to the custom of their popish manner,
by the assistance of all the friars and doctors of the same suit.
Which done, he was immediately committed to the lay power, and to the
two sheriffs of the city, of whom Thomas Necton was one. This Thomas
Necton was Bilney's special good friend, and sorry to accept him to
such execution as followed; but such was the tyranny of that time,
and dread of the chancellor and friars, that he could no otherwise
do, but needs must receive him:  who notwithstanding, as he could not
bear in his conscience himself to be present at his death, so, for
the time that he was in custody, he caused him to be more friendly
looked unto, and more wholesomely kept concerning his diet, than he
was before.

     After this, the Friday following, at night, which was before
the day of his execution, being St. Magnus' day, and on Saturday, the
said Bilney had divers of his friends resorting unto him in the
Guildhall, where he was kept. Amongst whom, one of the said friends,
finding him eating of an ale-brew with such a cheerful heart and
quiet mind as he did, said, that he was glad to see him at that time,
so shortly before his heavy and painful departure, so heartily to
refresh himself. Whereunto he answered, "O," said he, "I follow the
example of the husbandmen of the country, who, having a ruinous house
to dwell in, yet bestow cost as long as they may, to hold it up. And
so do I now with this ruinous house of my body, and with God's
creatures, in thanks to him, refresh the same as ye see." Then,
sitting with his said friends in godly talk to their edification,
some put him in mind, that though the fire, which he should suffer
the next day, should be of great heat unto his body, yet the comfort
of God's Spirit should cool it to his everlasting refreshing. At this
word the said Thomas Bilney, putting his hand toward the flame of the
candle burning before them, (as also he did divers times besides,)
and feeling the heat thereof, "O," (said he,) "I feel by experience,
and have known it long by philosophy, that fire, by God's ordinance,
is naturally hot:  but yet I am persuaded by God's holy word, and by
the experience of some, spoken of in the same, that in the flame they
felt no heat, and in the fire they felt no consumption:  and I
constantly believe, that howsoever the stubble of this my body shall
be wasted by it, yet my soul and spirit shall be purged thereby; a
pain for the time, whereon notwithstanding followeth joy
unspeakable." And here he much treated of this place of Scripture,
"Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, and called thee by thy name;
thou art mine own. When thou goest through the water I will be with
thee, and the strong floods shall not overflow thee. When thou
walkest in the fire, it shall not burn thee, and the flame shall not
kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel."
This he did most comfortably treat of, as well in respect of himself,
as applying it to the particular use of his friends there present; of
whom some took such sweet fruit therein, that they caused the whole
said sentence to be fairly written in tables, and some in their
books; the comfort whereof, in divers of them, was never taken from
them to their dying day.

     The Saturday next following, when the officers of execution (as
the manner is) with their glaves and halberts were ready to receive
him, and to lead him to the place of execution without the city gate,
called Bishop's Gate, in a low valley, commonly called The Lollards'
Pit, under St. Leonard's hill, environed about with great hills,
(which place was chosen for the people's quiet, sitting to see the
execution,) at the coming forth of the said Thomas Bilney out of the
prison-door, one of his friends came to him, and with few words, as
he durst, spake to him, and prayed him in God's behalf to be
constant, and to take his death as patiently as he could. Whereunto
the said Bilney answered, with a quiet and mild countenance, "Ye see
when the mariner is entered his ship to sail on the troublous sea,
how he for a while is tossed in the billows of the same, but yet, in
hope that he shall once come to the quiet haven, be beareth in better
comfort the perils which he feeleth:  so am I now toward this sailing;
and whatsoever storms I shall feel, yet shortly after shall my ship
be in the haven, as I doubt not thereof, by the grace of God,
desiring you to help me with your prayers to the same effect."

     And so he, going forth in the streets, giving much alms by the
way by the hands of one of his friends, and accompanied by one Dr.
Warner, doctor of divinity, and parson of Winterton, whom he did
choose, as his old acquaintance, to be with him for his ghostly
comfort, came at the last to the place of execution, and descended
down from the hill to the same, apparelled in a layman's gown, with
his sleeves hanging down and his arms out, his hair being piteously
mangled at his degradation (a little single body in person, but
always of a good upright countenance,) and drew near to the stake
prepared; and somewhat tarrying the preparation of the fire, he
desired that he might speak some words to the people, and there
standing, thus he said:  "Good people! I am come hither to die, and
born I was to live under that condition, naturally to die again; and
that ye may testify that I depart out of this present life as a true
Christian man, in a right belief towards Almighty God, I will
rehearse unto you in a fast faith the articles of my creed." And then
he began to rehearse them in order, as they be in the common Creed,
with oft elevating his eyes and hands to Almighty God; and at the
article of Christ's incarnation, having a little meditation in
himself, and coming to the word "crucified," he humbly bowed himself,
and made great reverence; and then proceeding in the articles, and
coming to these words, "I believe the catholic church," there he
paused, and spake these words:  "Good people! I must here confess to
have offended the church, in preaching once against the prohibition
of the same, at a poor cure belonging to Trinity-hall, in Cambridge,
where I was fellow; earnestly entreated thereunto by the curate and
other good people of the parish, showing that they had no sermon
there of long time before:  and so in my conscience moved, I did make
a poor collation unto them, and thereby ran into the disobedience of
certain authority in the church, by whom I was prohibited; howbeit I
trust at the general day, charity, that moved me to this act, shall
bear me out at the judgment-seat of God: " and so he proceeded on,
without any manner of words of recantation, or charging any man for
procuring him to his death.

     This once done, he put off his gown, and went to the stake, and
kneeling upon a little ledge coming out of the stake, whereon he
should afterward stand to be better seen, he made his private prayer
with such earnest elevation of his eyes and hands to heaven, and in
so good and quiet behaviour, that he seemed not much to consider the
terror of his death; and ended at last his private prayers with the
Psalm, beginning, Hear my prayer, O Lord! consider my desire. And the
next verse he repeated in deep meditation thrice:  And enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified:  and so finishing that Psalm, he ended his private prayers.

     After that, he turned himself to the officers, asking them if
they were ready, and they answered, Yea. Whereupon he put off his
jacket and doublet, and stood in his hose and shirt, and went unto
the stake, standing upon that ledge, and the chain was cast about
him; and standing thereon, the said Dr. Warner came to him to bid him
farewell, who spake but few words for weeping:  upon whom the said
Thomas Bilney did most gently smile, and inclined his body to speak
to him a few words of thanks; and the last were these, "O Master
Doctor! Feed your flock, feed your flock; that when the Lord cometh,
he may find you so doing." And, "Farewell, good Master Doctor! and
pray for me;" and so Warner departed without any answer, sobbing and
weeping. And while Bilney thus stood upon the ledge at the stake,
certain friars, doctors, and priors of their houses, being there
present, (as they were uncharitably and maliciously present at his
examination and degradation, &c.,) came to him and said, "O Master
Bilney, the people be persuaded that we be the causers of your death,
and that we have procured the same, and thereupon it is likely that
they will withdraw their charitable alms from us all, except you
declare your charity towards us, and discharge us of the matter: "
whereupon the said Thomas Bilney spake with a loud voice to the
people and said, "I pray you, good people! be never the worse to
these men for my sake, as though they should be the authors of my
death; it was not they: " and so he ended.

     Then the officers put reeds and faggots about his body, and set
fire on the reeds, which made a very great flame, which sparkled and
deformed the visor of his face; he holding up his hands, and knocking
upon his breast, crying sometimes "Jesus!" sometimes, Credo! which
flame was blown away from him by the violence of the wind, which was
that day, and two or three days before, notably great; in which it
was said, that the fields were marvellously plagued by the loss of
corn; and so, for a little pause, he stood without flame, the flame
departing and re-coursing thrice ere the wood took strength to be the
sharper to consume him; and then he gave up the ghost, and his body,
being withered, bowed downward upon the chain. Then one of the
officers, with his halberd, smote out the staple in the stake behind
him, and suffered his body to fall into the bottom of the fire,
laying wood upon it; and so he was consumed.

     Thus have ye, good readers! the true history and martyrdom of
this good man; that is, of blessed Saint Bilney, (as Master Latimer
doth call him,) without any recantation, testified and ratified by
the authority abovesaid:  • by which authority and party being there
present and yet alive, it is furthermore constantly affirmed, that
Bilney not only did never recant, but also that he never had any such
bill, or scrip, or scroll, in his hand to read, either softly or
apertly, as Master More would bear us down. Wherefore, even as ye see
Master More deal in this, so ye may trust him in the residue of his
other tales, if ye will.

Master Stafford, of Cambridge.

     As the death of this godly Bilney did much good in Norfolk,
where he was burned; so his diligent travail, in teaching and
exhorting other, and example of life correspondent to his doctrine,
left no small fruit behind him in Cambridge, being a great means of
framing that university, and drawing divers unto Christ. By reason of
whom, and partly also of another, called Master Stafford, the word of
God began there most luckily to spread, and many toward wits to
flourish; in the company of whom was Master Latimer, Dr. Barnes, Dr.
Thistell of Pembroke-hall, Master Fooke of Benet-college, and Master
Soude of the same college, Dr. Warner above-mentioned, with divers
others more. This Master Stafford was then the public reader of the
divinity lecture in that university; who, as he was an earnest
professor of Christ's gospel, so was he as diligent a follower of
that which he professed, as by this example here following may
appear.

     For as the plague was then sore in Cambridge, and amongst other
a certain priest, called Sir Henry Conjurer, lay sore sick of the
said plague, Master Stafford, hearing thereof, and seeing the
horrible danger that his soul was in, was so moved in conscience to
help the dangerous case of the priest, that he, neglecting his own
bodily death, to recover the other from eternal damnation, came unto
him, exhorted, and so laboured him, that he would not leave him
before he had converted him, and saw his conjuring books burned
before his face. Which being done, Master Stafford went home, and
immediately sickened, and, shortly after, most Christianly deceased.

     Concerning which Master Stafford, this moreover is to be noted,
how that Master Latimer, being yet a fervent and a zealous papist,
standing in the schools when Master Stafford read, bade the scholars
not to hear him; and also, preaching against him, exhorted the people
not to believe him:  and yet the said Latimer confessed himself, that
he gave thanks to God, that he asked him forgiveness before he
departed. And thus much by the way of good Master Stafford, who, for
his constant and godly adventure in such a cause, may seem not
unworthy to go with blessed Bilney, in the fellowship of holy and
blessed martyrs.



172. BOOKS BANNED BY THE PAPISTS.

     Before the time of Master Bilney, and the fall of the cardinal,
I should have placed the story of Simon Fish, with the book called
The Supplication of Beggars; declaring how, and by what means, it
came to the king' s hand, and what effect thereof followed after, in
the reformation ,of many things, especially of the clergy. But the
missing of a few years in this matter breaketh no great square in our
story, though that be now entered here, which should have come in six
years before. The manner and circumstance of the matter is this: 

     After that the light of the gospel, working mightily in
Germany, began to spread its beams here also in England, great stir
and alteration followed in the hearts of many; so that coloured
hypocrisy, and false doctrine, and painted holiness, began to be
espied more and more by the reading of God's word. The authority of
the bishop of Rome, and the glory of his cardinals, were not so high,
but such as had fresh wits, sparkled with God's grace, began to espy
Christ from antichrist; that is, true sincerity from counterfeit
religion:  in the number of whom was the said Master Simon Fish, a
gentleman of Gray's Inn. It happened the first year that this
gentleman came to London to dwell, which was about A.D. 1525, that
there was a certain play or interlude made by one Master Roo, of the
same inn, gentleman, in which play partly was matter against the
Cardinal Wolsey; and when none durst take upon them to play that part
which touched the said cardinal, this aforesaid Master Fish took upon
him to do it. Thereupon great displeasure ensued against him upon the
cardinal's part, insomuch as he, being pursued by the said cardinal
the same night that this tragedy was played, was compelled by force
to void his own house, and so fled over the sea to Tyndale:  upon
occasion whereof, the next year following, this book was made (being
about the year 1527); and so, not long after, in the year, as I
suppose, 1528, was sent over to the Lady Ann Bullen, who then lay at
a place not far from the court. Which book her brother seeing in her
hand, took it and read it, and gave it her again, willing her
earnestly to give it to the king, which thing she so did. This was
(as I gather) about A.D. 1528.

     The king, after he had received the book, demanded of her who
made it:  whereunto she answered and said, a certain subject of his,
one Fish, who was fled out of the realm for fear of the cardinal.
After the king had kept the book in his bosom three or four days, as
is credibly reported, such knowledge was given by the king's servants
to the wife of the said Simon Fish, that she might boldly send for
her husband without all peril or danger:  whereupon she, thereby being
encouraged, came first and made suit to the king for the safe return
of her husband; who, understanding whose wife she was, showed a
marvellous gentle and cheerful countenance towards her, asking where
her husband was. She answered, "If it like your Grace, not far off."
"Then," saith he, "fetch him, and he shall come and go safe, without
peril, and no man shall do him harm: " saying moreover, that he had
much wrong that he was from her so long; who had been absent now the
space of two years and a half. In the which mean time the cardinal
was deposed, as is afore showed, and Master More set in his place of
the chancellorship.

     Thus Fish's wife, being imboldened by the king's words, went
immediately to her husband, (being lately come over, and lying
privily within a mile of the court,) and brought him to the king;
which appeareth to be about A.D. 1530. When the king saw him, and
understood he was the author of the book, he came and embraced him
with loving countenance. Who after long talk for the space of three
or four hours, as they were riding together in hunting, the king at
length dismissed him, and bade him take home his wife, for she had
taken great pains for him; who answered the king again, and said, he
durst not so do, for fear of Sir Thomas More, then chancellor, and
Stokesley, then bishop of London. This seemeth to be about A.D. 1530.

     The king, taking the signet off his finger, willed him to have
him recommended to the lord chancellor, charging him not to be so
hardy as to work him any harm. Master Fish, receiving the king's
signet, went and declared his message to the lord chancellor, who
took it as sufficient for his own discharge, but he asked him, if he
had any thing for the discharge of his wife? For she, a little
before, had by chance displeased the friars, for not suffering them
to say their gospels in Latin in her house, as they did in others,
unless they would say them in English. Whereupon the lord chancellor,
though he had discharged the man, yet not leaving his grudge towards
the wife, the next morning sent his man for her to appear before him;
who, had it not been for her young daughter, which then lay sick of
the plague, had been like to come to much trouble. Of the which
plague, her husband (the said Master Fish) deceasing within half a
year, she afterwards married one Master James Bainham, Sir Alexander
Bainham's son, a worshipful knight of Gloucestershire; the which
aforesaid Master James Bainham not long after was burned, as
incontinently after, in the process of this story, shall appear.

     And thus much concerning Simon Fish, the author of the Book of
Beggars, who also translated a book, called The Sum of the Scripture,
out of the Dutch.

     Now cometh another note of one Edmund Moddis, the king's
footman, touching the same matter.

     This Master Moddis, being with the king in talk of religion,
and of the new books that were come from beyond the seas, said, if it
might please his Grace to pardon him, and such as he would bring to
his Grace, he should see such a book as it was a marvel to hear of.
The king demanded what they were. He said, "Two of your merchants,
George Elyot and George Robinson." The king appointed a time to speak
with them. When they came before his presence in a privy closet, he
demanded what they had to say, or to show him. One of them said, that
there was a book come to theirhands, which they had there to show his
Grace. When he saw it, he demanded if any of them could read it.
"Yea," said George Elyot, "if it please your Grace to hear it." "I
thought so," said the king, "for if need were thou canst say it
without book."

     The whole book being read out, the king made a long pause, and
then said, "If a man should pull down an old stone wall, and begin at
the lower part, the upper part thereof might chance to fall upon his
head." And then he took the book, and put it into his desk, and
commanded them, upon their allegiance, that they should not tell to
any man that he had seen the book, &c.

     Against this Book of the Beggars, being written in the time of
the cardinal, another contrary book or supplication was devised and
written shortly upon the same, by one Sir Thomas More, knight,
chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, under the name and title of The
poor silly Souls pulling out of Purgatory. In the which book, after
the said Master More, the writer thereof, had first divided the whole
world into four parts, that is, into heaven, hell, middle earth, and
purgatory; then he maketh the dead men's souls, by a rhetorical
prosopopœia, to speak out of purgatory pin-fold, sometimes lamentably
complaining of, sometimes pleasantly dallying and scoffing at, the
author of the Beggars' Book; sometimes scolding and railing at him,
calling him fool, witless, frantic, an ass, a goose, a mad dog, a
heretic, and all that naught is. And no marvel, if these simple souls
of purgatory seem so fumish and testy; for heat (ye know) is testy,
and soon inflameth choler. But yet these purgatory souls must take
good heed how they call a man a fool and heretic so often; for if the
sentence of the gospel doth pronounce them guilty of hell-fire, who
say, "Fool!" it may be doubted, lest those poor, simple, melancholy
souls of purgatory, calling this man fool so oft as they have done,
do bring themselves thereby out of purgatory-fire to the fire of
hell, by that just sentence of the Gospel; so that neither the five
wounds of St. Francis, nor all the merits of St. Dominic, nor yet of
all the friars, can release those poor wretches! But yet, forasmuch
as I do not, nor cannot think, that those departed souls either would
so far overshoot themselves, if they were in purgatory, or else that
there is any such fourth place of purgatory at all, (unless it be in
Master More's Utopia,) as Master More's poetical vein doth imagine, I
cease therefore to burden the souls departed, and lay all the wit on
Master More, the author and contriver of this poetical book, for not
keeping decorum personae, as a perfect poet should have done. They
that give precepts of art, do note this, in all poetical fictions, as
a special observation, to foresee and express what is convenient for
every person, according to his degree and condition, to speak and
utter. Wherefore if it be true that Master More saith, in the sequel
of his book, that grace and charity increase in them that lie in the
pains of purgatory, then is it not agreeable that such souls, lying
so long in purgatory, should so soon forget their charity, and fall a
railing in their supplication so fumishly, both against this man,
with such opprobrious and unsuiting terms, and also against John
Badby, Richard Hovedon, John Goose, Lord Cobham, and other martyrs of
the Lord, burned for his word:  also against Luther, William Tyndale,
Richard Hun, and other more, falsely belying the doctrine by them
taught and defended; which it is not like that such charitable souls
of purgatory would ever do, neither were it convenient for them in
that case; which indeed, though their doctrine were false, should
redound to the more increase of their pain. Again, where the bishop
of Rochester defineth the angels to be ministers to purgatory-souls,
some will think, peradventure, Master More to have missed some part
of his decorum, in making the evil spirit of the author and the devil
to be messenger, between middle-earth and purgatory, in bringing
tidings to the prisoned souls, both of the book, and of the name of
the maker.

     Now, as touching the manner how this devil came into purgatory,
laughing, grinning, and gnashing his teeth, in sooth it maketh me to
laugh, to see the merry antics of Master More. Belike then this was
some merry devil, or else had eaten with his teeth some nasturcium
before; which, coming into purgatory, to show the name of this man,
could not tell his tale without laughing. "But this was," saith he,
"an enmious and an envious laughing, joined with grinning and
gnashing of teeth." And immediately upon the same, was contrived this
scoffing and railing supplication of the puling souls of purgatory,
as he himself doth term them. So then, here was enmying, envying,
laughing, grinning, gnashing of teeth, puling, scoffing, railing, and
begging; and all together to make a very black sanctus in purgatory.
Indeed we read in Scripture, that there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth in hell, where the souls and bodies of men shall be
tormented. But who would ever have thought before, that the evil
angel of this man that made the Book of Beggars, being a spiritual
and no corporal substance, hath teeth to gnash, and a mouth to grin?,
But where then stood Master More, I marvel, all this mean while, to
see the devil laugh with his mouth so wide, that the souls of
purgatory might see all his teeth? Belike this was in Utopia, where
Master More's purgatory is founded; but because Master More is hence
departed, I leave him with his merry antics. And as touching his book
of purgatory, which he hath left behind, because John Frith hath
learnedly and effectuously overthrown the same, I will therefore
refer the reader to him, while I repair again (the Lord willing) to
the history.

     After the clergy of England, and especially the cardinal,
understood these books of The Beggars' Supplication aforesaid, to be
strewed abroad in the streets of London, and also before the king,
the said cardinal caused not only his servants diligently to attend
to gather them up, that they should not come into the king's hands,
but also, when he understood that the king had received one or two of
them, he came unto the king's Majesty, saying, "If it shall please
your Grace, here are divers seditious persons which have scattered
abroad books containing manifest errors and heresies;" desiring his
Grace to beware of them. Whereupon the king, putting his hand in his
bosom, took out one of the books, and delivered it unto the cardinal.
Then the cardinal, together with his bishops, consulted how they
might provide a speedy remedy for this mischief, and thereupon
determined to give out a commission to forbid the reading of all
English books, and namely, this Book of the Beggars, and the New
Testament of Tyndale's translation; which was done out of hand by
Cuthbert Tonstal, bishop of London, who sent out his prohibition unto
his archdeacons with all speed, for the forbidding of that book and
divers others; the tenor of which prohibition here followeth

     "Cuthbert, by the permission of God, bishop of London, unto our
well-beloved in Christ, the archdeacon of London, or to his official,
health, grace, benediction. By the duty of our pastoral office, we
are bound diligently, with all our power, to foresee, provide for,
root out, and put away, all those things, which seem to tend to the
peril and danger of our subjects, and specially to the destruction of
their souls. Wherefore we, having understanding, by the report of
divers credible persons, and also by the evident appearance of the
matter, that many children of iniquity, maintainers of Luther's sect,
blinded through extreme wickedness, wandering from the way of truth
and the catholic faith, craftily have translated the New Testament
into our English tongue, intermeddling therewith many heretical
articles, and erroneous opinions, pernicious and offensive, seducing
the simple people; attempting, by their wicked and perverse 
interpretations, to profanate the majesty of the Scripture, which
hitherto hath remained undefiled, and craftily to abuse the most holy
word of God, and the true sense of the same, of the which translation
there are many books imprinted, some with glosses, and some without,
containing in the English tongue that pestiferous and most pernicious
poison dispersed throughout all our diocese of London in great
number; which truly, without it be speedily foreseen, without doubt
will contaminate and infect the flock committed unto us, with most
deadly poison and heresy; to the grievous peril and danger of the
souls committed to our charge, and the offence of God's divine
Majesty. Wherefore, we, Cuthbert, the bishop aforesaid, grievously
sorrowing for the premises, willing to withstand the craft and
subtlety of the ancient enemy and his ministers, who seek the
destruction of our flock, and with a diligent care to take heed unto
the flock committed to my charge, desiring to provide speedy remedies
for the premises, do charge you jointly and severally, and by virtue
of your obedience straitly enjoin and command you, that by our
authority you warn, or cause to be warned, all and singular, as well
exempt as not exempt, dwelling within your archdeaconries, that
within thirty days' space, whereof ten days shall be for the first,
ten for the second, and ten for the third and peremptory term, under
pain of excommunication, and incurring the suspicion of heresy, they
do bring in, and really deliver unto our vicar-general, all and
singular such books as contain the translation of the New Testament
in the English tongue; and that you do certify us, or our said
commissary, within two months after the day of the date of these
presents, duly, personally, or by your letters, together with these
presents, under your seals, what you have done in the premises, under
pain of contempt.

     "Given under our seal, the three and twentieth of October, in
the fifth year of our consecration, anno 1526."

     The like commission, in like manner and form, was sent to the
other three archdeacons of Middlesex, Essex, and Colchester, for the
execution of the same matter, under the bishop's seal.

The names of the books that were forbidden at this time, together
with the New Testament.

     The Supplication of Beggars; the Revelation of Antichrist, of
Luther; the New Testament of Tyndale; the Wicked Mammon; the
Obedience of a Christian Man; an Introduction to Paul's Epistle to
the Romans; a Dialogue betwixt the Father and the Son; Christian
Economics; The Union of Dissenters; Pious Prayers.; The Babylonish
Captivity; John Huss on Hosea; Zwingle on the Anabaptists; On the
Education of Children; Brentius on the Government of a State; Luther
on the Galatians; On Christian Liberty; Luther's Exposition upon the
Lord's Prayer.

     Besides these books here before-mentioned, within a short time
after there were a great number more of other books in like manner
prohibited by the king's proclamation; but yet by the bishop's
procurement, A.D. 1529.

     The New Testament, in the catalogue above recited, began first
to be translated by William Tyndale, and so came forth in print about
A.D. 1529, wherewith Cuthbert Tonstal, bishop of London, with Sir
Thomas More, being sore aggrieved, devised how to destroy that false,
erroneous translation, as he called it. It happened that one
Augustine Packington, a mercer, was then at Antwerp, where the bishop
was. This man favoured Tyndale, but showed the contrary unto the
bishop. The bishop, being desirous to bring his purpose to pass,
communed how that he would gladly buy the New Testaments. Packington
hearing him say so, said, "My lord! I can do more in this matter than
most merchants that be here, if it be your pleasure; for I know the
Dutchmen and strangers that have bought them of Tyndale, and have
them here to sell; so that if it be your Lordship's pleasure, I must
disburse money to pay for them, or else I cannot have them:  and so I
will assure you to have every book of them that is printed and
unsold." The bishop, thinking he had God by the toe, said, "Do your
diligence, gentle Master Packington! get them for me, and I will pay
whatsoever they cost; for I intend to burn and destroy them all at
Paul's Cross." This Augustine Packington went unto William Tyndale,
and declared the whole matter, and so, upon compact made between
them, the bishop of London had the books, Packington had the thanks,
and Tyndale had the money. After this, Tyndale corrected the New
Testaments again, and caused them to be newly imprinted, so that they
came thick and threefold over into England. When the bishop perceived
that, he sent for Packington, and said to him, "How cometh this, that
there are so many New Testaments abroad? you promised me that you
would buy them all." Then answered Packington, "Surely, I bought all
that were to be had:  but I perceive they have printed more since. I
see it will never be better so long as they have letters and stamps: 
wherefore you were best to buy the stamps too, and so you shall be
sure: " at which answer the bishop smiled, and so the matter ended.

     In short space after, it fortuned that George Constantine was
apprehended by Sir Thomas More, which was then chancellor of England,
suspected of certain heresies during the time that he was in the
custody of Master More, After divers communications, amongst other
things, Master More asked of him, saying, "Constantine! I would have
thee be plain with me in one thing that I will ask; and I promise
thee, I will show thee favour in all other things, whereof thou art
accused. There is beyond the sea, Tyndale, Joye, and a great many of
you:  I know they cannot live without help. There are some that help
and succour them with money; and thou, being one of them, hadst thy
part thereof, and therefore knowest from whence it came. I pray thee,
tell me, who be they that help them thus?" "My lord," quoth
Constantine, "I will tell you truly:  it is the bishop of London that
hath holpen us, for he hath bestowed among us a great deal of money
upon New Testaments to burn them; and that hath been, and yet is, our
only succour and comfort." "Now, by my troth," quoth More, "I think
even the same; for so much I told the bishop before he went about
it."

     Of this George Constantine, moreover, it is reported by Sir
Thomas More, that he, being taken and in hold, seemed well content to
renounce his former doctrine; and not only to disclose certain other
of his fellows, but also studied and devised, how these books, which
he himself, and other of his fellows, had brought and shipped, might
come to the bishop's hands to he burned, and showed to the aforesaid
Sir Thomas More, chancellor, the ship-man's name that had them, and
the marks of the fardels, by which the books afterwards were taken
and burned. Besides this, he is reported also to have disclosed
divers of his companions, of whom some were abjured after, some had
abjured before; as Richard Necton, who was committed to Newgate upon
the same, and is thought there to have died in prison, or else he had
not escaped their hands, but should have suffered burning, if the
report of Master More be to be credited.

     Notwithstanding the same Constantine afterwards, by the help of
some of his friends, escaped out of prison over the seas, and after
that, in the time of King Edward, was one of them that troubled the
good bishop of St. David's, which after, in Queen Mary's time, was
burned. But of Constantine enough.

     Mention was made, how the bishops had procured of the king a
proclamation to be set forth A.D. 1529, for the abolishing of divers
books afore-named, and also for the withstanding of all such as
taught or preached any thing against the dignity and ordinances of
the Church of Rome. Upon this proclamation ensued great persecution
and trouble against the poor innocent flock of Christ.

     The books which in this proclamation generally are restrained
and forbidden, be afterwards in theregister, more specially named by
the bishops; whereof the most part were in Latin, as are above
recited, and some were in English, as these and others, partly also
above expressed: 

     A Disputation between the Father and the Son; a Book of the old
God and new; Godly Prayers; the Christian state of Matrimony; the
burying of the Mass; the Sum of the Scripture; Mattens and Even-song,
Seven Psalms, and other heavenly Psalms, with the Commendations, in
English; an Exposition upon the seventh Chapter of the First Epistle
to the Corinthians; the chapters of Moses called Genesis; the
chapters of Moses called Deuteronomy; the Matrimony of Tyndale;
David's. Psalter in English; the Practice of Prelates; Hortulus
animæ, in English; A.B.C. against the Clergy; the Examination of
William Thorpe, &c.

     Although these books, with all other of the like sort, by the
virtue of this proclamation were inhibited to all Englishmen to use
or to read; yet licence was granted before to Sir Thomas More, by
Tonstal, bishop of London, A.D. 1527, that he, notwithstanding, might
have and peruse them; with a letter also sent to him from the said
bishop, or rather by the advice of other bishops, desiring him, that
he would show his cunning, and play the pretty man, like a
Demosthenes, in expugning the doctrine of these books and opinions: 
who, albeit he was no great divine, yet because he saw some
towardness in him by his book of Utopia, and other fine poetry of
his, therefore he thought him a meet man for their purpose, to
withstand the proceedings of the gospel, either in making some
appearance of reason against it, or at least to outface it, and dash
it out of countenance. Wherein there lacked on his part neither good
will nor labour to serve the bishop's turn, so far forth as all his
rhetoric could reach; filling up with fineness of wit, and scoffing
terms, where true knowledge and judgment of Scripture did fail; as by
his works and writings against Bilney, Tyndale, Frith, Fish, Barnes,
Luther, &c., may soon be discerned, if the reasons and manner of his
handling be well weighed, and rightly examined with the touchstone of
the Scriptures. But now to fall into our story again.

     Upon this fierce and terrible proclamation aforesaid, thus
devised and set out in the king's name, A.D. 1529, the bishops, which
were the procurers hereof, had that now which they would have;
neither did there lack on their part any study unapplied, any stone
unremoved, any corner unsearched, for the diligent execution of the
same:  whereupon ensued a grievous persecution, and slaughter of the
faithful; of whom the first that went to rack was Thomas Bilney, of
whom sufficiently afore hath been said; and the next was Richard
Bayfield, as in the story shall shortly follow.



173. RICHARD BAYFIELD, MARTYR.

     Following the order of years and of times, as the course of our
history requireth, next after the consummation of Thomas Bilney, we
have to treat of the martyrdom of Richard Bayfield, which in the
month of November, the same year, which was A.D. 1531, was burned in
Smithfield.

     This Richard Bayfield, sometime a monk of Bury, was converted
by Dr. Barnes, and two godly men of London, brickmakers, Master
Maxwell and Master Stacey, wardens of their company, who were grafted
in the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and through their godly conversation
of life, converted many men and women, both in London and in the
country; and once a year, of their own cost, went about to visit the
brethren and sisters scattered abroad. Dr. Barnes, at that time, much
resorted to the abbey of Bury, where Bayfield was, to one Dr. Ruffam;
who had been at Louvaine together students. At that time it happened
that this Bayfield the monk was chamberlain of the house, to provide
lodging for the strangers, and to see them well entertained; who
delighted much in Dr. Barnes's talk, and in the other laymen's talk
afore rehearsed; and at last, Dr. Barnes gave him a New Testament in
Latin, and the other two gave him Tyndale's Testament in English,
with a book called The Wicked Mammon, and The Obedience of a
Christian Man:  wherein he prospered so mightily in two years' space,
that he was cast into the prison of his house, there sore whipped,
with a gag in his mouth, and then stocked; and so continued in the
same torment three quarters of a year before Dr. Barnes could get him
out; which he brought to pass by the means of Dr. Ruffam aforesaid,
and so he was committed to Dr. Barnes, to go to Cambridge with him.
By that time he had been there a good while, he tasted so well of
good letters, that he never returned home again to his abbey, but
went to London, to Maxwell and Stacy, and they kept him secretly a
while, and so conveyed him beyond the sea; Dr. Barnes being then in
the Fleet for God's word. This Bayfield mightily prospered in the
knowledge of God, and was beneficial to Master Tyndale, and Master
Frith; for he brought substance with him, and was their own hand, and
sold all their works, and the works of the Germans, both in France
and in England; and at last, coming to London, to Master Smith's
house, in Bucklersbury, there he was betrayed, and dogged from that
house to his bookbinder's in Mark Lane, and there taken, and carried
to Lollards' Tower, and from thence to the coal-house; by reason that
one Parson Patmore, parson of Much Haddam in Essex, then lying in
Lollards' Tower, was, in the doctrine and in the kingdom of Christ,
there confirmed by him. This Parson Patmore, after long trouble, was
abjured and condemned by the bishops to perpetual prison, and
delivered afterwards by the king's pardon, as more appeareth in the
sequel of his story among abjurers, &c. He was taken because he
married his priest in those days. He had always corn in plenty, and
when the markets were very dear, he would send plenty of his corn
thither, to pluck down the prices thereof.

     This Richard Bayfield, being in the coal-house, was worse
handled than he was before in the Lollards' Tower; for there he was
tied both by the neck, middle, and legs, standing upright by the
walls, divers times manacled, to accuse others that had bought his
books. But he accused none, but stood to his religion and confession
of his faith, unto the very end, and was, in the consistory of
Paul's, thrice put to his trial, whether he would abjure or no? He
said he would dispute for his faith, and so did to their great shame;
Stokesley then being his judge, with the assistance of Winchester,
and other bishops, wherof here followeth now the circumstance in
order to be seen.

     The articles laid to Richard Bayfield, by the aforesaid
bishops, A.D. 1531, Nov. 10, were these: 

     "I. That he had been many years a monk professed, of the order
of St. Beet, of St. Edmund's Bury, in the diocese of Norwich.

     "II. That he was a priest, and had ministered, and continued in
the same order the space of nine or ten years.

     "III. That since the feast of Easter last, he, being beyond the
sea, brought and procured to have divers and many books and treatises
of sundry sorts, as well of Martin Luther's own works, as of divers
other of his damnable sect, and of Œcolampadius the great heretic,
and divers other heretics, both in Latin and English; the names of
which books were contained in a little bill written with his own
hand.

     "IV. That in the year of our Lord 1528, he was detected and
accused to Cuthbert, then bishop of London, for affirming and holding
certain articles contrary to the holy church, and especially that all
laud and praise should be given to God alone, and not to saints or
creatures.

     "V. That every priest might preach the word of God by the
authority of the gospel, and not to run to the pope or cardinals for
licence; as it appeared (said they) by his confession before the said
bishop.

     "VI. That he judicially abjured the said articles before the
said bishop, and did renounce and forswear them, and all other
articles contrary to the determination of holy church, promising that
from thenceforth he would not fall into any of them, nor any other
errors.

     "VII. That he made a solemn oath upon a book, and the holy
evangelists, to fulfil such penance as should be enjoined him by the
said bishop.

     "VIII. After his abjuration it was enjoined to him for penance,
that he should go before the cross in procession, in the parish
church of St. Botolph's at Billingsgate, and to bear a faggot of wood
upon his shoulder.

     "IX. It was enjoined him in penance, that he should provide a
habit, requisite and meet for his order and profession, as shortly as
he might; and that he should come or go no where without such a
habit:  the which he had not fulfilled.

     "X. That it was likewise enjoined him in penance, that,
sometime before the feast of the Ascension then next ensuing his
abjuration, he should go home unto the monastery of Bury, and there
remain, according to the vow of his profession:  which he had not
fulfilled.

     "XI. That he was appointed by the said bishop of London to
appear before the said bishop, the twenty-fifth of April next after
his abjuration, to receive the residue of his penance; and after his
abjuration, he fled beyond the sea, and appeared not.

     "XII. That the twentieth day of June next following his
abjuration, he did appear before the said bishop Tonstal, in the
chapel of the bishop of Norwich's place, and there it was newly
enjoined him in part of penance, that he should provide him a habit
convenient for his order and profession, within eight days then next
following:  which he had not done.

     "XIII. That it was there again enjoined him, that he should
depart from the city, diocese, and jurisdiction of London; and no
more to come within it, without the special licence of the bishop of
London, or his successor for the time being:  which he had not
fulfilled."

The answer of Richard Bayfield to the articles prefixed.

     To the first article he confessed, that he was professed a monk
in the monastery aforesaid, A.D. 1514. To the second article he
answered, that he was a priest, and took orders, A.D. 1518. To the
third article he confessed the bill and schedule to be written with
his hand, which is annexed thereunto, and that he brought over the
said books and works a year and a half past, and a great number of
every sort.

     Being further demanded for what intent he brought them into the
realm; he answered, "To the intent that the gospel of Christ might be
set forward, and God the more glorified in this realm amongst
Christian people;" and that he had sold and dispersed many of those
books before named, to sundry persons within this realm, and to
divers of the diocese of London. Being further demanded, whether
Martin Luther were condemned as a heretic by the pope; he answered,
that he heard say, that Martin Luther, with all his sect and
adherents, were, and are, condemned as heretics by the pope. And
being demanded, whether Zuinglius was of Luther's sect; he answered,
that he never spake with him. Being asked whether Zuinglius was a
catholic; he answered, that he could not tell. Being inquired whether
the books contained in the schedules did contain any errors in them;
he said, he could not tell, neither could he judge. Also he
confessed, that the common fame hath been within these two or three
years, that Œcolampadius and Zuinglius be heretics; also that such as
lean to Martin Luther be heretics. Also he confessed, that being
beyond the sea, he heard say, before he brought into this realm the
books contained in the said bills, that the king had by proclamation
prohibited, that no man should bring into this realm any of Martin
Luther's books or of his sect:  which confession thus ended, the
bishop appointed him to appear the next day.

     Saturday, being the eleventh of November, Richard Bayfield
appeared, and acknowledged the answers he made in the session the day
before. This thing done, the official objected the fourth article
unto him:  whereunto he answered, that he could not tell whether there
be any heresies in them; for he had read no heresies in them. And
being demanded, whether he had read any of those books; he answered,
that he had read the greater part of them here and there, but not
throughout. He was demanded, whether he believed the aforenamed books
to be good, and of the true faith? He answered, that he judged they
were good, and of the true faith. Being inquired, what books he read
in the realm? he said, that he had read the New Testament in Latin,
and other books mentioned in the bills; but he read none translated: 
notwithstanding he did confess that he had read a book called
Thorp's, in the presence and audience of others, and also a book of
John Frith's purgatory, which he had read to himself alone, as he
said; and also had read to himself a book called The Practice of
Prelates; and also said, that he had read a book called The Parable
of the Wicked Mammon, but in the presence and hearing of others which
he knew not. Also he confessed that he had read The Obedience of a
Christian Man, and The Sum of Scripture, among company, and also The
Dialogue betwixt the Ploughman and the Gentleman, among company, as
he thought; also he had read a piece of the answer of Tyndale made to
Sir Thomas More; likewise he had read the Dialogue of Frith, to
himself:  he had read also the prologues of the five books of Moses,
contained in the long schedule, and in company, as he thought.

     All which books he had read in manner aforesaid within these
two years last past, and as for the New Testament in English, he read
it before he had these books specified in the schedule before
rehearsed.

     To the third article, as touching Zuinglius and others, he
supposed that they held the same doctrine that Luther did; but that
he thought them to vary in some points.

     The sixteenth day of November, Richard Bayfield appeared again
before the bishop; who inquired of him, of what sect Zuinglius was.
He said, he thought that he held with Luther in some points, &c.

     Also he confessed, that first he brought books of the sorts
abovenamed into this realm, about Midsummer was a twelvemonth, and
landed them at Colchester; and afterwards brought part of them to
this city; and some he dispersed and sold in this city. The second
time that he brought books was about All-Hallowtide was a
twelvemonth, and landed them at St. Catharine's; which books the lord
chancellor took from him. Also that at Easter last was the third time
that he brought over the books now showed unto him, and contained in
these two bills, and landed with them in Norfolk, and from thence
brought them to the city of London in a mail.

     To the fifth, sixth, and seventh articles, he answered and
confessed them to be true.

     To the eighth he answered, that it was enjoined him as is
contained in the article; the which injunction he fulfilled.

     To the ninth he answered, that he did not remember it.

     To the tenth he answered, that it was enjoined him that he
should go to the abbey of Bury, and there continue; the which, he
said, he did three times; but he did not wear his monk's cowl, as he
was enjoined.

     The eleventh article he confessed.

     For the twelfth article, "That he did not wear his monk's habit
according to the abjuration; "he referred himself to the acts,
whether he were so enjoined or no.

     To the thirteenth article he said, that he did not remember the
contents thereof, but referred himself to the acts. Notwithstanding
he confessed that he had no licence of the bishop of London to come
to the city or diocese of London, nor to make any abode there.

The sentence given against Richard Bayfield in a case of relapse.

     "In the name of God, Amen. We, John, by the sufferance of God,
bishop of London, in a case of inquisition of heresy, and relapse of
the same, first begun before Master Richard Foxfard, doctor of both
laws, our official, now depending before us undecided, against thee,
Richard Bayfield, priest and monk, professed to the order and rule of
St. Benedict, in the monastery of St. Edmund's Bury, in the diocese
of Norwich, and by means of the causes within written under our
jurisdiction, and with all favour rightly and lawfully proceeding,
with all favour possible, the merits and circumstances of the cause
of this inquisition heard, weighed, understood, and fully discussed
by us, the said bishop, reserving unto ourselves that which by law
ought to be reserved; have thought good to proceed in this manner, to
the pronouncing of our definitive sentence.

     "Forasmuch as by the acts enacted, inquired, propounded, and
alleged, and by thee judicially confessed, we do find that thou hast
abjured certain, errors and heresies, and damnable opinions by thee
confessed, as well particularly as generally, before our reverend
fellow and brother, then thy ordinary, according to the form and
order of the church:  and that one Martin Luther, together with his
adherents and complices, receivers and favourers, whatsoever they be,
was condemned as a heretic by the authority of Pope Leo the Tenth, of
most happy memory, and by the authority of the apostolic see, and the
books, and all writings, schedules, and sermons of the said Master
Luther, his adherents and complices, whether they be found in Latin,
or in any other languages imprinted or translated, for the manifold
heresies and errors, and damnable opinions that are in them, are
condemned, reproved, and utterly rejected; and inhibition made, by
the authority of the said see, to all faithful Christians, under the
pain of excommunication, and other punishments in that behalf to be
incurred by the law, that no man by any means presume to read, teach,
hear, imprint, or publish, or by any means do defend, directly or
indirectly, secretly or openly, in their houses, or in any other
public or private places,any such manner of writings, books, errors,
or articles, as are contained more at large in the apostolic letters,
drawn out in form of a public instrument; whereunto, and to the
contents thereof, we refer ourselves as far as is expedient, and no
otherwise. And forasmuch as we doperceive that thou didst understand
the premises, and yet these things notwithstanding, after thy
abjuration made, (as is aforesaid,) thou hast brought in, divers and
sundry times, many books of the said Martin Luther, and his adherents
and complices, and of other heretics, the names, titles, and authors
of which books here follow, and are these:  Martin Luther, Of the
Abrogating of the private Mass; the Declarations of Martin Luther
upon the Epistles of St. Peter; Luther upon the Epistles of St. Paul
and St. Jude; Luther upon Monastical Vows; Luther's Commentary upon
the Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians; Johannes Œcolampadius, upon
the exposition of these words, This is my Body; the Annotations of
Œcolampadius upon the Epistles of St. Paul unto the Romans;
Œcolampadius's Commentary upon the three last Prophets, Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi; the Sermons of Œcolampadius upon the Catholic
Epistles of John; a Book of Annotations upon Genesis, gathered by
Huldricus Zuinglius; the Commentaries of Pomeran, upon four Chapters
of the First Epistle to the Corinthians; Annotations of Pomeran upon
Deuteronomy and Samuel; Pomeran upon the Psalms; the Commentaries of
Francis Lambert of Avignon, upon the Gospel of St. Luke; A Congest of
all matters of Divinity, by Francis Lambert; the Commentaries of
Francis Lambert upon the Prophet Joel; also the Commentaries of
Francis Lambert upon the Prophets Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah,
Haggai, Zechariah, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, and Hosea; a new Gloss of
Philip Melancthon upon the Proverbs of Solomon; the Commentaries of
Philip Melancthon upon the Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians; the
Annotations of Philip Melancthon upon the Epistle of St. Paul to the
Romans, and upon the Epistle to the Colossians; Solomon's Sentences,
translated according to the Hebrew, by Philip Melancthon; most
wholesome Annotations upon the Gospel of St. Mark, by Christopher
Hegendorphinus; the Commentaries of John Brentius upon Job; the
Commentary of John Brentius upon the Ecclesiastes of Solomon;
Homilies of Brentius upon the Gospel of St. John; the Annotations of
Andrew Althomarus and Brentius upon the Epistle of St. James; the
Commentaries of Bucer upon Zephaniah; Bucer upon the four
Evangelists; the Process Consistorial of the Martyrdom of John Huss;
a Brief Commendatory of Martin Luther, unto Otho Brunfelsius, as
touching the Life, Doctrine, and Martyrdom of John Huss; Felinus upon
the Psalter; his Exposition upon Isaiah; his Exposition upon
Jeremiah; Capito upon Hosea; Capito upon Habakkuk; the Union of
Dissentients; the Pandect of Otho; the Catalogue of famous Men; an
Answer of Tyndale unto Sir Thomas More; a Disputation of Purgatory,
made by John Frith in English; a Prologue to the Fifth Book of Moses,
called Deuteronomy; the First Book of Moses, called Genesis; a
Prologue to the Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus; a Prologue to
the Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers; a Prologue to the Second
Book of Moses, called Exodus; the Practice of Prelates; the New
Testament in English, with an Introduction to the Romans; the Parable
of the Wicked Mammon; the Obedience of a Christian Man; A.B.C. of
Thorpe's; the Sum of Scripture; the Primer in English; the Psalter in
English; a Dialogue betwixt the Gentleman and the Ploughman.

     "Of all which kind of books, both in Latin and English,
translated, set forth, and imprinted, containing not only Lutheran
heresies, but also the damnable heresies of other heretics condemned,
forasmuch as thou hast brought over, from the parties beyond the sea,
a great number into this realm of England, and specially to our city
and diocese of London, and hast procured them to be brought and
conveyed over; also hast kept by thee and studied those books, and
hast published and read them unto divers men, and many of those books
also hast dispersed and given unto divers persons dwelling within our
city and diocese of London, and hast confessed and affirmed before
our official, that those books of Martin Luther and other heretics
his complices and adherents, and all the contents in them, are good
and agreeable to the true faith; saying thus, That they are good, and
of the true faith; 'and by this means and pretence hast commended and
praised Martin Luther, his adherents and complices, and hast favoured
and believed their errors, heresies, and opinions:  Therefore we,
John, the bishop aforesaid, first calling upon the name of Christ,
and setting God only before our eyes; by the counsel and consent of
the divines and lawyers with whom in this behalf we have conferred,
do declare and decree thee, the aforesaid Richard Bayfield, otherwise
called Somersam, for the contempt of thy abjuration, as a favourer of
the aforesaid Martin Luther, his adherents, complices, favourers, and
other condemned heretics, and for commending and studying, reading,
having, retaining, publishing, selling, giving, and dispersing the
books and writings, as well of the said Martin Luther, his adherents
and disciples, as of other heretics before named; and also for
crediting and maintaining the errors, heresies, and damnable opinions
contained in the said books and writings, worthily to be and have
been a heretic; and that thou, by the pretence of the premises, art
fallen again most damnably into heresy; and we pronounce that thou
art and hast been a relapsed heretic, and hast incurred, and oughtest
to incur, the pain and punishment of relapse:  and we so decree and
declare, and also condemn thee thereunto; and that by the pretence of
the premises, thou hast even by the law incurred the sentence of the
greater excommunication:  and thereby we pronounce and declare thee to
have been and to be excommunicate, and clearly discharge, exonerate,
and degrade thee from all privilege and prerogative of the
ecclesiastical orders, and also deprive thee of all ecclesiastical
office and benefice:  also we pronounce and declare thee, by this our
sentence or decree, the which we here promulgate and declare in these
writings, that thou art actually to be degraded, deposed, and
deprived, as followeth: 

     "In the name of God, Amen. We, John, by the permission of God,
bishop of London, rightfully and lawfully proceeding in this behalf,
do dismiss thee, Richard Bayfield, alias Somersam, being pronounced
by us a relapsed heretic, and degraded by us from all ecclesiastical
privilege, out of the ecclesiastical court, pronouncing that the
secular power here present should receive thee under their
jurisdiction; earnestly requiring and desiring, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, that the execution of this worthy punishment, to be
done upon thee and against thee, in this behalf, may be so moderated,
that there be neither overmuch cruelty, neither too much favourable
gentleness; but that it may be to the health and salvation of thy
soul, and to the extirpation, fear, terror, and conversion of all
other heretics, unto the unity of the catholic faith. This our final
decree, by this our sentence definitive, we have caused to be
published in form aforesaid."

     On Monday, the twentieth of November, 1531, in the choir of the
cathedral church of St. Paul, before the said John, bishop of London,
judicially sitting, being assisted by John, abbot of Westminster;
Robert, abbot of Waltham; and Nicholas, prior of Christ's Church, in
London; these honourable lords being also present; Henry, earl of
Essex; Richard Gray, brother to the marquis of Somerset; John
Lambert, mayor of London; Richard Gresham, and Edward Altam, sheriffs
(the which mayor and sheriffs were required to be there present by
the bishop of London's letters hereafter written, and by virtue of a
statute of King Henry the Fourth, king of England); also in the
presence of divers canons, the chancellor, official, and the 
archdeacon of London, with the bishops' chaplains, and a great number
both of the clergy and laity; Matthew Grefton, the registrar, being
also there present:  Master Richard Bayfield, alias Somersam, was
brought forth by Thomas Turner the apparitor, his keeper, in whose
presence the transumpt of the apostolic bull of Pope Leo the Tenth,
upon the condemnation of Martin Luther and his adherents, was brought
forth and showed, sealed with the seal of Thomas Wolsey, late legate
de Latere, and subscribed with the sign and name of Master Robert
Tunnes, public notary; and also the decree upon the condemnation of
certain books brought in by him, sealed with the seals of the
archbishop of Canterbury, and subscribed by three notaries.

     Then the bishop of London repeated in effect before him his
abjuration which he had before made, and other his demerits committed
and done, besides his abjuration; and the said Bayfield said, that he
was not culpable in the articles that were objected against him; and
desired that the heresies contained in the books which he brought
over, might be declared in open audience. Then the bishop, after
certain talk had with the said Bayfield, as touching the desert of
his cause, asked him whether he could show any cause why he should
not be delivered over unto the secular power, and be pronounced as a
relapse, and suffer punishment as a relapse. The said Bayfield
declared or propounded no cause, but said that he brought over those
books for lack of money, and not to sow any heresies. And incontinent
the said Bayfield, with a vehement spirit, (as it appeared,) said
unto the bishop of London, "The life of you of the spiritualty is so
evil, that ye be heretics; and ye do not only live evil, but do
maintain evil living, and also do let, that what true living is, may
not be known;" and said that their living is against Christ's gospel,
and that their belief was never taken of Christ's church. Then the
said bishop, after long deliberation had, forasmuch as the said
Bichard Bayfield, be said, could show no cause why he should not be
declared a relapse, read the decree and sentence against him; by the
which, amongst other things, he condemned him as a heretic, and
pronounced him to be punished with the punishment due unto such as
fall again into heresy; and by his words did degrade him, and also
declared that he should be actually degraded, as is more at large
contained in the long sentence.

     The aforesaid sentence being so read by the bishop of London,
he proceeded immediately to the actual and solemn degrading of the
said Richard Bayfield, alias Somersam, and there solemnly and
actually degraded him before the people; the which thing being done,
he dismissed him by the sentence aforesaid from the ecclesiastical
court:  whereupon the secular power, being there present, received him
into their jurisdiction, without any writ in that behalf obtained,
but only by virtue of the bishop's letters, by the statute of King
Henry the Fourth, in that behalf provided and directed unto them
under the bishop's seal. The tenor of which letters hereafter follow.

     "John, by the permission of God, bishop of London, unto our
dearly beloved in Christ, the right honourable lord mayor of the city
of London, and the sheriffs of the same, health, grace, and
benediction. Whereas we have already, by our vicar-general, proceeded
in a certain cause of heresy, and relapse into the same, against one
Richard Bayfield, alias Somersam, and intend upon Monday next, being
the twentieth day of this present month of November, to give a
sentence definitive against the said Richard Bayfield, alias
Somersam, and to leave and deliver him over unto the secular power;
we require you, the lord mayor and sheriffs aforesaid, the king's
Majesty's vicegerents, even in the bowels of Jesu Christ, that
according to the form and effect of the statute of our most noble and
famous prince in Christ our Lord the lord Henry the Fourth, by the
grace of God, late king of England, you will be personally present in
the choir of the cathedral church of St. Paul, with your favourable
aid and assistance in this behalf, the day that the sentence shall he
given, and to receive the said Richard Bayfield, alias Somersam,
after his sentence so given, to discharge us and our officers; and to
do further, according to the tenor and effect of the said statute, as
far as shall be required of you, according to the canonical
sanctions, and the laudable custom of the famous kingdom of England,
in this behalf accustomed. In witness whereof we have set our seal
unto this present.

     "Dated the 19th day of November, anno 1531, and in the first
year of our consecration."

     On Monday, the 20th day of November, in the year aforesaid, in
the choir of the cathedral church of St. Paul, the bishop of London
calling unto him John, abbot of Westminster; Robert, abbot of
Waltham; Nicholas, prior of Christ's Church of the city of London;
Master John Cox, auditor and vicar-general to the archbishop of
Canterbury; Peter Ligham, official of the court of Canterbury; Thomas
Baghe, chancellor of the church of St. Paul's; William Cliefe,
archdeacon of London; John Intent, canon residentiary of the same;
William Briton, Robert Birch, and Hugh Aprice, doctors of both laws,
in the presence of us, Matthew Grefton, registrar; Anthony Hussie,
Richard Martine, and Thomas Shadwell, public notaries and scribes
appointed in this behalf; briefly rehearsed the answers of the same
Bayfield in effect, and his abjuration, and other his demerits by him
done besides his abjuration:  which religious persons, and other
ecclesiastical men abovesaid, thought it good, and agreed, that the
said bishop should proceed against him in this case of relapse, and
should pronounce and give forth the sentence against him in case
aforesaid.

     And so he was delivered to the sheriffs to carry to Newgate,
being commanded to bring him again upon Monday following into Paul's
upper choir, there to give attendance upon the bishop of London with
the residue, till they had done with him; and by and by the sheriffs
were commanded to have him into the vestry, and then to bring him
forth again in antichrist's apparel, to be degraded before them. When
the bishop had degraded him, kneeling upon the highest step of the
altar, he took his crosier-staff, and smote him on the breast, that
he threw him down backwards, and brake his head, that he swooned; and
when he came to himself again, he thanked God that he was delivered
from the malignant church of antichrist, and that he was come into
the true sincere church of Jesus Christ, militant here in earth. "And
I trust anon," said he, "to be in heaven with Jesus Christ, and the
church triumphant for ever." And so was he led forth through the
choir to Newgate, and there rested about an hour in prayer, and so
went to the fire in his apparel manfully and joyfully, and there, for
lack of a speedy fire, was two quarters of an hour alive. And when
the left arm was on fire and burned, he rubbed it with his right
hand, and it fell from his body, and he continued in prayer to the
end without moving.

     Sir Thomas More, after he had brought this good man to his end,
ceased not to rave after his death in his ashes, to pry and spy out
what sparks he could find of reproach and contumely, whereby to rase
out all good memory of his name and fame. In searching whereof he
hath found out two things to lay against him:  the one is, that this
Bayfield went about to assure himself of two wives at once, one in
Brabant, another in England:  the second, that after his taking, all
the while that he was not in utter despair of his pardon, he was
content to forswear his doctrine, and letted not to disclose his
brethren. For the answer whereof, although there were no more to be
said, yet this were enough to say, that Master More thus said of him;
a man so blinded in the zeal of popery, so deadly set against the one
side, and so partially affectionate unto the other, that in them whom
he favoureth he can see nothing but all fair roses and sweet virtue;
in the other which he hateth, there is never a thing can please his
fantasy, but all is as black as pitch, vice, abomination, heresy, and
folly, whatsoever they do, or intend to do. But as touching the
defence of this Bayfield, as also of other more, I will defer the
defence of them to a several apology by itself, hereafter, God
willing, to be adjoined.



174. JOHN TEWKESBURY, LEATHERSELLER, OF LONDON, MARTYR.
Illustration:  A Victim on the Rack

     JOHN Tewkesbury was converted by the reading of Tyndale's
Testament, and The Wicked Mammon. He had the Bible written. In all
points of religion he openly did dispute in the bishop's chapel in
his palace. In the doctrine of justification and all other articles
of his faith he was very expert and prompt in his answers, in such
sort that Tonstal, and all his learned men ,were ashamed that a
leatherseller should so dispute with them, with such power of the
Scriptures and heavenly wisdom, that they were not able to resist
him.

     This disputation continued a se'nnight.

     The process of whose examinations, articles, and answers, here
follow, as they are out of the bishop's register extracted.

     "On Wednesday, the twenty-first day of April, A.D. 1529, John
Tewkesbury was brought into the consistory at London, before
Cuthbert, bishop of London, and his assistants, Henry, bishop of St.
Asaph, and John, abbot of Westminster; unto whom the bishop of London
declared, that he had at divers times exhorted him to recant the
errors and heresies which he held and defended, even as he did then
again exhort him not to trust too much to his own wit and learning,
but unto the doctrine of the holy mother the church:  who made answer
that in his judgment he did not err from the doctrine of the holy
mother the church. And at the last, being examined upon errors,
which, they said, were in the said book called The Wicked Mammon, he
answered thus:  'Take ye the book and read it over, and I think in my
conscience, ye shall find no fault in it.' And being asked by the
said bishop, whether he would rather give credit to his book, or to
the gospel, he answered that the gospel is, and ever hath been, true.
And moreover, being particularly examined what he thought of this
article, 'That the Jews of good intent and zeal slew Christ,' he
answered, 'Look ye the book through, before and after, as it lieth,
and ye shall find a better tale in it than ye make of it;' and
further thought, that whosoever translated the New Testament, and
made the book, meaning The Wicked Mammon, he did it of good zeal, and
by the Spirit of God.

     "Also being further asked by the said bishop of London, whether
he would stand to the contents of his book, he answered, 'Look ye the
book before and after, and I will be content to stand unto it.' Then
being examined, whether that all good works must be done without
respect of any thing, he answered, that a man should do good works
for the love of God only, and for no hope of any reward higher or
lower in heaven; for if he should, it were presumption. Also being
demanded, whether that Christ, with all his works, did not deserve
heaven, he answered and said, that it was plain enough. Which things
being done, the bishop said further to John Tewkesbury thus:  'I tell
thee, before God and those which are here present, in examination of
my conscience, that the articles above named, and many others
contained in the same book, are false, heretical, and condemned by
the holy church:  how thinkest thou?' And further, the said bishop of
London said unto him again, 'I tell thee, before God and those which
are here present,' &c.; and so asked him again, what he thought of
those articles. And after many exhortations, he commanded him to
answer determinately under pain of the law, saying further unto him,
that if he refused to answer, he must declare him an open and
obstinate heretic, according to the order of the law. These things so
done, the bishop asked John Tewkesbury again, whether the said book,
called The Wicked Mammon, were good?

     "To which interrogatory he answereth, that he thinketh in his
conscience there is nothing in the book but that which is true. And
to this article objected, that is, that faith only justifieth without
works, he answereth, that it is well said. Whereunto the bishop
inferred again, that the articles before objected, with divers others
contained in the book called The Wicked Mammon, were false,
erroneous, damnable, and heretical, and reproved and condemned by the
church:  and, before God, and all those that were present, for the
discharge of his conscience, he had often, and very gently, exhorted
the said John Tewkesbury, that he would revoke and renounce his
errors:  otherwise if he did intend to persevere in them, he must
declare him a heretic; which he would be very sorry to do. These
things thus done, the bishop oftentimes offered him, that he should
choose what spiritual or temporal man he would, to be his counsellor;
and gave him time, as before, to deliberate with himself until the
next sitting."

     "Also in the same month of April, in the year of our Lord
aforesaid, the bishop of London, Cuthbert Tonstal, sitting in the
consistory, with Nicholas of Ely, John of Lincoln, and John of Bath
and Wells, &c., this John Tewkesbury was brought before them. After
certain articles being repeated unto him, the bishop of London
brought before him a certain book, called The Wicked Mammon, asking
him whether the book was of the same impression and making as were
his books that he had sold to others? who answered and said, it was
the same. Whereupon the bishop of London asking him again, whether
the book contained the same error or no? who answered again, saying,
I pray God, that the condemnation of the gospel and translation of
the Testament, be not to your shame, and that you be not in peril for
it:  for the condemnation of it and of the others is all one. Further
he said, that he had studied the Holy Scripture by the space of these
seventeen years, and as he may see the spots of his face through the
glass, so in reading the New Testament he knoweth the faults of his
soul. Further, he was examined upon certain points and articles,
extracted out of the said book of The Wicked Mammon, as followeth

     "First, That antichrist is not an outward thing, that is to
say, a man that should suddenly appear with wonders, as your
forefathers talked of him; but antichrist is a spiritual thing. --
Whereunto he answered and said, that he findeth no fault in it.

     "Again, it was demanded of him touching the article whether
faith only justifieth a man? -- To this he said, that if he should
look to deserve heaven by works, he should do wickedly; for works
follow faith, and Christ redeemed us all with the merits of his
passion.

     "That the devil holdeth our hearts so hard, that it is
impossible for us to consent unto God's law. -- To that he answered,
that he findeth no fault in it.

     "That the law of God suffereth no merits, neither any man to be
justified in the sight of God. -- To that he answered, that it is
plain enough, considering what the law is; and he saith, that he
findeth no ill in it.

     "That the law of God requireth of us things impossible. -- To
that he answered, that the law of God doth command, that thou shalt
love God above all things, and thy neighbour as thyself, which never
man could do; and in that he doth find no fault in his conscience.

     "That as the good tree bringeth forth fruit, so there is no law
to him that believeth and is justified through faith. -- To that he
answered and said, he findeth no ill in it.

     "All good works must be done without respect of any thing, or
any profit to be had thereof. -- To that he answered, 'It is truth.'

     "Christ with all his works did not deserve heaven. -- To that
he answered, that the text is true as it lieth, and findeth no fault
in it.

     "Peter and Paul, and saints that be dead, are not our friends,
but their friends whom they did help when they were alive. -- To that
he said, he findeth no ill in it.

     "Alms deserve no reward of God. -- To that he answered, that 
the text of the book is true.

     "The devil is not cast out by merits of fasting or prayer. --
To that he answered, thinking it good enough.

     "We cannot love except we see some benefit and kindness. As
long as we live under the law of God only, where we see but sin and
damnation, and the wrath of God upon us, yea, where we were damned
before we were born, we cannot love God, and cannot but hate him as a
tyrant, unrighteous and unjust; and flee from him, as did Cain. -- To
that he answered, and thinketh it good and plain enough.

     "We are damned by nature, as a toad is a toad by nature, and a
serpent is a serpent by nature. -- To that he answered, that it is
true, as it is in the book.

     "Item, As concerning the article of fasting. -- To that he
answered and said, 'The book declareth itself.'

     "Every one man is a lord of whatsoever another man hath. -- To
that he answered; 'What law can be better than that? for it is
plainly meant there.'

     "Love in Christ putteth no difference betwixt one and another.
-- To that he answered and said, It is plain enough of itself.'

     "As concerning the preaching of the word of God, and washing of
dishes, there is no difference as concerning salvation, and as
touching the pleasing of God. -- To that he answered, saying, 'It is
a plain text, and as for pleasing God, it is all one.'

     "That the Jews of good intent and zeal put Christ to death. To
that he answered, that it is true, and the text is plain enough.

     "The sects of St. Francis, and St. Dominic, and others, be
damnable. -- To that he answered and said, 'St. Paul repugneth
against them.'

     These articles being so objected, and answer made unto them by
John Tewkesbury, the said bishop of London asked him whether he would
continue in his heresies and errors above rehearsed, or renounce and
forsake them? who answered thus:  "I pray you reform yourself, and if
there be any error in the book, let it be reformed; I think the book
is good enough."

     Further, the bishop exhorted him to recant his errors. To this
the said John Tewkesbury answered as is above written; to wit, "I
pray you reform yourself, and if there be any error in the book, let
it be reformed; I think it is good enough." This thing being done,
the bishop appointed him to determine better with himself against the
morrow, in the presence of Master John Cox, vicar-general to the
archbishop of Canterbury, Master Galfride Warton, Rowland Philips,
William Philow, and Robert Ridley, professors of divinity.

     On the thirteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord
abovesaid, in the chapel within the palace of London, before
Cuthbert, bishop of London, with his assistants, Nicholas, bishop of
Ely, &c., Tewkesbury again appeared, and was examined upon the
articles drawn out of the book called The Wicked Mammon, as
followeth: 

     First, "Christ is thine, and all his deeds be thy deeds; Christ
is in thee, and thou so knit to him inseparably, that neither canst
thou be damned, except Christ be damned with thee; neither canst thou
be saved, except Christ be saved with thee." -- To this he answered,
that he found no fault in it.

     Item, "We desire one another to pray for us. That done, we must
put our neighbour in remembrance of his duty, and that he trust not
in his holiness." -- To this he answered, "Take ye it as ye will; I
will take it well enough."

     Item, "Now seest thou what alms meaneth, and wherefore it
serveth. He that seeketh with his alms more than to be merciful, to
be a neighbour, to succour his brother's need, to do his duty to his
brother, to give his brother that he owed him; the same is blind, and
seeth not Christ's blood." Here he answereth, that he findeth no
fault throughout all the book, but that all the book is good, and it
hath given him great comfort and light to his conscience.

     Item, "That ye do do nothing to please God, but that he
commanded." -- To that he answereth, and thinketh it good, by his
troth.

     Item, "So God is honoured on all sides, in that we count him
righteous in all his laws and ordinances:  and to worship him
otherwise than so, it is idolatry." -- To that he answered, that it
pleaseth him well.

     The examination of these articles being done, the bishop of
London did exhort the said John Tewkesbury to recant his errors
abovesaid; and after some other communication had by the bishop with
him, the said bishop did exhort him again to recant his errors, and
appointed him to determine with himself against the next session what
he would do.

     In the next session be submitted himself, and abjured his
opinions, and was enjoined penance, as followeth:  which was the
eighth of May.

     Imprimis, That he should keep well his abjuration, under pain
of relapse.

     Secondly, That the next Sunday following, in Paul's church, in
the open procession, he should carry a faggot, and stand at Paul's
Cross with the same.

     That the Wednesday following, he should carry the same faggot
about Newgate Market and Cheap-side.

     That on Friday after, he should take the same faggot again at
St. Peter's church in Cornhill, and carry it about the market of
Leadenhall.

     That he should have two signs of faggots embroidered, one on
his left sleeve, and the other on his right sleeve; which he should
wear all his lifetime, unless he were otherwise dispensed withal.

     That on Whitsunday-eve he should enter into the monastery of
St. Bartholomew, in Smithfield, and there to abide; and not come out
unless he were released by the bishop of London.

     That he should not depart out of the city or diocese of London,
without the special licence of the bishop or his successors.
Illustration:  John Tewkesbury carrying a faggot

     The which penance he entered into the eighth day of May, A.D.
1529. And thus much concerning his first examination, which was in
the year 1529, at what time he was enforced through infirmity, as is
before expressed, to retract and abjure his doctrine.
Notwithstanding, the same John Tewkesbury, afterward confirmed by the
grace of God, and moved by the example of Bayfield aforesaid, that
was burned in Smithfield, did return, and constantly abide in the
testimony of the truth, and suffered for the same; who, recovering
more grace and better strength at the hand of the Lord, two years
after being apprehended again, was brought before Sir Thomas More,
and the bishop of London; where certain articles were objected to
him, the chief whereof we intend briefly to recite; for the matter is
prolix.

     "Imprimis, That he confessed that he was baptized, and intended
to keep the catholic faith.

     "Secondly, That he affirmeth, that the abjuration oath and
subscription that he made before Cuthbert, late bishop of London, was
done by compulsion.

     "Thirdly, That he had the books of the Obedience of a Christian
Man, and of The Wicked Mammon, in his custody, and hath read them
since his abjuration.

     "Fourthly, That he affirmeth that he suffered the two faggots
that were embroidered on his sleeve, to be taken from him, for that
he deserved not to wear them.

     "Fifthly, He saith, that faith only justifieth, which lacketh
not charity.

     "Sixthly, He saith, that Christ is a sufficient Mediator for
us, and therefore no prayer is to be made unto saints. Whereupon they
laid unto him this verse of the anthem:  'Hail Queen our advocate,'
&c.; to which he answered, that he knew none other advocate but
Christ alone.

     "Seventhly, He affirmeth that there is no purgatory after this
life, but that Christ our Saviour is a sufficient purgation for us.

     "Eighthly, He affirmeth, that the souls of the faithful,
departing this life, rest with Christ.

     "Ninthly, He affirmeth, that a priest, by receiving of orders,
receiveth more grace, if his faith be increased; or else not.

     "Tenthly, and last of all, he believeth that the sacrament of
the flesh and blood of Christ is not the very body of Christ, in
flesh and blood, as it was born of the Virgin Mary.

     "Whereupon the bishop's chancellor asked the said Tewkesbury,
if he could show any cause why he should not be taken for a heretic,
falling into his heresy again, and receive the punishment of a
heretic. Whereunto he answered that he had wrong before, and if he be
condemned now, he reckoneth that he hath wrong again."

     Then the chancellor caused the articles to be read openly, with
the answers unto the same; the which the said Tewkesbury confessed;
and thereupon the bishop pronounced sentence against him, and
delivered him unto the sheriffs of Loudon for the time being, who
were Richard Gresham and Edward Altam, who burned him in Smithfield
upon St. Thomas's eve, being the twentieth of December, in the year
aforesaid; the tenor of whose sentence, pronounced against him by the
bishop, doth here ensue, word for word.

     "In the name of God, Amen. The deservings and circumstances of
a certain cause of heretical pravity, and falling again thereunto by
thee John Tewkesbury, of the parish of St. Michael's in the Quern, of
the city of London, and of our jurisdiction, appearing before us
sitting in judgment, being heard, seen, and understood, and fully
discussed by us John, by the sufferance of God, bishop of London;
because we do find by inquisitions, manifestly enough, that thou
didst abjure freely and voluntarily before Cuthbert, late bishop of
London, thy ordinary, divers and sundry heresies, errors, and
damnable opinions, contrary to the determination of our mother holy
church, as well special as general, and that since and beside the
aforesaid abjuration thou artagain fallen into the same damnable
heresies, opinions, and errors, (which is greatly to be lamented,)
and the same dost hold, affirm, and believe:  we therefore, John, the
bishop aforesaid, the name of God first being called upon, and the
same only God set before our eyes; and with the counsel of learned
men assisting us in this behalf, (with whom in this cause we have
communicated of our definitive sentence and final decree, in this
behalf to be done,) do intend to proceed and do proceed in this
manner. Because, as it is aforesaid, we do find thee, the aforesaid
John Tewkesbury, of our jurisdiction, to be a contemner of the first
abjuration; and moreover, before and after the aforesaid first errors
and other damnable opinions, to have fallen, and to be a heretic
fallen, and to have incurred the pain of such fallen heretics:  we do
pronounce, determine, declare, and condemn thee of the premises, to
have incurred the guilt of the great excommunication; and do
pronounce thee to be excommunicated; and also do declare thee, the
said Tewkesbury, so damnably fallen again into heresy, to be in the
secular power and in their judgment (as the holy canons have
decreed); and here we do leave thee to the aforesaid secular power,
and to their judgment; beseeching them earnestly, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, that such severe punishment and execution as in this
behalf is to be done against thee, may be so moderated, that no
rigorous rigour be used, but to the health and salvation of thy soul,
and to the terror, fear, and rooting out of heretics, and their
conversion to the catholic faith and unity, by this our final decree
which we declare by these our writings."

     This aforesaid sentence definitive against John Tewkesbury was
read and pronounced by the bishop of London, the sixteenth day of the
month of December, in the year aforesaid, in the house of Sir Thomas
More, high chancellor of England, in the parish of Chelsea. After
this sentence, the sheriffs received the aforesaid Tewkesbury into
their custody, and carried him away with them, and afterwards burned
him in Smithfield, as is aforesaid; having no writ of the king for
their warrant.



175. JOHN RANDALL AND EDWARD FREESE.

     Now also it cometh into my remembrance to speak of another, one
John Randall my kinsman, who, through the privy malice of divers, had
not a far unlike tragical end and death to that of Richard Hun,
before mentioned.

     This John Randall being a young scholar in Christ's college, in
Cambridge, about the year of our Lord 1531, had one Wyer for his
tutor, unto whom, for the love of the Scriptures and sincere
religion, he began not only to be suspected but also to be hated. And
as this was unknown unto any man, so it is uncertain, whether he were
afterwards hanged up by him or no; because as yet it is not come to
light. But the matter happened in this sort:  the young man, being
studious and scarcely twenty-one years old, was long lacking among
his companions; at last, after four days, through the stench of the
corpse, his study door being broken open, he was found hanged with
his own girdle within the study, in such sort and manner that he had
his face looking upon his Bible, and his finger pointing to a place
of Scripture, where predestination was treated of. Surely this matter
lacked no singular and exquisite policy and craft of some old naughty
and wicked man, whosoever he was that did the deed, that it should
seem that the poor young man through fear of predestination was
driven to despair; that other young men being feared through that
example should be kept back from the study of the Scriptures as a
thing most perilous. And albeit this brief history do not pertain to
these times, yet I thought it by no means to be omitted, both for the
profitable memory of the thing, as also for the similitude of the
story that it seemeth not to be so fit in another place.

The apprehension of one Edward Freese, a painter.

     Edward Freese was born in York, and was apprentice to a painter
in the same city; and by the reason of working for his master in
Bearsy abbey, or by some such occasion, was known unto the abbot of
the same house; for he was a boy of a pregnant wit, and the abbot
favoured him so much, that he bought his years of his master, and
would have made him a monk. And the lad not liking that kind of
living, and not knowing how to get out, because he was a novice, ran
away after a long space, and came to Colchester, in Essex, and
remaining there according to his former vocation, was married, and
lived like an honest man. After he had been there a good time, he was
hired to paint certain cloths for the new inn, in Colchester, which
is in the middle of the market-place; and in the upper border of the
cloths, he wrote certain sentences of the Scripture; and by that he
was plainly known to be one of them that they call heretics.

     And on a time, he being at his work in the same inn, they of
the town, when they had seen his work, went about to take him; and
he, having some inkling thereof, thought to shift for himself, but
yet was taken forcibly in the yard of the same inn; and after this he
was brought to London, and so to Fulham, to the bishop's house, where
he was cruelly imprisoned, with certain others of Essex, that is to
wit, one Johnson and his wife; Wylie, and his wife and son; and
Father Bate, of Rowshedge. They were fed with fine manchet made of
saw-dust, or at least a great part thereof; and were so straitly
kept, that their wives and their friends could not come to them.
After the painter had been there a long space, by much suit he was
removed to Lollard's Tower. His wife, in the time of the suit, while
he was yet at Fulham, being desirous to see her husband, and pressing
to come in at the gate, being then great with child, the porter
lifted up his foot and struck her on the body, that at length she
died of the same; but the child was destroyed immediately. After
that, they were all stocked for a long time, and then they were let
loose into their prisons again. Some had horselocks on their legs,
and some other irons. This painter would ever be writing on the walls
with chalk or a coal, and in one place he wrote, "Doctor Dodipall
would make me believe the moon were made of green cheese." And
because he would be writing many things, he was manacled by the
wrists so long that the flesh of his arms was grown higher than his
irons. By means of his manacles he could not comb his head, and he
remained so long manacled, that his hair was folded together.

     After the death of his wife, his brother sued to the king for
him, and after a long suit he was brought out into the consistory at
Paul's, and (as his brother did report) they kept him three days
without meat before he came to his answer. Then, what by the long
imprisonment and much evil handling, and for lack of sustenance, the
man was in that case, that he could say nothing, but look and gaze
upon the people like a wild man; and if they asked him a question, he
could say nothing but "My lord is a good man." And thus, when they
had spoiled his body, and destroyed his wits, they sent him back
again to Bearsy abbey; but he came away from thence, and would not
tarry amongst them:  albeit he never came to his perfect mind, to his
dying day. His brother, of whom I before spake, whose name was
Valentine Freese, and his wife, gave their lives at one stake in
York, for the testimony of Jesus Christ.

     Also the wife of the said Father Bate, while he was at Fulham,
made many supplications to the king without redress, and at the last
she delivered one into his own hands, and he read it himself,
whereupon she was appointed to go to Chancery-lane, to one whose name
(as is thought) was Master Selyard; and at last she got a letter of
the said Selyard to the bishop; and when she had it, she thought all
her suit well bestowed, hoping that some good should come to her
husband thereby. And because the wicked officers in those days were
crafty, and desirous of his blood, as some others had proved their
practice, some of her friends would needs see the contents of her
letter, and not suffer her to deliver it to the bishop:  and as they
thought, so they found indeed; for it was after this manner:  -- After
commendations had, &c., Look, what you can gather against Father
Bate, send me word by your trusty friend, Sir William Saxie, that I
may certify the king's Majesty," &c. Thus the poor woman, when she
thought her suit had been done, was in less hope of her husband's
life than before. But within short space it pleased God to deliver
him; for he got out in a dark night, and so he was caught no more,
but died within a short time after.

     In this year also, as we do understand by divers notes of old
registers and otherwise, Friar Roy was burned in Portugal; but what
his examination, or articles, or order of his death was, we can have
no understanding:  but what his doctrine was, it may be easily judged
by the testimonies which he left here in England.

     In the beginning of this year which we are now about, through
the complaint of the clergy made to the king, the translation of the
New Testament, with a great number of other books, were forbidden.
For the bishops coming into the Star Chamber the twenty-fifth day of
May, and communing with the king's counsel, after many pretences and
long debating, alleged that the translations of Tyndale and Joye were
not truly translated; and moreover, that in them were prologues and
prefaces that smelled of heresy, and railed against the bishops: 
wherefore all such books were prohibited, and commandment given by
the king to the bishops, that they, calling to them the best learned
men of the universities, should cause a new translation to be made,
so that the people might not be ignorant in the law of God.
Notwithstanding this commandment, the bishops did nothing at all to
the setting forth of any new translation, which caused the people
much to study Tyndale's translation, by reason whereof many things
came to light, as ye shall hereafter hear.

     This year also, in the month of May, the bishop of London
caused all the New Testaments of Tyndale's translation, and many
other books which he had bought, to be brought unto Paul's Church-
yard, and there openly to be burned.



176. JAMES BAINHAM, LAWYER, AND MARTYR.

     James Bainham, gentleman, son to one Master Bainham, a knight
of Gloucestershire, being virtuously brought up by his parents in the
studies of good letters, had knowledge both of the Latin and the
Greek tongue. After that he gave himself to the study of the law,
being a man of virtuous disposition, and godly conversation, mightily
addicted to prayer, an earnest reader of Scriptures, a great
maintainer of the godly, a visitor of the prisoners, liberal to
scholars, very merciful to his clients, using equity and justice to
the poor, very diligent in giving counsel to all the needy, widows,
fatherless, and afflicted, without money or reward; briefly, a
singular example to all lawyers.

     This Master Bainham, as is above noted, married the wife of
Simon Fish aforesaid, for the which he was the more suspected, and at
last was accused to Sir Thomas More, chancellor of England, and
arrested with a serjeant-at-arms, and carried out of the Middle
Temple to the chancellor's house at Chelsea, where he continued in
free prison awhile, till the time that Sir Thomas More saw he could
not prevail in perverting him to his sect. Then he cast him into
prison in his own house, and whipping him at the tree in his garden,
called the tree of Troth, and after sent him to the Tower to be
racked; and so he was, Sir Thomas More being present himself, till in
a manner he had lamed him, because he would not accuse the gentlemen
of the Temple of his acquaintance, nor would show where his books
lay; and because his wife denied them to be at his house, she was
sent to the Fleet, and their goods confiscated.

     After they had thus practised against him what they could by
tortures and torments, then was he brought before John Stokesley,
bishop of London, the fifteenth day of December, A.D. 1531, in the
said town of Chelsea, and there examined upon these articles and
interrogatories ensuing.

     I. Whether he believed there were any purgatory of souls hence
departed? -- Whereunto he made answer as followeth:  "If we walk in
light, even as he is in light, we have society together with him, and
the blood of Jesus Christ his Son hath cleansed us from all sin. If
we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, and will forgive
us our sins, and will purge us from all our iniquities.

     II. Whether that the saints hence departed are to be honoured
and prayed unto, to pray for us? -- To this he answered on this wise: 
"My little children, I write this unto you, that you sin not. If any
man do sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
just, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not only for our
sins, but also for the sins of the whole world." And further, upon
occasion of these words, Let all the saints of God pray for us; being
demanded what he meant by these words, All the saints, he answered,
that he meant by them, those that were alive, as St. Paul did by the
Corinthians, and not those that be dead:  for he prayed not to them,
he said, because he thought that they which be dead cannot pray for
him. Item, when the whole church is gathered together, they used to
pray one for another, or desire one to pray for another, with one
heart; and that the will of the Lord may be fulfilled, and not ours: 
"and I pray," said he, "as our Saviour Christ prayed at his last
hour:  Father, take this cup from me if it be possible; yet thy will
be fulfilled."

     III. He was demanded whether he thought that any souls departed
were yet in heaven or no? -- To this he answered and said, that he
believed that they be there as it pleased God to have them, that is
to say, in the faith of Abraham; and that herein he would commit
himself to the church.

     IV. It was demanded of him, whether he thought it necessary to
salvation, for a man to confess his sins to a priest? -- Whereunto
his answer was this:  that it was lawful for one to confess and
acknowledge his sins to another:  as for any other confession, he knew
none. And further he said, that if he came to a sermon, or any where
else, where the word of God is preached, and there took repentance
for his sin, he believed his sins forthwith to be forgiven of God,
and that he needed not to go to any confession.

     V. That he should say and affirm, that the truth of the Holy
Scripture hath been hid, and appeared not these eight hundred years,
neither was known before now. -- To this he said, that he meant no
otherwise, but that the truth of Holy Scripture was never, these
eight hundred years past, so plainly and expressly declared unto the
people, as it hath been within these six years.

     VI. He was demanded further, for what cause Holy Scripture hath
been better declared within these six years, than it hath been these
eight hundred years before? -- Whereunto he answered, To say plainly,
he knew no man to have preached the word of God sincerely and purely,
and after the vein of Scripture, except Master Crome and Master
Latimer. And he said, moreover, that the New Testament now translated
into English, doth preach and teach the word of God, and that before
that time men did preach but only that folks should believe as the
church did believe; and then if the church erred, men should err too.
Howbeit the church of Christ, said he, cannot err:  and that there
were two churches, that is, the church of Christ militant, and the
church of antichrist; and that this church of antichrist may and doth
err; but the church of Christ doth not.

     VII. Whether he knew any person that lived in the true faith of
Christ, since the apostles' time? -- He said he knew Bayfield, and
thought that he died in the true faith of Christ.

     VIII. He was asked what he thought of purgatory and of vows? --
He answered, if any such thing had been moved to St. Paul of
purgatory after this life, he thought St. Paul would have condemned
it for a heresy. And when he heard Master Crome preach and say, that
he thought there was a purgatory after this life, he thought in his
mind that the said Master Crome lied, and spake against his
conscience; and that there were a hundred more who thought the same
as he did:  saying moreover, that he had seen the confession of Master
Crome in print, God wot, a very foolish thing, as he judged.

     And as concerning vows, he granted that there were lawful vows,
as Ananias vowed, for it was in his own power, whether he would have
sold his possession or not, and therefore he did offend. But vows of
chastity, and all godliness, is given of God by his abundant grace,
the which no man of himself can keep, but it must be given him of
God. And therefore, a monk, friar, or nun, that hath vowed the vows
of religion, if they think after their vows made, that they cannot
keep their promises that they made at baptism, they may go forth and
marry, so that they keep, after their marriage, the promise that they
made at baptism. And finally he concluded, that he thought there were
no other vows, but only the vow of baptism.

     IX. He was demanded, whether Luther, being a friar, and taking
a nun out of religion, and afterwards marrying her, did well or no,
and what he thought therein? -- He answered, That he thought nothing.
And when they asked him, whether it was lechery or no? he made answer
he could not say so.

     As concerning the sacrament of anoiling, being willed to say
his mind, he answered and said. "It was but a ceremony, neither did
he wot what a man should be the better for such anoiling and
anointing. The best was, that some good prayers, he saw, were said
thereat.

     Likewise touching the sacrament of baptism, his words were
these:  "That as many as repent, and do on them Christ, shall be
saved; that is, as many as die concerning sin, shall live by faith
with Christ. Therefore it is not we that live after that, but Christ
in us. And so, whether we live or die, we are God's by adoption, and
not by the water only, but by water and faith:  that is, by keeping
the promise made. For ye are kept by grace and faith, saith St. Paul,
and that not of yourselves, for it is the gift of God."

     He was asked moreover of matrimony, whether it was a sacrament
or not, and whether it conferreth grace; being commanded in the old
law, and not yet taken away? -- His answer was, that matrimony is an
order or law, that the church of Christ hath made and ordained, by
the which men may take to them women, and not sin.

     Lastly, for his books of Scripture, and for his judgment of
Tyndale, because he was urged to confess the truth, he said, that he
had the New Testament translated into the English tongue by Tyndale
within this month, and thought he offended not God in using and
keeping the same, notwithstanding that he knew the king's
proclamation to the contrary, and that it was prohibited in the name
of the church, at Paul's Cross; but, for all that, he thought the
word of God had not forbid it. Confessing moreover, that he had in
his keeping within this month these books; the Wicked Mammon, the
Obedience of a Christian Man, the Practice of Prelates, the Answer of
Tyndale to Thomas More's Dialogue, the book of Frith against
Purgatory; the Epistle of George Gee, alias George Clerk:  adding
furthermore, that in all these books he never saw any errors; and if
there were any such in them, then, if they were corrected, it were
good that the people had the said books. And as concerning the New
Testament in English, he thought it utterly good, and that the people
should have it as it is. Neither did he ever know (said he) that
Tyndale was a naughty fellow.

     Also to these answers he subscribed his name. This examination,
as is said, was the fifteenth of December. The next day following,
namely, the sixteenth of December, the said James Bainham appeared
again before the bishop of London, in the aforesaid place of Sir
Thomas More at Chelsea; where, after the guise and form of their
proceedings, first his former articles with his answers were again
repeated, and his hand brought forth. This done, they asked him
whether he would persist in that which he had said, or else would
return to the catholic church, from whence he was fallen, and to
which he might be yet received, as they said:  adding, moreover, many
fair, enticing, and alluring words, that he would reconcile himself,
saying, the time was yet that he might be received; the bosom of his
mother was open for him:  otherwise, if he would continue stubborn,
there was no remedy. Now was the time either to save, or else utterly
to cast himself away. Which of these ways he would take, the case
present now required a present answer, for else the sentence
definitive was there ready to be read, &c.

     To conclude long matter in few words, Bainham, wavering in a
doubtful perplexity, between life on the one hand and death on the
other, at length giving over to the adversaries, gave answer unto
them, that he was contented to submit himself in those things wherein
he had offended, excusing that he was deceived by ignorance.

     Then the bishop, requiring him to say his mind plainly of his
answers above declared, demanded what he thought thereof, whether
they were true or no. To this Bainham said, that it was too high for
him to judge. And then asked of the bishop, whether there was any
purgatory, he answered and said, he could not believe that there was
any purgatory after this life. Upon other articles being examined and
demanded, he granted as followeth: 

     "That he could not judge whether Bayfield died in the true
faith of Christ or no:  that a man making a vow, cannot break it
without deadly sin:  that a priest, promising to live chaste, may not
marry a wife:  that he thinketh the apostles to be in heaven:  that
Luther did naught, in marrying a nun:  that a child is the better for
confirmation:  that it is an offence to God, if any man keep books
prohibited by the church, the pope, the bishop, or the king:  and he
said, that he pondered those points more now than he did before."

     Upon these answers, the bishop, thinking to keep him in safe
custody to further trial, committed him to one of the compters.

     The time thus passing on, which bringeth all things to their
end, in the month of February next following, A.D. 1532, the
aforesaid James Bainham was called for again to the bishop's
consistory, before his vicar-general and other his assistants; to
whom Foxford, the bishop's chancellor, recited again his articles and
answers above mentioned; protesting, that he intended not to receive
him to the unity of the holy mother church, unless he knew the said
Bainham to be returned again purely and unfeignedly to the catholic
faith, and to submit himself penitently to the judgment of the
church. To whom Bainham spake to this effect, saying, that he hath
and doth believe the holy church, and holdeth the faith of the holy
mother, the catholic church.

     Wherefore the chancellor, offering to him a bill of his
abjuration, after the form of the pope's church conceived, required
him to read it; who was contented, and read to the clause of the
abjuration containing these words:  "I voluntarily, as a true penitent
person returned from my heresies, utterly abjure" -- And there he
stayed and would read no further, saying, that he knew not the
articles contained in his abjuration to be heresy, therefore he could
not see why he should refuse them. This done, the chancellor
proceeded to the reading of the sentence definitive, coming to this
place of the sentence, "the doctrine of the determination of the
church," &c., and there paused, saying, he would reserve the rest
till he saw his time:  whom then Bainham desired to be good unto him,
affirming that he did acknowledge that there was a purgatory; that
the souls of the apostles were in heaven, &c. Then began he again to
read the sentence, but Bainham again desired him to be good unto him;
whereupon he ceased the sentence, and said that he would accept this
his confession for that time, as sufficient.

     So Bainham, for that present, was returned to his prison again;
who then, the fifth day after, which was the eighth of February,
appeared, as before, in the consistory; whom the aforesaid
chancellor, repeating again his articles and answers, asked if he
would abjure and submit himself. Who answered that he would submit
himself, and as a good Christian man should. Again, the chancellor
the second time asked if he would abjure. "I will," said he, "forsake
all my articles, and will meddle no more with them;" and so being
commanded to lay his hands upon the book, read his abjuration openly.
After the reading whereof, he burst out into these words, saying,
that because there were many words in the said abjuration which he
thought obscure and difficile, he protested that by his oath he
intended not to go from such defence, which he might have had before
his oath. Which done, the chancellor asked him why he made that
protestation. Bainham said, for fear lest any man of ill will do
accuse me hereafter. Then the chancellor, taking the definitive
sentence in his hand, posing himself (as appeared) to read the same,
"Well, Master Bainham," said he, "take your oath, and kiss the book;
or else I will do mine office against you: " and so immediately he
took the book in his hand and kissed it, and subscribed the same with
his hand.

     Which done, the chancellor, receiving the abjuration at his
hand, put him to his fine, first to pay twenty pounds to the king.
After that, he enjoined him penance, to go before the cross in
procession at Paul's, and to stand before the preacher during the 
sermon at Paul's Cross, with a faggot upon his shoulder, the next
Sunday; and so to return with the sumner to the prison again, there
to abide the bishop's determination:  and so, the seventeenth day of
February, he was released and dismissed home; where he had scarce
continued a month, but he bewailed his fact and abjuration; and was
never quiet in mind and conscience until the time he had uttered his
fall to all his acquaintance, and asked God and all the world
forgiveness, before the congregation in those days, in a warehouse in
Bow-lane. And immediately, the next Sunday after, he came to St.
Austin's, with the New Testament in his hand in English, and the
Obedience of a Christian Man in his bosom, and stood up there before
the people in his pew, there declaring openly, with weeping tears,
that he had denied God; and prayed all the people to forgive him, and
to beware of his weakness, and not to do as he did:  "for," said he,
"if I should not return again unto the truth, (having the New
Testament in his hand,) this word of God would damn me both body and
soul at the day of judgment." And there he prayed every body rather
to die by and by, than to do as he did:  for he would not feel such a
hell again as he did feel, for all the world's good. Besides this, he
wrote also certain letters to the bishop, to his brother, and to
others; so that shortly after he was apprehended, and so committed to
the Tower of London.

The process against James Bainham in case of relapse.

     The nineteenth day of April, 1532, Master Richard Foxford,
vicar-general to the bishop of London, accompanied by certain
divines, and Matthew Grefton the registrar, sitting judicially, James
Bainham was brought before him by the lieutenant of the Tower; before
whom the vicar-general rehearsed the articles contained in his
abjuration before made, and showed him a bound book, which the said
Bainham acknowledged to be his own writing, saying, that it was good.
Then he showed him more of a certain letter sent unto the bishop of
London, the which also he acknowledged to be his; objecting also to
the said Bainham, that he had made and read the abjuration which he
had before recited:  showing him moreover certain letters which he had
written unto his brother, the which he confessed to be his own
writing; saying moreover, that though he wrote it, yet there is one
thing in the same that is naught, if it be as my lord chancellor
saith. Then he asked of Bainham, how he understood this which 
followeth, which was in his letters:  "Yet could they not see nor know
him for God, when indeed he was both God and man; yea, he was three
persons in one, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." And Bainham
said it was naught. Which things thus done, there was further
objected unto him these words, that he had as leave pray to Joan his
wife, as to our Lady. The which article Bainham denied. The said
Bainham, amongst other talk, as touching the sacrament of the altar,
said, "Christ's body is not chewed with teeth, but received by
faith." Further it was objected against him, that notwithstanding his
abjuration, he had said, that the sacrament of the altar was but a
mystical or memorial body. The which article Bainham denied. It was
further laid unto him, that he should say that St. Thomas of
Canterbury was a thief, and a murderer, and a devil in hell: 
whereunto he answered thus:  that St. Thomas of Canterbury was a
murderer; and if he did not repent him of his murder, he was rather a
devil in hell, than a saint in heaven.

     The twentieth day of April, in the year aforesaid, the said
James Bainham was brought before the vicar-general, in the church of
All Saints, of Barking, where he ministered these interrogatories
unto him: 

     First, That since the feast of Easter last past, he had said,
affirmed, and believed, that the sacrament of the altar was but a
mystical body of Christ; and afterwards he said, it was but a
memorial. Which article Bainham denied. Then the vicar-general
declared unto him, that our holy mother the catholic church
determineth and teacheth in this manner:  that in the sacrament of the
altar, after the words of consecration, there remaineth no bread. The
official asked Bainham, whether he did so believe or not? To this
Bainham answered, saying, that St. Paul calleth it bread, rehearsing
these words, As oft as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show forth the Lord's death:  and in that point he saith as St. Paul
saith, and believeth as the church believeth. And being demanded
twice afterwards, what he thought therein, he would give no other
answer.

     Item, That since the feast of Easter aforesaid, he had affirmed
and believed, that every man that would take upon him to preach the
gospel of Christ clearly, had as much power as the pope. To this
article he answered thus:  "He that preacheth the word of God purely,
whatsoever he be, and liveth thereafter, he hath the key that bindeth
and looseth both in heaven and earth; which key is the same Scripture
that is preached:  and the pope hath no other power to bind and to
loose, but by the key of the Scripture.

     Item, That he affirmed that St. Thomas of Canterbury was a
thief and a murderer, and in hell. -- To this he answered as before.

     Item, That he said, that he had as leave pray to Joan his wife,
as to our Lady. This he denied as before.

     Item, That he affirmed and believed, that Christ himself was
but a man. -- This article he also denied.

     The premises thus passed, the vicar-general received Francis
Realms, John Edwards, Ralph Hilton, John Ridley, Francis Driland, and
Ralph Noble, as witnesses to be sworn upon the articles aforesaid,
and to speak the truth before the face of the said James Bainham, in
the presence of Master John Nayler, vicar of Barking; Master John
Rode, bachelor of divinity; William Smith, Richard Grivel, Thomas
Wimple, and Richard Gill.

     The twenty-sixth day of April, in the year aforesaid, before
Master John Foxford, vicar-general of the bishop of London, in the
presence of Matthew Grefton, registrar; and Nicholas Wilson and
William Philley, professors of divinity; John Oliver, William
Middleton, and Hugh Aprice, doctors of the law:  Master Richard
Gresham, sheriff of London, and a great company of others:  James
Bainham, was brought forth by the lieutenant of the Tower, in whose
presence the vicar-general rehearsed the merits of the cause of
inquisition of heresy agsinst him, and proceeded to the reading of
the abjuration. And when the judge read this article following,
contained in the abjuration:  "Item, That I have said, that I will not
determine whether any souls departed be yet in heaven or no, but I
believe that they be there as it pleaseth God to have them; that is
to say, in the faith of Abraham; and I wot not whether the souls of
the apostles or any others be in heaven or no: " to this James
answered, "That I did abjure, and if that had not been, I would not
have abjured at all."

     After all the articles were read contained in the abjuration,
and certain talk had as touching the sacrament of baptism, the said
James Bainham spake these words:  "If a Turk, a, Jew, or a Saracen, do
trust in God, and keep his law, he is a good Christian man." Then the
official showed unto him the letters which he sent unto his brother,
written with his own hand, and asked him what he thought as touching
this clause following:  "Yet could they not see and know him for God,
when indeed he was both God and man, yea, he was three persons in
one, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Whereunto Bainham said
that it was naught, and that he did it by ignorance, and did not
oversee his letters. Then Master Nicholas Wilson, among other talk,
as touching the sacrament of the altar, declared unto him that the
church did believe the very body of Christ to be in the sacrament of
the altar. Bain-ham answered, "The bread is not Jesus Christ, for
Christ's body is not chewed with teeth, therefore it is but bread."
Being further demanded whether in the sacrament of the altar is the
very body of Christ, God and man in flesh and blood; after divers
doubtful answers, Bainham answered thus:  "He is there very God and
man, in form of bread."

     This done, the official declared unto him the depositions of
the witnesses which were come in against him; and objected unto him
that a little before Easter, he had abjured all heresies, as well
particularly as generally. Then the said vicar-general, after he had
taken deliberation and advice with the learned his assistants, did
proceed to the reading of the definitive sentence against him, and
also published the same in writing; whereby, amongst other things,
besides his abjuration, he pronounced and condemned him as a relapsed
heretic, damnably fallen into sundry heresies, and so to be left unto
the secular power; that is to say, to one of the sheriffs being there
present. After the pronouncing of this sentence, Master Nicholas
Wilson counselled and admonished the said James, that he would
conform himself unto the church; to whom he answered, that he trusted
that he is the very child of God:  "which ye blind asses," said he,
"do not perceive." And last of all, departing from his judgment, he
spake these words:  "Master Wilson, nor you, my lord chancellor, shall
not prove by Scripture, that there is any purgatory."

     Then the sentence of condemnation was given against him, the
which here to repeat word for word is not necessary, forasmuch as the
tenor thereof is all one with that which passed before in the story
of Bayfield, alias Somersam. Here also should ensue the letter of the
bishop of London, directed unto the mayor and sheriffs of the same
city, for the receiving of him into their power, and the putting of
him to death, the tenor whereof is also of like effect to that before
written in the story of Bayfield. After this sentence given, James
Bainham was delivered into the hands of Sir Richard Gresham, sheriff,
then being present, who caused him by his officers to be carried unto
Newgate, and the said James Bainham was burned in Smithfield the last
day of April, in the year aforesaid, at three of the clock at
afternoon.

     This Master Bainham, during his imprisonment, was very cruelly
handled; for almost the space of a fortnight, he lay in the bishop's
coal-house in the stocks, with irons upon his legs. Then he was
carried to the lord chancellor's, and there chained to a post two
nights:  then he was carried to Fulham, where he was cruelly handled
by the space of a week; then to the Tower, where he lay a fortnight,
scourged with whips, to make him revoke his opinions. From thence he
was carried to Barking; then to Chelsea, and there condemned; and so
to Newgate to be burned.
Illustration:  James Bainham at the stake

     At whose burning, here is notoriously to be observed, that as
he was at the stake, in the midst of the flaming fire, which fire had
half consumed his arms and legs, he spake these words:  "O ye papists
behold, ye look for miracles, and here now you may see a miracle; for
in this fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a bed of down: 
but it is to me as a bed of roses." These words spake he in the midst
of the flaming fire, when his legs and arms, as I said, were half
consumed.



177. JOHN BENT AND OTHERS.

John Bent, martyr.

     At the writing hereof, came to our hands a certain notice of
one John Bent, who about this present time, or not long before, being
a tailor, and dwelling in a village called Urchevant, was burned in
the town of Devizes, in the county of Wiltshire, for denying the
sacrament of the altar, as they term it.

One Trapnel, martyr.

     Also much about the same time, was one Trapnel burned in a town
called Bradford, within the same county.

The history of three men hanged for the burning of the rood of Dover-
court; collected out of a letter of Robert Gardner, who was one of
the doers of the same.

     In the same year of our Lord 1532, there was an idol named the
Rood of Dover-court, whereunto was much and great resort of people: 
for at that time there was a great rumour blown abroad amongst the
ignorant sort, that the power of the idol of Dovercourt was so great,
that no man had power to shut the church door where he stood; and
therefore they let the church door, both night and day, continually
stand open, for the more credit unto their blind rumour. Which once
being conceived in the heads of the vulgar sort, seemed a great
marvel unto many men; but to many again, whom God had blessed with
his Spirit, it was greatly suspected, specially unto these, whose
names here follow:  as Robert King of Dedham, Robert Debnam of
Eastbergholt, Nicholas Marsh of Dedham, and Robert Gardner of Dedham,
whose consciences were sore burdened to see the honour and power of
the Almighty living God so to be blasphemed by such an idol.
Wherefore they were moved by the Spirit of God, to travel out of
Dedham in a wondrous goodly night, both hard frost and fair
moonshine, although the night before, and the night after, were
exceeding foul and rainy. It was from the town of Dedham, to the
place where the filthy Rood stood, ten miles. Notwithstanding, they
were so willing in that their enterprise, that they went these ten
miles without pain, and found the church door open, according to the
blind talk of the ignorant people:  for there durst no unfaithful body
shut it. Which happened well for their purpose, for they found the
idol, which had as much power to keep the door shut, as to keep it
open; and for proof thereof, they took the idol from his shrine, and
carried him a quarter of a mile from the place where he stood,
without any resistance of the said idol. Whereupon they struck fire
with a flint-stone, and suddenly set him on fire, who burned out so
brim, that he lighted them homeward one good mile of the ten.

     This done, there went a great talk abroad that they should have
great riches in that place:  but it was very untrue; for it was not
their thought or enterprise, as they themselves afterward confessed,
for there was nothing taken away but his coat, his shoes, and the
tapers. The tapers did help to burn him, the shoes they had again,
and the coat one Sir Thomas Rose did burn; but they had neither
penny, halfpenny, gold, groat, nor jewel.

     Notwithstanding, three of them were afterwards indicted of
felony, and hanged in chains within half a year after, or thereabout.
Robert King was hanged in Dedham at Burchet; Robert Debnam was hanged
at Cataway-Causey; Nicholas Marsh was hanged at Dover-court:  which
three persons, through the Spirit of God, at their death, did more
edify the people in godly learning, than all the sermons that had
been preached there a long time before.

     The fourth man of this company, named Robert Gardner, escaped
their hands and fled; albeit he was cruelly sought for to have had
the like death. But the living Lord preserved him; to whom be all
honour and glory, world without end!

     The same year, and the year before, there were many images cast
down and destroyed in many places:  as the image of the crucifix in
the highway by Coggeshall, the image of St. Petronal in the church of
Great Horksleigh, the image of St. Christopher by Sudbury, and
another image of St. Petronal in a chapel of Ipswich.

     Also John Seward of Dedham overthrew a cross in Stoke park, and
took two images out of a chapel in the same park, and cast them into
the water.



178. JOHN FRITH AND ANDREW HEWET.

The story, examination, death, and martyrdom of John Frith.
 AMONGST all other chances lamentable,: there hath
been none a great time which seemed unto me more grievous, than the
lamentable death and cruel handling of John Frith, so learned and
excellent a young man; which had so profited in all kind of learning
and knowledge, that scarcely there was his equal amongst all his
companions; and besides, withal, had such a godliness of life joined
with his doctrine, that it was hard to judge in whether of them he
was more commendable, being greatly praiseworthy in them both:  but as
touching his doctrine, by the grace of Christ we will speak
hereafter.

     Of the great godliness which was in him, this may serve for 
experiment sufficient, for that notwithstanding his other manifold
and singular gifts and ornaments of the mind, in him most pregnant,
wherewithal he might have opened an easy way unto honour and dignity,
notwithstanding he chose rather wholly to consecrate himself unto the
church of Christ, excellently showing forth, and practising in
himself, the precept so highly commended of the philosophers,
touching the life of man:  which life, they say, is given unto us in
such sort, that how much the better the man is, so much the less he
should live unto himself, but unto other, serving for the common
utility; and that we should think a great part of our birth to be due
unto our parents, a greater part unto our country, and the greatest
part of all to be bestowed upon the church, if we will be counted
good men. First of all he began his study at Cambridge; in whom
nature had planted, being but a child, marvellous instinctions and
love unto learning, whereunto he was addicted. He had also a
wonderful promptness of wit, and a ready capacity to receive and
understand any thing, insomuch that he seemed not to be sent unto
learning, but also born for the same purpose. Neither was there any
diligence wanting in him, equal unto that towardness, or worthy of
his disposition; whereby it came to pass, that he was not only a
lover of learning, but also became an exquisite learned man; in the
which exercise when he had diligently laboured certain years, not
without great profit both of Latin and Greek, at the last he fell
into knowledge and acquaintance with William Tyndale, through whose
instructions he first received into his heart the seed of the gospel
and sincere godliness.

     At that time Thomas Wolsey, cardinal of York, prepared to build
a college in Oxford, marvellously sumptuous, which had the name and
title of Frideswide, but now named Christ's-church, not so much (as
it is thought) for the love and zeal that he bare unto learning, as
for an ambitious desire of glory and renown, and to leave a perpetual
name unto posterity. But that building, he being cut off by the
stroke of death, (for he was sent for unto the king, accused of
certain crimes, and in the way, by immoderate purgations, killed
himself,) was left partly begun, partly half ended and imperfect, and
nothing else save only the kitchen was fully finished. Whereupon
Rodulph Gualter, a learned man, being then in Oxford, and beholding
the college, said these words in Latin:  Egregium opus, cardinalis
iste instituit collegium, et absolvit popinam. How large and ample
those buildings should have been, what sumptuous cost should have
been bestowed upon the same, may easily be perceived by that which is
already builded, as the kitchen, the hall, and certain chambers,
where there is such curious graving and workmanship of stone-cutters,
that all things on every side did glister for the excellency of the
workmanship, for the fineness of the matter, with the gilt antics and
embossings; insomuch that if all the rest had been finished to that
determinate end as it was begun, it might well have excelled not only
all colleges of students, but also palaces of princes. This ambitious
cardinal gathered together into that college whatsoever excellent
thing there was in the whole realm, either vestments, vessels, or
other ornaments, beside provision of all kind of precious things.
Besides that, he also appointed unto that company all such men as
were found to excel in any kind of learning and knowledge; whose
names to recite all in order would be too long. The chief of them
which were called from Cambridge were these:  Master Clerk, master of
arts, of thirty-four years of age; Master Frier, afterwards doctor of
physic, and after that a strong papist; Master Sumner, master of
arts; Master Harman, master of arts, afterwards fellow of Eton
college, and after that a papist; Master Bettes, master of arts, a
good man and zealous, and so remained; Master Cox, master of arts,
who conveyed himself away toward the north, and after was
schoolmaster of Eton, and then chaplain to Doctor Goodrich, bishop of
Ely, and by him preferred to King Henry, and, of late, bishop of Ely;
John Frith, bachelor of arts; Bayly, bachelor of arts; Goodman, who
being sick in the prison with the others, was had out, and died in
the town; Drumme, who afterwards fell away and forsook the truth;
Thomas Lawney, chaplain of the house, prisoner with John Frith.

     To these join also Taverner of Boston, the good musician,
besides many other called also out of other places, most picked young
men, of grave judgment and sharp wits; who, conferring together upon
the abuses of religion, being at that time crept into the church,
were therefore accused of heresy unto the cardinal, and cast into a
prison, within a deep cave under the ground of the same college,
where their salt-fish was laid; so that, through the filthy stench
thereof, they were all infected, and certain of them, taking their
death in the same prison, shortly upon the same being taken out of
the prison into their chambers, there deceased.

     The troublers and examiners of these good men, were these:  Dr.
London; Dr. Higdon, dean of the said college; and Dr. Cottesford,
commissary.

     Master Clerk, Master Sumner, and Sir Bayly, eating nothing but
salt-fish from February to the midst of August, died all three
together within the compass of one week.

     Master Bettes, a witty man, having no books found in his
chamber, through entreaty and surety got out of prison, and so
remaining a space in the college, at last slipped away to Cambridge,
and afterwards was chaplain to Queen Anne, and in great favour with
her.

     Taverner, although he was accused and suspected for hiding of
Clerk's books under the boards in his school, yet the cardinal, for
his music, excused him, saying that he was but a musician:  and so he
escaped.

     After the death of these men, John Frith with others, by the
cardinal's letter, which sent word that he would not have them so
straitly handled, were dismissed out of prison, upon condition not to
pass above ten miles out of Oxford; which Frith, after hearing of the
examination of Dalaber and Garret, which bare then faggots, went over
the sea, and after two years he came over for exhibition of the prior
of Reading, (as is thought,) and had the prior over with him.

     Being at Reading, it happened that he was there taken for a
vagabond, and brought to examination; where the simple man, which
could not craftily enough colour himself, was set in the stocks.
After he had sitten a long time, and was almost pined with hunger,
and would not, for all that, declare what he was, at the last he
desired that the schoolmaster of the town might be brought to him,
who at that time was one Leonard Cox, a man very well learned. As
soon as he came unto him, Frith, by and by, began in the Latin tongue
to bewail his captivity.

     The schoolmaster, by and by, being overcome with his eloquence,
did not only take pity and compassion upon him, but also began to
love and embrace such an excellent wit and disposition unlooked for,
especially in such a state and misery. Afterwards, conferring more
together upon many things, as touching the universities, schools, and
tongues, they fell from the Latin into the Greek, wherein Frith did
so inflame the love of that schoolmaster towards him, that he brought
him into a marvellous admiration, especially when the schoolmaster
heard him so promptly by heart rehearse Homer's verses out of his
first book of the Iliad; whereupon the schoolmaster went with all
speed unto the magistrates, grievously complaining of the injury
which they did show unto so excellent and innocent a young man.

     Thus Frith, through the help of the schoolmaster, was freely
dismissed out of the stocks, and set at liberty without punishment.
Albeit this his safety continued not long, through the great hatred
and deadly pursuit of Sir Thomas More, who, at that time being
chancellor of England, persecuted him both by land and sea, besetting
all the ways and havens, yea, and promising great rewards, if any man
could bring him any news or tidings of him.

     Thus Frith, being on every part beset with troubles, not
knowing which way to turn, seeketh for some place to hide him in.
Thus fleeting from one place to another, and often changing both his
garments and place, yet could he be in safety in no place; no, not
long amongst his friends; so that at the last, being traitorously
taken, (as ye shall after hear,) he was sent unto the Tower of
London, where he had many conflicts with the bishops, but especially
in writing with Sir Thomas More.

     What dexterity of wit was in him, and excellency of doctrine,
it may appear not only by his books which he wrote of the sacrament,
but also in them which he entitled Of Purgatory. In the which quarrel
he withstood the violence of three most obstinate enemies; that is to
say, of Rochester, More, and Rastal, whereof the one by the help of
the doctors, the other by wresting of the Scripture, and the third by
the help of natural philosophy, had conspired against him. But he, as
a Hercules, fighting not against two only, but even with them all
three at once, did so overthrow and confound them, that he converted
Rastal to his part.

     Besides all these commendations of this young man, there was
also in him a friendly and prudent moderation in uttering of the
truth, joined with a learned godliness; which virtue hath always so
much prevailed in the church of Christ, that, without it, all other
good gifts of knowledge, be they ever so great, cannot greatly
profit, but oftentimes do very much hurt. And would God that all
things, in all places, were so free from all kinds of dissension,
there were no mention made amongst Christians of Zuinglians and
Lutherans, when neither Zuinglius nor Luther died for us; but that we
might be all one in Christ. Neither do I think that any thing more
grievous could happen unto these worthy men, than their names so to
be abused to sects and factions, which so greatly withstood and
strove against all factions. Neither do I here discourse which part
came nearest unto the truth, neither so rashly intermeddle in this
matter, that I will detract any thing from either part, but rather
wish of God I might join either part unto the other.

     But now, forasmuch as we treat of the story of John Frith, I
cannot choose, but must needs earnestly and heartily embrace the
prudent and godly moderation which was in that man, who, maintaining
this quarrel of the sacrament of the Lord's supper, no less godly
than learnedly, (and so as no man in a manner had done it more
learnedly and pithily,) yet he did it so moderately, without any
contention, that he would never seem to strive against the papists,
except he had been driven to it even of necessity. In all other
matters; where necessity did not move him to contend, he was ready to
grant all things for quietness' sake, as his most modest reason and
answers did declare. For when More, disputing in a certain place upon
the sacrament, laid against him the authority of Doctor Barnes, for
the presence of the body and blood in the sacrament, he answered unto
More and his companions, that he would promise under this condition,
that if the sentence of Luther and Barnes might be holden as
ratified, he would never speak more words of it:  for in that point
they did both agree with him, that the sacrament was not to be
worshipped; and that idolatry being taken away, he was content to
permit every man to judge of the sacrament, as God should put into
their hearts:  for then there remained no more poison, that any man
ought or might be afraid of. Wherefore, if they did agree in that
which was the chief point of the sacrament, they should easily accord
and agree in the rest.

     Thus much he wrote, in the treatise entitled The Exile, of
Barnes against More; which words of this most meek martyr of Christ,
if they would take place in the seditious divisions and factions of
these our days, with great ease and little labour men might be
brought to a unity in this controversy; and much more concord and
love should be in the church, and much less offence given abroad than
there is.

     But to our story again of John Frith. After he had now
sufficiently contended in his writings with More, Rochester, and
Rastal, More's son-in-Iaw, he was at last carried to Lambeth, first
before the bishop of Canterbury, and afterward unto Croydon, before
the bishop of Winchester, to plead his cause. Last of all, he was
called before the bishops, in a common assembly at London, where he
constantly defended himself, if he might have been heard.

     The order of his judgment, with the manner of his examination
and the articles which were objected against him, are comprised and
set forth by himself in a letter written and sent unto his friends,
whilst he was prisoner in the Tower.

A letter of John Frith to his friends, concerning his troubles;
wherein, after he had first with a brief preface saluted them,
entering then into the matter, thus he writeth: -

     "I doubt not, dear brethren, but that it doth some deal vex
you, to see the one part have all the words, and freely to speak what
they list, and the others to be put to silence, and not be heard
indifferently.

     But refer your matters unto God, who shortly shall judge after
another fashion. In the mean time I have written unto you, as briefly
as I may, what articles were objected against me, and what were the
principal points of my condemnation, that ye might understand the
matter certainly.

     "The whole matter of this my examination was comprehended in
two special articles, that is to say, Of Purgatory, and Of the
Substance of the Sacrament.

     "And first of all, as touching purgatory, they inquired of me
whether I did believe there was any place to purge the spots and
filth of the soul after this life? But I said, that I thought there
was no such place:  for man (said I) doth consist and is made of two
parts, that is to say, of the body and the soul, whereof the one is
purged here in this world, by the cross of Christ, which he layeth
upon every child that he receiveth; as affliction, worldly
oppression, persecution, imprisonment, &c. The last of all, the
reward of sin, which is death, is laid upon us:  but the soul is
purged with the word of God, which we receive through faith, to the
salvation both of body and soul. Now if ye can show me a third part
of a man besides the body and the soul, I will also grant unto you
the third place, which ye do call purgatory. But because ye cannot do
this, I must also of necessity deny unto you the bishop of Rome's
purgatory. Nevertheless I count neither part a necessary article of
our faith, to be believed under pain of damnation, whether there be
such a purgatory or no?

     "Secondly, They examined me touching the sacrament of the
altar, whether it was the body of Christ or no?

     "I answered, that I thought it was both Christ's body, and also
our body, as St. Paul teacheth us in 1 Cor. x.16. For in that it is
made one bread of many corns, it is called our body, which, being
divers and many members, are associate and gathered together into one
fellowship or body. Likewise of the wine, which is gathered of many
clusters of grapes, and is made into one liquor. But the same bread
again, in that it is broken, is the body Christ; declaring his body
to be broken and delivered unto death, to redeem us from our
iniquities.

     "Furthermore, in that the sacrament is distributed, it is
Christ's body, signifying that as verily as the sacrament is
distributed unto us, so verily are Christ's body and the fruit of his
passion distributed unto all faithful people.

     "In that it is received, it is Christ's body, signifying that
as verily as the outward man receiveth the sacrament with his teeth
and mouth, so verily doth the inward man, through faith, receive
Christ's body and the fruit of his passion, and is as sure of it as
of the bread which he eateth.

     "Well (said they) dost thou not think that his very natural
body, flesh, blood, and bone, is really contained under the
sacrament, and there present without all figure or similitude? No,
(said I,) I do not so think:  notwithstanding I would not that any
should count, that I make my saying (which is the negative) any
article of faith. For even as I say, that you ought not to make any
necessary article of the faith of your part, (which is the
affirmative,) so I say again, that we make no necessary article of
the faith of our part, but leave it indifferent for all men to judge
therein, as God shall open their hearts, and no side to condemn or
despise the other, but to nourish in all things brotherly love; and
one to bear another's infirmity.

     "After this they alleged the place of St. Augustine, where he
saith, 'He was carried in his own hands.'

     "Whereunto I answered, that St. Augustine was a plain
interpreter of himself; for he hath in another place, 'He was carried
on as it were in his own hands: ' which is a phrase of speech not of
one that doth simply affirm, but only of one expressing a thing by a
similitude. And albeit that St. Augustine had not thus expounded
himself, yet he, writing unto Boniface, doth plainly admonish all
men, that the sacraments do represent and signify those things
whereof they are sacraments, and many times even of the similitudes
of the things themselves they do take their names. And therefore,
according to this rule it may be said, he was borne in his own hands,
when he bare in his hands the sacrament of his body and blood.

     "Then they alleged a place of Chrysostom, which, at the first
blush, may seem to make much for them, who, in a certain Homily upon
the supper, writeth thus:  'Dost thou see bread and wine? Do they
depart from thee into the draught, as other meats do? No, God forbid;
for as in wax, when it cometh to the fire, nothing of the substance
remaineth or abideth; so likewise think that the mysteries are
consumed by the substance of the body,' &c.

     "These words I expounded by the words of the same doctor, who,
in another Homily, saith on this manner; 'The inward eyes,' saith he,
'as soon as they see the bread, they flee over all creatures, and do
not think of the bread that is baked by the baker, but of the bread
of everlasting life, which is signified by the mystical bread.' Now
confer these places together, and you shall perceive that the last
expoundeth the first plainly. For he saith, Dost thou see the bread
and wine? I answer by the second, Nay. For the inward eyes, as soon
as they see the bread, do pass over all creatures, and do not any
longer think upon the bread, but upon him which is signified by the
bread. And after this manner he seeth it, and again he seeth it not: 
for as he seeth it with his outward and carnal eyes, so with his
inward eyes he seeth it not; that is to say, regardeth not the bread,
or thinketh not upon it, but is otherwise occupied. Even as when we
play or do any thing else negligently, we commonly are wont to say,
we see not what we do; not that indeed we do not see that which we go
about, but because our mind is fixed on some other thing, and doth
not attend unto that which the eyes do see.

     "In like manner may it be answered unto that which followeth;
'Do they avoid from thee,' saith he, 'into the draught as other meats
do?' I will not so say, for other meats, passing through the bowels,
after they have of themselves given nourishment unto the body, be
voided into the draught:  but this is a spiritual meat, which is
received by faith, and nourisheth both body and soul unto everlasting
life, neither is it at any time avoided as other meats are.

     "And as before I said that the external eyes do behold the
bread, which the inward eyes, being otherwise occupied, do not behold
or think upon, even so our outward man doth digest the bread, and
void it into the draught; but the inward man doth neither regard nor
think upon it, but thinketh upon the thing itself that is signified
by that bread. And therefore Chrysostom, a little before the words
which they alleged, saith, 'Lift up your minds and hearts: ' whereby
he admonisheth us to look upon and consider those heavenly things
which are represented and signified by the bread and wine, and not to
mark the bread and wine itself.

     "Here they said, that was not Chrysostom's mind; but that by
this example he declared that there remained no bread nor wine. I
answered, that was false:  for the example that he taketh tendeth to
no other purpose, but to call away our spiritual eyes from the
beholding of visible things, and to transport them another way, as if
the things that are seen were of no force. Therefore he draweth away
our mind from the consideration of these things, and fixeth it upon
him which is signified unto us by the. same. The very words which
follow, sufficiently declare this to be the true meaning of the
author, where he commandeth us to consider all things with our inward
eyes; that is to say, spiritually.

     "But whether Chrysostom's words do tend either to this or that
sense, yet do they indifferently make on our part against our
adversaries, which way so-ever we do understand them. For if he
thought that the bread and wine do remain, we have no further to
travel:  but if he meant contrariwise, that they do not remain, but
that the natures of the bread and wine are altered, then are the
bread and wine falsely named sacraments and mysteries, which can be
said in no place to be in the nature of things:  for that which is in
no place, how can it be a sacrament, or supply the room of a mystery?
Finally, if he speak only of the outward forms and shapes, (as we
call them,) it is most certain that they do continually remain, and
that they by the substance of the body are not consumed in any place: 
wherefore it must necessarily follow the words of Chrysostom to be
understood in such sense as I have declared.

     "Here peradventure many would marvel, that forasmuch as the
matter touching the substance of the sacrament is separate from the
articles of faith, and bindeth no man of necessity either unto
salvation or damnation, whether he believe it or not, but rather may
be left indifferently unto all men, freely to judge either on the one
part or on the other, according to his own mind, so that neither part
do contemn or despise the other, but that all love and charity be
still holden and kept in this dissension of opinions; what then is
the cause, why I would therefore so willingly suffer death? The cause
why I die is this:  for that I cannot agree with the divines and other
head prelates, that it should be necessarily determined to be an
article of faith, and that we should believe, under pain of
damnation, the substance of the bread and wine to be changed into the
body and blood of our Saviour Jesus Christ, the form and shape only
not being changed. Which thing if it were most true, (as they shall
never be able to prove it by any authority of the Scripture or
doctors,) yet shall they not so bring to pass, that that doctrine,
were it ever so true, should be holden for a necessary article of
faith. For there are many things, both in the Scriptures and other
places, which we are not bound of necessity to believe as an article
of faith. So it is true, that I was a prisoner and in bonds when I
wrote these things, and yet, for all that, I will not hold it as an
article of faith, but that you may, without danger of damnation,
either believe it, or think the contrary.

     "But as touching the cause why I cannot affirm the doctrine of
transubstantiation, divers reasons do lead me thereunto:  first, for
that I do plainly see it to be false and vain, and not to be grounded
upon any reason, either of the Scriptures, or of approved doctors.
Secondly, for that by my example I would not be an author unto
Christians to admit any thing as a matter of faith, more than the
necessary points of their creed, wherein the whole sum of our
salvation doth consist, especially such things, the belief whereof
have no certain argument of authority or reason. I added moreover,
that their church (as they call it) hath no such power and authority,
that it either ought or may bind us, under the peril of our souls, to
the believing of any such articles. Thirdly, because I will not, for
the favour of our divines or priests, be prejudicial in this point
unto so many nations, of Germans, Helvetians, and others, which,
altogether rejecting the transubstantiation of the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ, are all of the same opinion as I
am, as well those that take Luther's part, as those that hold with
Œcolampadius. Which things standing in this case, I suppose there is
no man of any upright conscience, which will not allow the reason of
my death, which I am put unto for this only cause, that I do not
think transubstantiation, although it were true indeed, to be
established for an article of faith."

     And thus much hitherto as touching the articles and whole
disputation of John Frith, which was done with all moderation and
uprightness. But when no reason would prevail against the force and
cruelty of these furious foes, on the twentieth day of June, A.D.
1533, he was brought before the bishops of London, Winchester, and
Lincoln, who, sitting in St. Paul's, on Friday the twentieth day of
June, ministered certain interrogatories upon the sacrament of the
supper, and purgatory, Unto the said Frith, as is above declared; to
the which when he had answered, and showed his mind in form and
effect, as by his own words above doth appear, he afterwards
subscribed to his answers with his own hand, in these words:  "I,
Frith, thus do think; and as I think, so have I said, written,
taught, and affirmed, and in my books have published."

     But when Frith by no means could be persuaded to recant these
articles aforesaid, neither be brought to believe that the sacrament
is an article of faith, but said, Fiat judicium et justitia; he was
condemned by the bishop of London to be burned, and sentence given
against him.

     This sentence read, the bishop of London directed his letter to
Sir Stephen Peacock, mayor of London, and the sheriffs of the same
city, for the receiving of the aforesaid John Frith into their
charge; who, being so delivered over unto them the fourth day of
July, in the year aforesaid, was by them carried into Smithfield to
be burned. And when he was tied unto the stake, there it sufficiently
appeared with what constancy and courage he suffered death; for when
the faggots and fire were put unto him, he willingly embraced the
same; thereby declaring with what uprightness of mind he suffered his
death for Christ's sake, and the true doctrine, whereof that day he
gave, with his blood, a perfect and firm testimony. The wind made his
death somewhat the longer, which bare away the flame from him unto 
his fellow that was tied to his back:  but he had established his mind
with such patience, God giving him strength, that even as though he
had felt no pain in that long torment, he seemed rather to rejoice
for his fellow than to be careful for himself.

     This truly is the power and strength of Christ, striving and
vanquishing in his saints; who sanctify us together with them, and
direct us in all things to the glory of his holy name! Amen.

     The day before the burning of these worthy men of God, the
bishop of London certified King Henry the Eighth of his worthy, yea,
rather wolfish, proceeding against these men.
Illustration:  Frith and Hewet at the stake
Andrew Hemet burned with Master Frith.

     Andrew Hewet, born in Feversham, in the county of Kent, a young
man of the age of four and twenty years, was apprentice with one
Master Warren, a tailor in Watling Street. And as it happened that he
went upon a holyday into Fleet Street, towards St. Dunstan's, he met
with one William Holt, which was foreman with the king's tailor, at
that present called Master Malte; and being suspected by the same
Holt, which was a dissembling wretch, to be one that favoured the
gospel, after a little talk had with him, he went into an honest
house about Fleet Bridge, which was a bookseller's house. Then Holt,
thinking he had found good occasion to show forth some fruit of his
wickedness, sent for certain officers, and searched the house, and
finding the said Andrew, apprehended him, and carried him to the
bishop's house, where he was cast into irons; and being there a good
space, by the means of a certain honest man, he had a file conveyed
unto him, wherewith he filed off his irons, and when he spied his
time, he got out of the gate. But being a man unskilful to hide
himself, for lack of good acquaintance, he went into Smithfield, and
there met with one Withers, which was a hypocrite, as Holt was. Which
Withers, understanding how he had escaped, and that he knew not
whither to go, pretending a fair countenance unto him, willed him to
go with him, promising that he should be provided for; and so kept
him in the country where he had to do, from Low Sunday till
Whitsuntide, and then broughthim to London, to the house of one John
Chapman in Hosier Lane beside Smithfield, and there left him by the
space of two days.

     Then he came to the said Chapman's house again, and brought
Holt with him. And when they met with the said Andrew, they seemed as
though they meant to do him very much good; and Holt, for his part,
said that if he should bring any man in trouble, (as the voice was
that he had done the said Andrew,) it were pity but that the earth
should open and swallow him up:  insomuch that they would needs sup
there that night, and prepared meat of their own charges. At night
they came, and brought certain guests with them, because they would
have the matter to seem as though it had come out by others. When
they had supped, they went their way, and Holt took out of his purse
two groats, and gave them to the said Andrew, and embraced him in his
arms. As they were gone out, there came in one John Tibauld, which
was banished from his own house by an injunction, for he had been
four times in prison for Christ's cause. And within an hour after
that Holt and Withers were gone, the bishop's chancellor, and one
called Sergeant Weaver, came, and brought with them the watch, and
searched the house, where they found the said John Chapman and the
before-named Andrew, and John Tibauld, whom they bound with ropes
which Sergeant Weaver had brought with him, and so carried them to
the bishop's house:  but Andrew Hewet they sent unto the Lollard's
Tower, and kept Chapman and Tibauld asunder, watched by two priests'
servants. The next day Bishop Stokesley came from Fulham, and after
they were examined with a few threatening words, Chapman was
committed to the stocks, with this threat, that he should tell
another tale, or else he should sit there till his heels did drop
off, &c.:  and Tibauld was shut up in a close chamber; but, by God's
provision, he was well delivered out of prison, albeit he could not
enjoy his house and land because of the bishop's injunction, but was
fain to sell all that he had in Essex; for the tenor of his
injunction was, that he should not come within seven miles of his own
house. And the aforesaid Chapman, after five weeks' imprisonment,
(whereof three weeks he sat in the stocks,) by much suit made unto
the lord chancellor, which at that time was Lord Audley, after many
threatenings, was delivered:  but the said Andrew Hewet, after long
and cruel imprisonment, was condemned to death, and burned with John
Frith. The examination of Hewet here followeth.

     On the twentieth day of the month of April, Andrew Hewet was
brought before the chancellor of the bishop of London, where was
objected against him, that he believed the sacrament of the altar,
after the consecration, to be but a signification of the body of
Christ, and that the host consecrated was not the very body of
Christ. Now, forasmuch as this article seemed heinous unto them, they
would do nothing in it without the consent of learned counsel: 
whereupon the bishop of London, associated with the bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester, called him again before them; where, it being
demanded of him what he thought as touching the sacrament of the last
supper; he answered, "Even as John Frith doth." Then said one of the
bishops unto him, "Dost thou not believe that it is really the body
of Christ, born of the Virgin Mary?"

     "So," saith he, "do not I believe." "Why not?" said the bishop.
"Because," said he, "Christ commanded me not to give credit rashly
unto all men, who say, Behold, here is Christ, and there is Christ;
for many false prophets shall rise up, saith the Lord."

     Then certain of the bishops smiled at him; and Stokesley, the
bishop of London, said, "Why, Frith is a heretic, and already judged
to be burned; and except thou revoke thine opinion, thou shalt be
burned also with him." "Truly," saith he, "I am content therewithal."
Then the bishop asked him if he would forsake his opinions; whereunto
he answered, that he would do as Frith did:  whereupon' he was sent
unto the prison to Frith, and afterwards they were carried together
to the fire. The bishops used many persuasions to allure this good
man from the truth, to follow them; but he, manfully persisting in
the truth, would not recant. Wherefore on the fourth day of July, in
the afternoon, he was carried into Smithfield with Frith, and there
burned.

     When they were at the stake, one Doctor Cook, a parson in
London, openly admonished all the people, that they should in no wise
pray for them, no more than they would do for a dog; at which words
Frith, smiling, desired the Lord to forgive him. These his words did
not a little move the people unto anger, and not without good cause.
Thus these two blessed martyrs committed their souls into the hands
of God.



179. THOMAS BENET

The history of the persecution and death of Thomas Benet, burned in
Exeter:  collected and testified by John Dowel, alias Hoker.

     This Thomas Benet was born in Cambridge, and, by order of
degree, of the university there made master of arts, and, as some
think, was also a priest; a man doubtless very well learned, and of a
godly disposition, being of the acquaintance and familiarity of
Thomas Bilney, the famous and glorious martyr of Christ. This man,
the more he did grow and increase in the knowledge of God and his
holy word, the more he did mislike and abhor the corrupt state of
religion then used; and therefore, thinking his own country to be no
safe place for him to remain in, and being desirous to live in more
freedom of conscience, he did forsake the university, and went into
Devonshire, A.D. 1524, and first dwelled in a market-town, named
Torrington, both town and country being to him altogether unknown, as
he was also unknown to all men there; where, for the better
maintenance of himself and his wife, he did practise to teach young
children, and kept a school for the same purpose. But that town not
serving his expectation, after his abode one yearthere, he came to
the city of Exeter; and there, hiring a house in a street called the
Butcher Row, did exercise the teaching of children, and by that means
sustained his wife and family. He was of a quiet behaviour, of a
godly conversation, and of a very courteous nature, humble to all
men, and offensive to nobody. His greatest delight was to be at all
sermons and preachings, whereof he was a diligent and attentive
hearer. The time which he had to spare from teaching, he gave wholly
to his private study in the Scriptures, having no dealings nor
conferences with any body, saving with such as he could learn and
understand to be favourers of the gospel, and zealous of God's true
religion:  of such he would be inquisitive, and most desirous to join
himself unto them. And therefore, understanding that one William
Strowd, esquire, of Newnbam, in the county of Devonshire, was
committed to the bishop's prison in Exeter, upon suspicion of heresy,
although he were never before acquainted with him, yet did he send
his letters of comfort and consolation unto him; wherein, to avoid
all suspicion which might be conceived of him, he did disclose
himself, and utter what he was, and the causes of his being in the
country, writing among other things these words:  "Because I would not
be a whoremonger, or an unclean person, therefore I married a wife,
with whom I have hidden myself in Devonshire, from the tyranny of the
antichristians, these six years."

     But, as every tree and herb hath its due time to bring forth
its fruit, so did it appear by this man. For he, daily seeing the
glory of God to be so blasphemed, idolatrous religion so embraced and
maintained, and that most false usurped power of the bishop of Rome
so extolled, was so grieved in conscience, and troubled in spirit,
that he could not be quiet till he did utter his mind therein.
Wherefore, dealing privately with certain of his friends, he did
plainly open and disclose how blasphemously and abominably God was
dishonoured, his word contemned, and his people, whom he so dearly
bought, were, by blind guides, carried headlong to everlasting
damnation:  and therefore he could no longer endure, but must needs,
and would, utter their abominations; and for his own part, for the
testimony of his conscience, and for the defence of God's true
religion, would yield himself most patiently (as near as God would
give him grace) to die and to shed his blood therein; alleging that
his death should be more profitable to the church of God, and for the
edifying of his people, than his life should be. To whose persuasions
when his friends had yielded, they promised to pray to God for him,
that he might be strong in the cause, and continue a faithful soldier
to the end:  which done, he gave order for the bestowing of such books
as he had, and very shortly after, in the month of October, he wrote
his mind in certain scrolls of paper, which, in secret manner, he set
upon the doors of the cathedral church of the city; in which was
written, "The pope is antichrist; and we ought to worship God only,
and no saints."

     These bills were found, there was no small ado, and no little
search made for the inquiry of the heretic that should set up these
bills:  and the mayor and his officers were not so busy to make
searches to find this heretic, but the bishop and all his doctors
were as hot as coals, and enkindled as though they had been stung
with a sort of wasps. Wherefore, to keep the people in their former
blindness, order was taken that the doctors should in haste up to the
pulpit every day, and confute this heresy. Nevertheless this Thomas
Benet, keeping his own doings in secret, went the Sunday following to
the cathedral church to the sermon, and by chance sat down by two
men, who were the busiest in all the city in seeking and searching
for this heretic; and they, beholding this Benet, said the one to the
other, "Surely this fellow, by all likelihood, is the heretic that
hath set up the bills, and it were good to examine him."
Nevertheless, when they had well beheld him, and saw the quiet and
sober behaviour of the man, his attentiveness to the preacher, his
godliness in the church, being always occupied in his book, which was
a Testament in the Latin tongue, they were astonied, and had no power
to speak unto him, but departed, and left him reading in his book. As
touching this point of Benet's behaviour in the church, I find the
reports of some others a little to vary, and yet not much contrary
one to the other. For in receiving the letters and writings of a
certain minister, who at the same time was present at the doing
hereof in Exeter, thus I find moreover added, concerning the
behaviour of this Thomas Benet in the church: 

     At that time, saith he, as I remember, Dr. Moreman, Crispin,
Caseley, with such others, bare the swinge there. Besides these, were
also preachers there, one Dr. Bascavild, an unlearned doctor, God
knoweth:  and one Dr. David, as well learned as he, both Grey Friars,
and Doctor I-know-not-who, a Black Friar, not much inferior unto
them. Moreover, there was one bachelor of divinity, a Grey Friar
named Gregory Basset, more learned indeed than they all, but as blind
and superstitious as he which was most; which Gregory, not long
before, was revolted from the way of righteousness, to the way of
Belial:  for in Bristol, saith the author, he lay in prison long, and
was almost famished, for having a book of Martin Luther, called his
Questions, which he a long time privily had studied, and for the
teaching of youth a certain catechism. To he short, the brains of the
canons and priests, the officers and commons of that city, were very
earnestly busied, how, or by what means, such an enormous heretic,
who had pricked up those bills, might be espied and known:  but it was
long first. At last, the priests found out a toy to curse him,
whatsoever he were, with a book, bell, and candle; which curse at
that day seemed most fearful and terrible. The manner of the curse
was after this sort: 

     One of the priests, apparelled all in white, ascended up into
the pulpit. The other rabblement, with certain of the two orders of
friars, and certain superstitious monks of St. Nicholas' house
standing round about, and the cross (as the custom was) being holden
up with holy candles of wax fixed to the same, he began his sermon
with this theme of Joshua, There is blasphemy in the army; and so
made a long protestation, but not so long as tedious and
superstitious:  and so concluded that that foul and abominable heretic
who had put up such blasphemous bills, was, for that his blasphemy,
damnably accursed; and besought God, our Lady, St. Peter, patron of
that church, with all the holy company of martyrs, confessors, and
virgins, that it might be known what heretic had put up such
blasphemous bills, that God's people might avoid the vengeance.

     The manner of the cursing of the said Benet was marvellous to
behold, forasmuch as at that time there were few or none, unless a
shearman or two, whose houses, I well remember, were searched for
bills at that time, and for books, that knew any thing of God's
matters, or how God doth bless their curses in such cases. Then said
the prelate thus: 

The pope's curse, with book, bell, and candle.

     "By the authority of God the Father Almighty, and of the
blessed Virgin Mary, of Saint Peter and Paul, and of the holy saints,
we excommunicate, we utterly curse and ban, commit and deliver to the
devil of hell, him or her, whatsoever he or she be, that have, -- in
spite of God and of St. Peter, whose church this is, in spite of all
holy saints, and in spite of our most holy father the pope, God's
vicar here in earth, and in spite of the reverend father in God,
John, our diocesan, and the worshipful canons, masters, and priests,
and clerks, who serve God daily in this cathedral church, -- fixed up
with wax such cursed and heretical bills, full of blasphemy, upon the
doors of this and other holy churches within this city.
Excommunicated plainly be he, or she, or they, plenarily, and
delivered over to the devil, as perpetual malefactors and
schismatics. Accursed may they be, and given body and soul to the
devil. Cursed be they, he or she, in cities and towns, in fields, in
ways, in paths, in houses, out of houses, and in all other places,
standing, lying, or rising, walking, running, waking, sleeping,
eating, drinking, and whatsoever thing they do besides. We separate
them, him, or her, from the threshold, and from all the good prayers,
of the church; from the participation of the holy mass; from all
sacraments, chapels, and altars; from holy bread and holy water; from
all the merits of God's priests and religious men, and from all their
cloisters; from all their pardons, privileges, grants, and
immunities, which all the holy fathers, popes of Rome, have granted
to them; and we give them over utterly to the power of the fiend:  and
let us quench their souls, if they be dead, this night in the pains
of hell-fire, as this candle is now quenched and put out (and with
that he put out one of the candles):  and let us pray to God, if they
be alive, that their eyes may be put out, as this candle light is (so
he put out the other candle); and let us pray to God and to our Lady,
and to St. Peter and Paul, and all holy saints, that all the senses
of their bodies may fail them, and that they may have no feeling, as
now the light of this candle is gone, (and so he put out the third
candle,) except they, he, or she, come openly now and confess their
blasphemy, and by repentance, as much as in them shall lie, make
satisfaction unto God, our Lady, St. Peter, and the worshipful
company of this cathedral church:  and as this holy cross-staff now
falleth down, so may they, except they repent."
[Note:  "So far is this horrible curse from being obsolete, that there
are several yet snore instinct with cursing in the Pontificale
Romanum; a book in the possession of every Romish bishop and priest,
and embodying the formulas according to which they bless and curse at
this day. Popery accommodates itself to circumstances, but never
changes.]

     Now this fond foolish fantasy and mockery being done and
played, which was to a Christian heart a thing ridiculous; Benet
could no longer forbear, but fell to great laughter, and within
himself, and for a great space could not cease; by which thing the
poor man was espied. For those that were next to him, wondering at
that great curse, and believing that it could not but light on one or
other, asked good Benet, for what cause he should so laugh. "My
friends," said he, "who can forbear, seeing such merry conceits and
interludes played by the priests?" Straightway a noise was made, Here
is the heretic! here is the heretic! hold him fast, hold him fast!
With that there was a great confusion of voices, and much clapping of
hands, and yet they were uncertain whether he were the heretic or no.
Some say, that upon the same he was taken and apprehended. Others
report, that his enemies, being uncertain of him, departed, and so he
went home to his house; where he, being not able to digest the lies
there preached, renewed his former bills, and caused his boy, early
in the morning following, to set the said bills upon the gates of the
churchyard. As the boy was setting one of the said bills upon a gate,
called The little Stile, it chanced that one W. S., going to the
cathedral church to hear a mass, called Barton's Mass, which was then
daily said about five o'clock in the morning, found the boy at the
gate, and asking him whose boy he was, did charge him to be the
heretic that had set up the bills upon the gates:  wherefore, pulling
down the bill, he brought the same, together with the boy, before the
mayor of the city; and thereupon Benet, being known and taken, was
violently committed to ward.

     On the morrow began both the canons and the heads of the city
joined with them, to fall to examination; with whom, for that day, he
had not much communication, but confessed and said to them, "It was
even I that put up those bills; and if it were to do, I would yet do
it again; for in them I have written nothing but that is very truth."
"Couldst not thou," said they, "as well have declared thy mind by
mouth, as by putting up bills of blasphemy?" "No," said he, "I put up
the bills, that many should read and hear what abominable blasphemers
ye are, and that they might the better know your antichrist, the
pope, to be that boar out of the wood, which destroyeth and throweth
down the hedges of God's church; for if I had been heard to speak but
one word, I should have been clapped fast in prison, and the matter
of God hidden. But now I trust more of your blasphemous doings will
thereby be opened and come to light; for God will so have it, and no
longer will suffer you."

     The next day after, he was sent unto the bishop, who first
committed him to prison, called The Bishop's Prison, where he was
kept in stocks and strong irons, with as much favour as a dog should
find. Then the bishop, associating unto him one Dr. Brewer, his
chancellor, and other of his lewd clergy and friars, began to examine
him and burden him, that, contrary to the catholic faith, be denied
praying to saints, and also denied the supremacy of the pope.
Whereunto he answered in such sober manner, and so learnedly proved
and defended his assertions, that he did not only confound and put to
silence his adversaries, but also brought them in great admiration of
him; the most part having pity and compassion on him. The friars took
great pains with him to persuade him from his erroneous opinions, to
recant and acknowledge his fault, touching the bills; but they did
but dig after day; for God had appointed him to be a blessed witness
of his holy name, and to be at defiance with all their false
persuasions.

     To declare here with what cruelty the officers searched his
house for bills and books, how cruelly and shamefully they handled
his wife, charging her with divers enormities, it were too long to
write. But she, like a good woman, took all things patiently that
they did unto her; like as in other things she was contented to bear
the cross with him, as to fare hardly with him at home, and to live
with coarse meat and drink, that they might be the more able somewhat
to help the poor, as they did to the uttermost of their power.

     Amongst all other priests and friars, Gregory Basset was most
busy with him. This Gregory Basset, as is partly touched before, was
learned, and had a pleasant tongue, and not long before was fallen
from the truth, for the which he was imprisoned in Bristol a long
time; at whose examination was ordained a great pan of fire, where
his holy brethren (as the report went abroad) menaced him to burn his
hands off:  whereupon he there before them recanted, and became
afterwards a mortal enemy to the truth all his life. This Gregory, as
it is said, was fervent with the poor man, to please the canons of
that church, and marvellously tormented his brains, how to turn him
from his opinions; yea, and he was so diligent and fervent with him,
that he would not depart the prison, but lay there night and day, who
notwithstanding lost his labour; for good Benet was at a point not to
deny Christ before men. So Gregory, as well as the other holy
fathers, lost his spurs, insomuch that he said in open audience, that
there never was so obstinate a heretic.

The matter between Gregory Basset and Thomas Benet.

     The principal point between Basset and Benet was touching the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome, whom in his bills he named
antichrist, the thief, the mercenary, and the murderer of Christ's
flock:  and these disputations lasted about eight days, where, at
sundry times, repaired to him both the Black and Grey Friars, with
priests and monks of that city. They that had some learning persuaded
him to believe the church, and showed by what tokens she is known.
The others unlearned railed, and said that the devil tempted him, and
spat upon him, calling him heretic; who prayed God to give them a
better mind, and to forgive them:  "For," said he, "I will rather die,
than worship such a beast, the very whore of Babylon, and a false
usurper, as manifestly doth appear by his doings." They asked, What
he did, that he had not power and authority to do, being God's vicar?
"He doth," quoth he, "sell the sacraments of the church for money, he
selleth remissions of sins daily for money, and so do you likewise: 
for there is no day but ye say divers masses for souls in feigned
purgatory:  yea, and ye spare not to make lying sermons to the people,
to maintain your false traditions and foul gains. The whole world
doth begin now to note your doings, to your utter confusion and
shame." "The shame," said they, "shall be to thee, and such as thou
art, thou foul heretic! Wilt thou allow nothing done in holy church?
what a perverse heretic art thou!" "I am," said he, "no heretic, but
a Christian man, I thank Christ; and with all my heart will allow all
things done and used in the church to the glory of God, and edifying
of my soul:  but I see nothing in your church, but what maintaineth
the devil." "What is our church?" said they. "It is not my church,"
quoth Benet, "God give me grace to be of a better church, for verily
your church is the plain church of antichrist, the malignant church,
the second church, a den of thieves, and an awmbry of poison, and as
far wide from the true, universal, and apostolic church, as heaven is
distant from the earth."

     "Dost not thou think," said they, "that we pertain to the
universal church?" " Yes," quoth he, "but as dead members, unto whom
the church is not beneficial; for your works are the devices of man,
and your church a weak foundation:  for ye say and preach that the
pope's word is equal with God's word in every degree." "Why," said
they, "did not Christ say to Peter, To thee I will give the keys of
the kingdom of heaven?" "He said that," quoth he, "to all, as well as
to Peter; and Peter had no more authority given to him than they, or
else the churches planted in every kingdom by their preaching are no
churches. Doth not St. Paul say, Upon the foundations of the apostles
and prophets? Therefore I say plainly, that the church that is built
upon a man, is the devil's church or congregation, and not God's. And
as every church this day is appointed to be ruled by a bishop or
pastor, ordained by the word of God in preaching and administration
of the sacraments under the princes the supreme governor under God,
so, to say that all the churches with their princes and governors be
subject unto one bishop, is detestable heresy; and the pope, your
god, challenging this power to himself, is the greatest schismatic
that ever was in the church, and the most foul whore; of whom John,
in the Revelation, speaketh."

     "O thou blind and unlearned fool!" said they, "is not the
confession and consent of all the world, as we confess and consent --
That the pope's Holiness is the supreme head and vicar of Christ?" "
That is," said Benet, "because they are blinded and know not the
Scriptures:  but if God would of his mercy open the eyes of princes to
know their office, his false supremacy would soon decay." "We think,"
said they, "thou art so malicious, that thou wilt confess no church."
"Look!" said he, "where they are that confess the true name of Jesus
Christ; and where only Christ is the Head, and under him the prince
of the realm, to order all bishops, ministers, and preachers, and to
see them do their duties in setting forth the only glory of God by
preaching the word of God; and where it is preached that Christ is
our only Advocate, Mediator, and Patron before God his Father, making
intercession for us; and where the true faith and confidence in
Christ's death and passion, and his only merits and deservings are
extolled, and our own depressed; where the sacrament is duly, without
superstition or idolatry, administered in remembrance of his blessed
passion and only sacrifice upon the cross once for all, and where no
superstition reigneth:  -- of that church will I be! "

     "Doth not the pope," said they, "confess the true gospel? do
not we all the same?" " Yes," said he, "but ye deny the fruits
thereof in every point. Ye build upon the sands, not upon the rock."
"And wilt thou not believe indeed," said they, "that the pope is
God's vicar?" "No," said he, "indeed." "And why?" said they.
"Because," quoth he, "he usurpeth a power not given to him by Christ,
no more than to other apostles; and also because, by force of that
usurped supremacy, he doth blind the whole world, and doth contrary
to all that ever Christ ordained or commanded." "What," said they,
"if he do all things after God's ordinance and commandment:  should he
then be his vicar?" "Then," said he, "would I believe him to be a
good bishop at Rome over his own diocese, and to have no further
power. And if it pleased God, I would every bishop did this in his
diocese:  then should we live a peaceable life in the church of
Christ, and there should be no such seditious therein. If every
bishop would seek no further power than over his own diocese, it were
a goodly thing. Now, because all are subject to one, all must do and
consent to all wickedness as he doth, or be none of his. This is the
cause of great superstition in every kingdom. And what bishop soever
he be that preacheth the gospel, and maintaineth the truth, is a true
bishop of the church." "And doth not," said they, "our holy father
the pope maintain the gospel?" "Yea," said he, "I think he doth read
it, and peradventure believe it, and so do you also:  but neither he
nor you do fix the anchor of your salvation therein. Besides that, ye
bear such a good will to it, that ye keep it close,that no man may
read it but yourselves. And when you preach, God knoweth how you
handle it; insomuch, that the people of Christ know no gospel well-
near, but the pope's gospel; and so the blind lead the blind, and
both fall into the pit. In the true gospel of Christ, confidence is
none; but only in your popish traditions and fantastical inventions."

     Then said a Black Friar unto him, (God knoweth, a blockhead,)
"Do we not preach the gospel daily?" "Yes," said he, "but what
preaching of the gospel is that, when therewith ye extol
superstitious things, and make us believe that we have redemption
through pardons and bulls of Rome, and by the merits of your orders
ye make many brethren and sisters; ye take yearly money of them, ye
bury them in your coats, and in shrift ye beguile them; yea, and do a
thousand superstitious things more:  a man may be weary to speak of
them." "I see," said the friar, "that thou art a damned wretch; I
will have no more talk with thee."

     Then stepped to him a Grey Friar, a doctor, (God knoweth of
small intelligence,) and laid before him great and many dangers. "I
take God to record," said Benet, "my life is not dear to me; I am
content to depart from it, for I am weary of it, seeing your
detestable doings, to the utter destruction of God's flock; and, for
my part, I can no longer forbear; I had rather, by death, (which I
know is not far off,) depart this life, that I may no longer be
partaker of your detestable idolatries and superstitions, or be
subject unto antichrist, your pope." "Our pope," said the friar, "is
the vicar of God, and our ways are the ways of God." "I pray you,"
said Benet, "depart from me, and tell not me of your ways. He is only
my way, who saith, I am the way, the truth, and the life. In his way
will I walk, his doings shall be my example; not your's, nor your
false pope's. His truth will I embrace; not the lies and falsehood of
you and your pope. His everlasting life will I seek, the true reward
of all faithful people. Away from me, I pray you. Vex my soul no
longer; ye shall not prevail. There is no good example in you, no
truth in you, no life to be hoped for at your hands. Ye are all more
vain than vanity itself If I should hear and follow you this day,
everlasting death should hang over me, a just reward for all them
that love the life of this world. Away from me:  your company liketh
me not."

     Thus a whole week, night and day, was Benet plied by these and
such other hypocrites. It were an infinite matter to declare all
things done and said to him in the time of his imprisonment; and the
hate of the people that time, by means of ignorance, was hot against
him:  notwithstanding they could never move his patience; he answered
to every matter soberly, and that, more by the aid of God's Spirit,
than by any worldly study. I think he was at the least fifty years
old. Being in prison, his wife provided sustenance for him; and when
she lamented, he comforted her, and gave her many good and godly
exhortations, and prayed her to move him nothing to apply unto his
adversaries.

     Thus when these godly canons and priests, with the monks and
friars, had done what they could, and perceived that he would by no
means relent, then they, proceeding unto judgment, drew out their
bloody sentence against him, condemning him, as the manner is, to be
burned. Which being done, and the writ which they had procured being
brought from London, they delivered him on the fifteenth of January,
1531, unto Sir Thomas Denis, knight, sheriff of Devonshire, to be
burned. The mild martyr, rejoicing that his end was approaching so
near, as the sheep before the shearer, yielded himself with all
humbleness to abide and suffer the cross of persecution. And being
brought to his execution, in a place called Livery-dole, without
Exeter, he made his most humble confession and prayer unto Almighty
God, and requested all the people to do the like for him; whom he
exhorted with such gravity and sobriety, and with such a pithy
oration, to seek the true honouring of God, and the true knowledge of
him; as also to leave the devices, fantasies, and imaginations of
man's inventions, that all the hearers and beholders of him were
astonied and in great admiration; insomuch that the most part of the
people, as also the scribe who wrote the sentence of condemnation
against him, did pronounce and confess that he was God's servant, and
a good man.

     Nevertheless two esquires, namely, Thomas Carew and John
Barnehouse, standing at the stake by him, first with fair promises
and goodly words, but at length through rough threatenings, willed
him to revoke his errors, and to call to our Lady and the saints, and
to say, I pray holy Mary, and all the saints of God, &c. To whom,
with all meekness, he answered, saying, "No, no; it is God only upon
whose name we must call; and we have no other advocate unto him, but
only Jesus Christ, who died for us, and now sitteth at the right hand
of his Father, to be an advocate for us; and by him must we offer and
make our prayers to God, if we will have them to take place and to be
heard." With which answer the aforesaid Barnehouse was so enkindled,
that he took a furze-bush upon a pike, and having set it on fire, he
thrust it unto his face, saying, "Ah! whoreson heretic! pray to our
Lady, and say, Holy Mary, pray for us, or, by God's wounds, I will
make thee do it." To whom the said Thomas Benet, with a humble and a
meek spirit, most patiently answered, "Alas, sir! trouble me not. And
holding up his hands, he said, "Father, forgive them." Whereupon the
gentlemen caused the wood and furzes to be set on fire, and therewith
this godly man lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven, saying, "O
Lord, receive my spirit." And so, continuing in his prayers, did
never stir nor strive, but most patiently abode the cruelty of the
fire, until his life was ended. For this the Lord God be praised, and
send us his grace and blessing, that at the latter day we may with
him enjoy the bliss and joy provided and prepared for the elect
children of God.

     This Benet was burned in a jerkin of neat's leather; at whose
burning, such was the devilish rage of the blind people, that well
was he or she that could catch a stick or furze to cast into the
fire.



180. PERSONS ABJURED IN LONDON

     Hitherto we have run over, good reader, the names and the acts
and doings of them, which have sustained death, and the torment of
burning, for Christ's cause, through the rigorous proclamation above
specified, set out, as is said, in the name of King Henry, but indeed
procured by the bishops. Which proclamation was so straitly looked
upon, and executed so to the uttermost in every point, by the said
popish prelates, that no good man that breathed, whereof Esdras
speaketh, could peep out with his head ever so little, but he was
caught by the back, and brought either to the fire, as were these
above mentioned; or else compelled to abjure. Whereof there was a
great multitude, as well men as women; whose names, if they were
sought out through all registers in England, no doubt it would make
too long a discourse. Nevertheless, omitting the rest, it shall
content us at this present, briefly, as in a short table, to
insinuate the names, with the special articles, of such as, in the
diocese of London, under Bishop Stokesley, were molested and vexed,
and, at the last, compelled to abjure, as here may appear.

A table of certain persons, abjured within the diocese of London,
under Bishop Stokesley, with the articles alleged against them.

Jeffery Lome, A.D. 1528.

     Imprimis, for having and dispersing sundry books of Martin
Luther's, as also for translating into the English tongue certain
chapters of the work of Luther, De Bonis Operibus:  as also, certain
chapters of a certain book called Piæ Predicationes, wherein divers
works of Luther be comprehended.

     Item, For affirming and believing that faith only, without good
works, will bring a man to heaven.

     Item, That men be not bound to observe the constitutions made
by the church.

     Item, That we should pray to God only, and to no saints.

     Item, That Christian men ought to worship God only, and no
saints.

     Item, That pilgrimages be not profitable for man's soul, and
should not be used.

     Item, That we should not offer to images in the church, nor set
any lights before them.

     Item, That no man is bound to keep any manner of fasting days,
instituted at the church.

     Item, That pardons granted by the pope or the bishop do not
profit a man.

     For these articles Jeffery Lome was abjured before the bishops
of London, Bath, and Lincoln; no mention being made of any penance
enjoined him.

Sigar Nicholson, stationer, of Cambridge, A.D. 1528.

     His articles were like; and moreover for having in his house
certain books of Luther, and other prohibited, and not presenting
them to the ordinary. The handling of this man was too, too cruel, if
the report be true, that he should be hanged up in such a manner as
well suffereth not to be named.

John Raimund, a Dutchman, A.D. 1528.

     For causing fifteen hundred of Tyndale's New Testaments to be
printed at Antwerp, and for bringing five hundred into England.

Paul Luther, Grey Friar, and warden of the house at Ware, A.D. 1529.

     His articles were for preaching and saying that it is pity that
there be so many images suffered in so many places, where indiscreet
and unlearned people be; for they make their prayers and oblations so
entirely and heartily before the image, that they believe it to be
the very self saint in heaven.

     Item, That if he knew his father and mother were in heaven, he
would count them as good as St. Peter and Paul, but for the pain they
suffered for Christ's sake.

     Item, That there is no need to go on pilgrimage.

     Item, That if a man were at the point of drowning, or any other
danger, he should call only upon God, and no saint; for saints in
heaven cannot help us, neither know any more what men do here in this
world, than a man in the north country knoweth what is done in the
south country.

Roger Whaplod, merchant tailor, sent, by one Thomas Norfolk, unto Dr.
Goderidge, this bill following, to be read at his sermon in the
Spital. A.D. 1529.

     "If there be any well-disposed person willing to do any cost
upon the reparation of the conduit in Fleet Street, let him or them
resort unto the administrators of the goods and chattels of one
Richard Hun, late merchant tailor of London, which died intestate, or
else to me, and they shall have toward the same six pounds thirteen
shillings and four-pence, and a better penny, of the goods of the
said Richard Hun; upon whose soul, and all Christian souls, Jesus
have mercy!"

     For the which bill, both Whaplod and Norfolk were brought and
troubled before the bishop; and also Dr. Goderidge, which took a
groat for reading the said bill, was suspended for a time from saying
mass, and also was forced to revoke the same at Paul's Cross; reading
this bill as followeth.

The revocation of Dr. William, Goderidge, read at Paul's Cross.

     "Masters! so it is, that where in my late sermon at St. Mary
Spital, the Tuesday in Easter-week last past, I did pray specially
for the soul of Richard Hun, late of London, merchant tailor, a
heretic, by the laws of holy church justly condemned:  by reason
whereof I greatly offended God and his church, and the laws of the
same, for which I have submitted me to my ordinary, and done penance
there-for:  forasmuch as, peradventure, the audience that was there
offended by my said words, might take any occasion thereby to think
that I did favour the said heretic, or any other, I desire you, at
the instance of Almighty God, to forgive me, and not so to think of
me, for I did it unadvisedly. Therefore, here before God and you, I
declare myself that I have not favoured him or any other heretic, nor
hereafter intend to do, but at all times shall defend the Catholic
faith of holy church, according to my profession, to the best of my
power.

Robert West, priest, A.D. 1529.

     Abjured for books and opinions contrary to the proclamation.

Nicholas White of Rye, A.D. 1529.

     His articles:  -- For speaking against the priests' saying of
matins; against praying for them that be dead; against praying to God
for small trifles, as for the cow calving, the hen hatching, &c.:  for
speaking against the relic of St. Peter's finger; against oblations
to images; against vowing of pilgrimage; against priesthood; against
holy bread and holy water, &c.

Richard Kitchen, priest, A.D. 1529.

     His articles:  -- That pardons granted by the pope are naught,
and that men should put no trust in them, but only in the passion of
Christ:  that he, being led by the words of the gospel, in Matt. vii.,
concerning the broad and narrow way, and also by the epistle of the
mass, beginning, Vir fortissimus Judas, had erred in the way of the
pope, and thought, that there were but two ways, and no purgatory: 
that men ought to worship no images, nor set up lights before them: 
that pilgrimage doth nothing avail:  that the gospel was not truly
preached for the space of three hundred years past, &c.

William Wegen, priest at St. Mary Hill, A.D. 1529.

     His articles:  -- That he was not bound to say his matins nor
other service, but to sing with the choir till they came to prime;
and then, saying no more service, thought he might well go to mass: 
that he had said mass oftentimes, and had not said his matins and his
divine service before:  that he had gone to mass without confession
made to a priest:  that it was sufficient for a man, being in deadly
sin, to ask only God mercy for his sin, without further confession
made to a priest:  that he held against pilgrimages, and called
images, stocks, stones, and witches.

     Item, That he being sick, went to the Rood of St. Margaret
Patens; and said before him twenty Pater-nosters; and when he saw
himself never the better, then he said, "A foul evil take him, and
all other images."

     Item, That if a man keep a good tongue in his head, he fasteth
well.

     Item, For commending Luther to be a good man, for preaching
twice a day, &c.

     Item, For saying that the mass was but a ceremony, and made to
the intent that men should pray only.

     Item, For saying, that if a man had a pair of beads or a book
in his hand at the church, and were not disposed to pray, it was
naught, &c.

William Hale, holy water clerk of Tolenham, 	A.D. 1529.

     His articles:  -- That offering of money and candles to images
did not avail, since we are justified by the blood of Christ.

     Item, For speaking against worshipping of saints, and against
the pope's pardons. For saying, that since the sacraments that the
priest doth minister be as good as they which the pope doth minister,
he did not see but the priest hath as good authority as the pope.

     Item, That a man should confess himself to God only, and not to
a priest, &c.

William Blomfield, monk of Bury.

     Abjured for the like causes.

John Tyndale, A.D. 1530.

     For sending five marks to his brother William Tyndale beyond
the sea, and for receiving and keeping with him certain letters from
his brother.

William Worsley, priest and hermit, A.D. 1530.

     His articles:  -- Forpreaching at Halestede, having the curate's
licence, but not the bishop's.

     Item, For preaching these words, "No man riding on pilgrimage,
having under him a soft saddle, and an easy horse, should have any
merit thereby, but the horse and the saddle," &c.

     Item, For saying that hearing of matins and mass is not the
thing that shall save a man's soul, but only to hear the word of God.

John Stacy, tiler, A.D. 1530.

     His articles were against purgatory, which, he said, to be but
a device of the priests to get money:  against fasting days by man's
prescription, and choice of meats:  against superfluous holy days: 
Item, against pilgrimage, &c.

Lawrence Maxwell, tailor, A.D. 1530.

     His articles:  -- That the sacrament of the altar was not the
very body of Christ in flesh and blood; but that he received him by
the word of God, and in remembrance of Christ's passion.

     Item, That the order of priesthood is no sacrament:  that there
is no purgatory, &c.

Thomas Curson, monk of Eastacre, in Norfolk, A.D. 1530.

     His articles were these:  -- For going out of the monastery, and
changing his weed, and letting his crown to grow; working abroad for
his living, making copes and vestments. Also for having the New
Testament of Tyndale's translation, and another book containing
certain books of the Old Testament, translated into English, by
certain whom the papists call Lutherans.

Thomas Cornewell or Austy, A.D. 1530.

     His articles:  -- It was objected, that he, being enjoined
afore, by Richard Fitzjames, bishop of London, for his penance to
wear a faggot embroidered upon his sleeve under pain of relapse, he
kept not the same; and therefore he was condemned to perpetual
custody in the house of St. Bartholomew, from whence afterwards he
escaped and fled away.

Thomas Philip, A.D. 1530.

     Thomas Philip was delivered by Sir Thomas More, to Bishop
Stokesley by indenture. Besides other articles of purgatory, images,
the sacrament of the altar, holy-days, keeping of books, and such
like, it was objected unto him, that he, being searched in the Tower,
had found about him Tracy's Testament; and in his chamber in the
Tower was found cheese and butter in Lent-time. Also, that he had a
letter delivered unto him going to the Tower. Which letter, with the
Testament also of Tracy, because they are both worthy to be seen, we
mind (God willing) to annex also unto the story of this Thomas
Philip. As he was oftentimes examined before Master More and the
bishop, he always stood to his denial, neither could there any thing
be proved clearly against him, but only Tracy's Testament, and his
butter in Lent. One Stacy first bare witness against him, but after,
in the court, openly he protested that he did it for fear. The bishop
then willing him to submit himself, and to swear never to hold any
opinion contrary to the determination of holy church, he said "he
would: " and when the form of his abjuration was given him to read, he
read it:  but the bishop, not content with that, would have him to
read it openly. But that he would not; and said, He would appeal to
the king as supreme head of the church, and so did. Still the bishop
called upon him to abjure. He answered, That he would be obedient as
a Christian man should, and that he would swear never to hold any
heresy during his life, nor to favour any heretics.

     But the bishop, not yet content, would have him to read the
abjuration after the form of the church conceived, as it was given
him. He answered again, that he would forswear all heresies, and that
he would maintain no heresies, nor favour any heretics. The bishop
with this would not be answered, but needs would drive him to the
abjuration formed after the pope's church:  to whom he said, If it
were the same abjuration that he read, he would not read it, but
stand to his appeal made to the king, the supreme head of the church
under God. Again the bishop asked him, if he would abjure or not.
"Except," said he, "you will show me the cause why I should abjure, I
will not say yea nor nay to it, but will stand to my appeal;" and he
required the bishop to obey the same. Then the bishop, reading openly
the bill of excommunication against him, denounced him for contumax,
and an excommunicated person, charging all men to have no company,
and nothing to do with him. After this excommunication, what became
of him, whether he was holpen by his appeal, or whether he was
burned, or whether he died in the Tower, or whether he abjured, I
find no mention made in the registers.

A letter directed to Thomas Philip in the name of the brethren, and
given him by the way going to the Tower.

     "The favour of him that is able to keep you that you fall not,
and to confess your name in the kingdom of glory, and to give you
strength by his Spirit to confess him before all his adversaries, be
with you ever. Amen.

     "Sir, the brethren think that there be divers false brethren
craftily crept in among them, to seek out their freedom in the Lord,
that they may accuse them to the Lord's adversaries, as they suppose
they have done you. Wherefore, if so it be, that the Spirit of God
move you thereunto, they, as counsellors, desire you above all things
to be stedfast in the Lord's verity, without fear; for he shall and
will be your help, according to his promise, so that they shall not
minish the least hair of your head without his will; unto the which
will, submit yourself and rejoice:  for the Lord knoweth how to
deliver the godly out of temptation, and how to reserve the unjust
unto the day of judgment, to be punished:  and therefore cast all your
care on him, for he careth for you. And in that you suffer as a
Christian man, be not ashamed, but rather glorify God on that behalf;
Looking upon Christ the author and finisher of our faith, which, for
the joy that was set before him, abode the cross and despised the
shame. Notwithstanding, though we suffer the wrong after the example
of our Master Christ, yet we be not bound to suffer the wrong cause,
for Christ himself suffered it not, but reproved him that smote him
wrongfully. And so likewise saith St. Paul also. So that we must not
suffer the wrong, but boldly reprove them that sit as righteous
judges, and do contrary to righteousness. Therefore, according both
to God's law and man's, ye be not bound to make answer in any cause,
till your accusers come before you; which if you require, and thereon
do stick, the false brethren shall be known, to the great comfort of
those that now stand in doubt whom they may trust; and also it shall
be a mean that they shall not craftily, by questions, take you in
snares. And that you may this do lawfully, in Acts xx. it is written,
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man that he should
perish, before that he which is accused have his accusers before him,
and have licence to answer for himself, as pertaining to the crime
whereof he is accused. And also Christ willeth that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses all things shall stand. And in 1 Tim. v. 19,
it is written, Against a senior receive none accusation, but under
two or three witnesses. A senior, in this place, is any man that hath
a house to govern. And also their own law is agreeable to this.
Wherefore, seeing it is agreeable to the word of God, that in
accusations such witnesses should be, you may with good conscience
require it. And thus the God of grace, which hath called you unto his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own self, after a little
affliction, make you perfect; shall settle, strengthen, and stablish
you, that to him may be glory and praise for ever. Amen."

     Thus ye have heard the letter delivered to Thomas Philip. Now
followeth the testament of William Tracy.

     A little before this time, William Tracy, a worshipful esquire
in Gloucestershire, and then dwelling at Toddington, made, in his
will, that he would have no funeral pomp at his burying, neither
passed he upon mass; and he further said, that he trusted in God
only, and hoped by him to be saved, and not by any saint. This
gentleman died, and his son, as executor, brought the will to the
bishop of Canterbury to prove:  which he showed to the convocation,
and there most cruelly they judged that he should be taken out of the
ground, and be burned as a heretic, A.D. 1532. This commission was
sent to Dr. Parker, chancellor of the diocese of Worcester, to
execute their wicked sentence; which accomplished the same. The king,
hearing his subject to be taken out of the ground and burned, without
his knowledge or order of his law, sent for the chancellor, and laid
high offence to his charge; who excused himself by the archbishop of
Canterbury which was lately dead; but in conclusion it cost him three
hundred pounds to have his pardon.

     The will and testament of this gentleman, thus condemned by the
clergy, was as hereunder followeth: 

     "In the name of God, Amen. I, William Tracy of Toddington in
the county of Gloucester, esquire, make my testament and last will as
hereafter followeth:  First, and before all other things, I commit
myself to God and to his mercy, believing, without any doubt or
mistrust, that by his grace, and the merits of Jesus Christ, and by
the virtue of his passion and of his resurrection, I have and shall
have remission of all my sins, and resurrection of body and soul,
according as it is written, I believe that my Redeemer liveth, and
that in the last day I shall rise out of the earth, and in my flesh
shall see my Saviour:  this my hope is laid up in my bosom.

     And touching the wealth of my soul, the faith that I have taken
and rehearsed is sufficient, (as I suppose,) without any other man's
works or merits. My ground and belief is, that there is but one God
and one Mediator between God and man, which is Jesus Christ; so that
I accept none in heaven or in earth to be mediator between me and
God, but only Jesus Christ:  all others to be but as petitioners in
receiving of grace, but none able to give influence of grace:  and
therefore will I bestow no part of my goods for that intent that any
man should say or do to help my soul; for therein I trust only to the
promises of Christ:  He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved,
and he that believeth not shall be damned.

     "As touching the burying of my body, it availeth me not
whatsoever be done thereto; for St. Augustine saith, concerning the
respect due to the dead, that the funeral pomps are rather the solace
of them that live, than the wealth and comfort of them that are dead: 
and therefore I remit it only to the discretion of mine executors.

     "As touching the distribution of my temporal goods, my purpose
is, by the grace of God, to bestow them to be accepted as the fruits
of faith; so that I do not suppose that my merit shall be by the good
bestowing of them, but my merit is the faith of Jesus Christ only, by
whom such works are good, according to the words of our Lord, I was
hungry, and thou gavest me to eat, &c. And it followeth, That ye have
done to the least of my brethren, ye have done it to me, &c. And ever
we should consider that true saying, that a good work maketh not a
good man, but a good man maketh a good work; for faith maketh a man
both good and righteous:  for a righteous man liveth by faith, and
whatsoever springeth not of faith is sin, &c.

     "And all my temporal goods that I have not given or delivered,
or not given by writing of mine own hand, bearing the date of this
present writing, I do leave and give to Margaret my wife, and Richard
my son, whom I make mine executors. Witness hereof mine own hand the
tenth of Octoher, in the twenty-second year of the reign of King
Henry the Eighth."

     This is the true copy of his will, for which, (as you heard
before,) after he was almost two years dead, they took him up and
burned him.

The table continued.

John Perlman, skinner, A.D. 1531.

     His articles were much like unto the others before; adding,
moreover, that all the preachers then at Paul's Cross preached
nothing but lies and flatterings, and that there was never a true
preacher but one; naming Edward Crome.

Robert Goldstone, glazier, A.D. 1.531.

     His articles:  -- That men should pray to God only, and to no
saints:  that pilgrimage is not profitable:  that men should give no
worship to images. Item, for saying, that if he had as much power as
any cardinal had, he would destroy all the images that were in all
the churches in England.

Lawrence Staple, serving-man, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- For having the Testament in English, the five
books of Moses, the Practice of Prelates, the Sum of Scripture, the
A.B.C.

     Item, About the burning of Bainham, for saying, "I would I were
with Bainham, seeing that every man hath forsaken him, that I might
drink with him, and he might pray for me."

     Item, That he moved Henry Tomson to learn to read the New
Testament, calling it The Blood of Christ.

     Item, In Lent past, when he had no fish, he did eat eggs,
butter, and cheese. Also, about six weeks before Master Bilney was
attached, the said Bilney delivered to him at Greenwich four New
Testaments of Tyndale's translation, which he had in his sleeve, and
a budget besides of books, which budget he, shortly after riding to
Cambridge, delivered unto Bilney, &c.

     Item, On Fridays he used to eat eggs, and thought that it was
no great offence before God, &c.

Henry Tomson, tailor, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That which the priest lifteth over his head at
the sacring-time, is not the very body of Christ, nor is it God; but
a thing that God hath ordained to be done.

     This poor Tomson, although at the first he submitted himself to
the bishop, yet they with sentence condemned him to perpetual prison.

Jasper Wetzell, of Cologne, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That he cared not for going to the church to
hear mass, for he could say mass as well as the priest:  That he would
not pray to our Lady, for she could do us no good.

     Item, Being asked if he would go hear mass, he said, he had as
lieve go to the gallows, where the thieves were hanged.

     Item, Being at St. Margaret Patens, and there holding his arms
across, he said unto the people, that he could make as good a knave
as he is, for he is made but of wood, &c.

Robert Man, serving-man, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- There is no purgatory:  That the pope hath no
more power to grant pardon than another simple priest:  That God gave
no more authority to St. Peter than to another priest:  That the pope
was a knave, and his priests knaves all, for suffering his pardons to
go abroad to deceive the people:  That St. Thomas of Canterbury is no
saint:  That St. Peter was never pope of Rome.

     Item, He used commonly to ask of priests where he came, whether
a man were accursed, if he handled a chalice, or no? If the priest
would say, Yea:  then would he reply again thus; "If a man have a
sheep-skin on his hands," meaning a pair of gloves, "he may handle
it." The priests saying, Yea. "Well then," quoth he, "ye will make me
believe, that God put more virtue in a sheep-skin, than he did in a
Christian man's hand, for whom he died."

Henry Feldon, A.D. 1531.

     His trouble was for having these books in English:  A proper
Dialogue between a Gentleman and a Husbandman, The Sum of Scripture,
The Prologue of Mark, a written book containing the Pater Noster, Ave
Maria, and the Creed, in English; The Ten Commandments, and The
Sixteen Conditions of Charity.

Robert Cooper, priest, A:  D. 1531.

     His article was only this:  -- For saying that the blessing with
a shoe-sole, is as good as the bishop's blessing, &c.

Thomas Roe, A.D. 1531.

     His articles were, for speaking against auricular confession
and priestly penance, and against the preaching of the doctors.

William Wallam, A.D. 1531.

     His opinion:  That the sacrament of the altar is not the body of
Christ in flesh and blood; and that there is a God, but not that God
in flesh and blood, in the form of bread.

Grace Palmer, A.D. 1531.

     Witness was brought against her by her neighbours, John Rouse,
Agnes his wife, John Pole, of St. Osithe's, for saying, "Ye use to
bear palms on Palm-Sunday:  it skilleth not whether you bear any or
not, it is but a thing used, and need not."

     Also, " Ye use to go on pilgrimage to our Lady of Grace, of
Walsingham and other places:  ye were better tarry at home, and give
money to succour me and my children, and other of my poor neighbours,
than to go thither; for there you shall find but a piece of timber
painted:  there is neither God nor Lady.

     Item, For repenting that she did ever light candles before
images.

     Item. That the sacrament of the altar is not the body of
Christ; it is but bread, which the priest there showeth for a token
or remembrance of Christ's body.

Philip Brasier, of Boxted, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That the sacrament holden up between the
priest's hands is not the body of Christ, but bread, and is done for
a signification:  That confession to a priest needeth not:  That images
be but stocks and stones:  That pilgrimage is vain:  Also for saying,
that when there is any miracle done, the priests do anoint the
images, and make men believe that the images do sweat in labouring
for them; and with the offerings the priests find their harlots.

John Fairestede, of Colchester, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- For words spoken against pilgrimage and 
images. Also for saying these words, "That the day should come that
men should say, Cursed be they that make these false gods" (meaning
images).

George Bull, of Much Hadham, draper, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That there be three confessions; one principal
to God; another to his neighbour whom he had offended; and the third
to a priest; and that without the two first confessions, to God and
to his neighbour, a man could not be saved. The third confession to a
priest, is necessary for counsel to such as be ignorant and
unlearned, to learn how to make their confession with a contrite
heart unto God, and how to hope for forgiveness; and also in what
manner they should ask forgiveness of their neighbour whom they have
offended, &c. Item, For saying that Luther was a good man. Item, That
he reported, through the credence and report of Master Patmore,
parson of Hadham, that where Wickliff's bones were burnt, sprang up a
well or well-spring.

John Haymond, millwright, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- For speaking and holding against pilgrimage
and images, and against prescribed fasting days.

     That priests and religious men, notwithstanding their vows
made, may lawfully forsake their vows and marry.

     Item, For having books of Luther and Tyndale.

Robert Lambe, a harper, A.D. 1531.

     His article:  -- For that he, standing accursed two years
together, and not fearing the censures of the pope's church, went
about with a song in commendation of Martin Luther.

John Hewes, draper, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- For speaking against purgatory, and Thomas
Becket.

     Item, At the town of Farnham, he, seeing Edward Frensham
kneeling in the street to a cross carried before a corse, asked, To
whom he kneeled? He said, To his Maker. "Thou art a fool," said he, "
it is not thy Maker; it is but a piece of copper or wood," &c.

     Item, For these words, "Masters! ye use to go on pilgrimage; it
were better first that ye look upon your poor neighbours, who lack
succour," &c.

     Also for saying, that he heard the vicar of Croydon thus preach
openly, That there was much immorality kept up by going on pilgrimage
to Wilsdon or Mouswell, &c.

Thomas Patmore, draper, A.D. 1531.

     This Patmore was brother to Master Patmore, parson of Hadham,
who was imprisoned in the Lollards' Tower for marrying a priest, and
in the same prison continued three years.

     This Patmore was accused by divers witnesses, upon these
articles: 

     That he had as lieve pray to yonder hunter (pointing to a man
painted there in a stained cloth) for a piece of flesh, as pray to
stocks that stand in walls (meaning images).

     Item, That men should not pray to saints, but to God only:  "For
why should we pray to saints?"  said he, "they are but blocks and
stocks."

     Item, That the truth of Scripture hath been kept from us a long
time, and hath not appeared till now.

     Item, Coming by a tree wherein stood an image, he took away the
wax which hanged there offered.

     Item, That he regarded not the place whether it was hallowed or
no, where be should be buried after he was dead.

     Also in talk with the curate of St. Peter's, he defended that
priests might marry.

     This Patmore had long hold with the bishop of London. First, he
would not swear, Infamia non præcedente. Then he would appeal to the
king:  but all would not serve. He was so wrapt in the bishop's nets,
that he could not get out:  but at last he was forced to abjure, and
was fined to the king a hundred pounds.

     Note in the communication between this Patmore and the priest
of St. Peter's, that whereas the priest objected against him (as is
in the register) that priests have lived unmarried and without wives
these fifteen hundred years in the church; he, and all other such
priests, therein say falsely, and deceive the people, as by story is
proved in these volumes, that priests here in England had wives by
law within these five hundred years and less.

Simon Smith, master of arts, of Gunwell-hall, Cambridge, and Joan
Bennore his wife, A.D. 1531.

     This Simon Smith, and Bennore his wife, were the parties whom
Master Patmore, parson of Hadham, above mentioned, did marry, and was
condemned for the same to perpetual prison. For the which marriage,
both the said Simon, and Bennore his wife, were called to examination
before the bishop, and he caused to make the whole discourse of all
his doings, how and where he married; then, after his marriage, how
long he tarried; whether he went beyond sea; where he was, and with
whom; after his return whither he resorted; how he lived; what
mercery-ware he occupied; what fairs he frequented; where he left his
wife; how he carried her over, and brought her home again, and how
she was found, &c. All this they made him confess, and put it in
their register. And though they could fasten no other crime of heresy
upon him, but only his marriage, yet, calling both him and her (being
great with child) to examination, they caused them both to abjure and
suffer penance.

Thomas Patmore, parson of Hadham, A.D. 1530.

     This Thomas Patmore, being learned and godly, was preferred to
the parsonage of Hadham, in Hertfordshire, by Richard Fitz-James,
bishop of London, and there continued instructing and teaching his
flock during the time of the said Fitz-James, and also of Tonstal his
successor, by the space of sixteen years or more; behaving himself in
life and conversation without any public blame or reproach; until
John Stokesley was preferred unto the said bishopric, who, not very
long after his installing, either for malice not greatly liking of
the said Patmore, or else desirous to prefer some other unto the
benefice, (as it is supposed and alleged by his brethren in sundry
supplications exhibited unto the king, as also unto Queen Anne, then
marchioness of Pembroke,) caused him to be attached and brought
before him; and then, keeping him prisoner in his own palace, a
certain time afterwards committed him to Lollard's Tower, where he
kept him most extremely above two years, without fire or candle, or
any other relief, but such as his friends sent him; not suffering any
of them, notwithstanding, to come unto him, no, not in his sickness.
Howbeit sundry times in the mean while he called him judicially
either before himself, or else his vicar-general Foxford, that great
persecutor, charging him with these sundry articles, viz. first,
whether he had been at Wittenberg; secondly, and had seen or talked
with Luther; thirdly, or with any Englishman, abiding there;
fourthly, who went with him or attended upon him thither; fifthly,
also what books he bought there, either Latin or English; sixthly,
and whether he had read or studied any works of Luther, Œcolampadius,
Pomerane, or Melancthon.

     Besides these, he ministered also other articles unto him,
touching the marriage of Master Simon Smith (before mentioned) with
one Joan Bennore, charging him that he both knew of and also
consented unto their marriage, the one being a priest and his curate,
and the other his maid-servant; and that he had persuaded his maid-
servant to marry with his said curate, alleging unto her, that though
it were not lawful in England for priests to marry, yet it was, in
other countries beyond seas. And that after their said marriage, he
(knowing the same) did yet suffer the said Smith to minister in his
cure all Easter-time, and fifteen days after; and that at their
departure out of England, he supped with them at the Bell in New Fish
Street; and again, at their return into England, did meet them at the
said Bell, and there lent unto the said Smith a priest's gown.

     He objected, moreover, against him in the said articles, that
he had affirmed at Cambridge, first, that he did not set a bottle of
hay by the pope's or bishop's curse; secondly, and that God bindeth
us to impossible things, that he may save us only by his mercy; also
thirdly, that though young children he baptized, yet they cannot be
saved except they have faith; fourthly and lastly, that it was
against God's law to burn heretics.

     Unto these articles, after long imprisonment and great threats
of the bishop and his vicar, he at last answered, making first his
appeal unto the king, wherein he showed, that forasmuch as the bishop
had most unjustly, and contrary to all due order of law, and the
equity thereof, proceeded against him, as well in falsely defaming
him with the crime of heresy, without having any just proof or public
defamation thereof; as also, contrary to all justice, keeping him in
most strait prison so long time (both to the great danger of his
life, by grievous sickness taken thereby, as especially to his no
small grief, that through his absence, his flock, whereof he had
charge, were not fed with the word of God and his sacraments as he
would); and then, to minister unto him such articles, mingled with
interrogatories, as neither touched any heresy nor transgression of
any law, but rather showing a mind to pick quarrels against him and
other innocent people; he therefore, for the causes alleged, was
compelled, and did, appeal from him and all his officers unto the
king's Majesty, whom, under God, he had for his most just and lawful
refuge, and defender against all injuries. From which appeal although
he minded not at any time to depart, yet because he would not show
himself obstinate against the bishop, being his ordinary, (although
he had most just cause to suspect his unjust proceeding against him,)
he was nevertheless content to exhibit unto him this his answer: 
First, that howsoever the bishop was privately informed, yet because
he was not publicly defamed among good and grave men, according to
law, he was not, by the law, bound to answer to any of those
articles.

     And as touching the first six articles, (as whether he was at
Wittenberg, and spake with Luther, or any other, or bought or read
any of their books, &c.,) because none of those things were forbidden
him by any law, neither was he publicly accused of them, (for that it
was permitted to many good men to have them,) he was not bound to
answer, neither was he to be examined of them. But as touching the
marriage of Master Simon Smith with Joan Bennore, he granted that he
knew thereof by the declaration of Master Smith; but, that he gave
his maid counsel thereunto, he utterly denied. And as concerning the
contracting of the marriage between them, he thought it not at all
against God's law, who at the first creation made marriage lawful for
all men:  neither thought he it unlawful for him, after their
marriage, either to keep him as his curate, or else to lend or give
him any thing needful (wherein he said he showed more charity than
the bishop, who had taken all things from them); and therefore he
desired to have it proved by the Scriptures, that priests' marriages
were not lawful.

     Against whom, Foxford, the bishop's vicar, often alleged
general councils, and determinations of the church, but no
Scriptures, still urging him to abjure his articles; which Patmore
long time refused, and sticking a great while to his former answers,
at last was threatened by Foxford, to have the definitive sentence
read against him. Whereupon he answered, that he believed the holy
church as a Christian man ought to do; and because it passed his
capacity, he desired to be instructed, and if the Scriptures did
teach it, he would believe it; for he knew not the contrary by the
Scriptures, but that a priest might marry a wife; howbeit, by the
laws of the church, he thought that a priest might not marry. But the
chancellor still so urged him to show whether a priest might marry
without offence to God, that at length he granted that priests might
not marry without offence to God, because the church had forbidden
it, and therefore a priest could not marry without deadly sin.

     Now as touching the four last articles, he denied that he spake
them as they were put against him; but he granted that he might
perhaps jestingly say, That a bottle of hay were more profitable to
him than the pope's curse, which he thought true. Also to the second,
he affirmed that God had set before us, by his precepts and
commandments, the way to righteousness, which way was not in man's
power to go and keep; therefore Paul saith, Gal. iii. 19, that the
law was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator; but yet, to
fulfil it, it was in the hand, that is, power, of the Mediator. That
none that shall be saved shall account their salvation unto their own
deeds, or thank their own justice in observing the law; for it was in
no man's power to observe it:  but shall give all thanks to the
mercies and goodness of God; according to the psalm, Praise the Lord,
all ye nations; and according to the saying of Paul, that he that
glorieth may glory in the Lord; who hath sent his Son to do for us
that which it was not in our own power to do. For if it had been in
our power to fulfil the law, Christ had been sent to us without
cause, to do for us that thing which we ourselves could have done,
that is to say, fulfil the law. As for the third, he spake not, for
he did never know that any may be baptized without faith; which
faith, inasmuch as it is the gift of God, why may it not be given to
infants? To the last he said, that if he spake it, ho meant it not of
those that St. Bernard called heretics, (with more adulterers,
thieves, murderers, and other open sinners, who blaspheme God by
their mouths, calling good evil, and evil good, making light
darkness, and darkness light,) but he meant it of such as men call
heretics, according to the testimony of St. Paul, Acts xxiv. 14, I
live after the way, saith he, that men call heresy, whom Christ doth
foretell that ye shall burn and persecute to death.

     After these answers thus made, the bishop, with his persecuting
Foxford, dealt so hardly with this good man, partly by strait
imprisonment, and partly by threats to proceed against him, that in
the end he was fain, through human infirmity, to submit himself, and
was abjured and condemned to perpetual prison; with loss, both of his
benefice, as also of all his goods. Howbeit one of his brethren
afterwards made such suit unto the king, (by means of the queen,)
that after three years' imprisonment, he was both released out of
prison, and also obtained of the king a commission unto the Lord
Audley, being then lord chancellor, and to Cranmer, archbishop of
Canterbury, and to Cromwell, then secretary, with others, to inquire
of the injurious and unjust dealings of the bishop and his chancellor
against the said Patmore, notwithstanding his appeal unto the king;
and to determine thereof according to true equity and justice, and to
restore the said Patmore again unto his said benefice. But what was
the end and issue of this commission, we find not as yet.

John Row, book-binder, a Frenchman, A.D. 1531.

     This man, for binding, buying, and dispersing of books
inhibited, was enjoined, besides other penance, to go to Smithfield
with his books tied about him, and to cast them into the fire, and
there to abide till they were all burned to ashes.

Christopher, a Dutchman of Antwerp, A.D. 1531.

     This man, for selling certain New Testaments in English, to
John Row aforesaid, was put in prison at Westminster, and there died.

W. Nelson, priest, A.D. 1531.

     His crime was, for having and buying of Periman certain books
of Luther, Tyndale, Thorp, &c., and for reading and perusing the
same, contrary to the king's proclamation, for which he was abjured.
He was priest at Leith.

Thomas Eve, weaver, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That the sacrament of the altar is but a
memory of Christ's passion. That men were fools to go on pilgrimage,
or to set any candle before images. Item, It is as good to set up
staves before the sepulchre, as to set up tapers of wax. That priests
might have wives.

Robert Hudson of St. Sepulchre's, A.D. 1531.

     His article:  -- On Childermas-day (saith the register) he
offered in Paul's church at offering-time, to the child bishop
(called St. Nicholas) a dog for devotion, (as he said,) and meant no
hurt; for he thought to have offered a halfpenny, or else the dog,
and thought the dog to be better than a halfpenny, and the dog should 
raise some profit to the child; and said moreover, that it was the
tenth dog, &c.

Edward Hewet, serving-man, A.D. 1531.

     His crime:  -- That after the king's proclamation, he had and
read the New Testament in English; also the book of John Frith
against purgatory, &c.

Walter Kiry, servant, A.D. 1531.

     His article:  -- That he, after the king's proclamation, had and
used these books; The Testament in English, The Sum of Scripture, a
Primer and Psalter in English, hidden in his bed-straw at Worcester.

Michael Lobley, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That he, being at Antwerp, bought certain
books inhibited, as The Revelation of Antichrist, The Obedience of a
Christian Man, The Wicked Mammon, Frith against Purgatory. Item, For
speaking against images and purgatory. Item, For saying, that Bilney
was a good man, and died a good man, because of a bill that one did
send from Norwich, that specified that he took his death so
patiently, and did not forsake to die with a good will.

A boy of Colchester, A.D. 1531.

     A boy of Colchester, or Norfolk, brought to Richard Bayfield a
budget of books, about four days before the said Bayfield was taken;
for which the lad was taken, and laid in the Compter by Master More,
chancellor, and there died.

William Smith, tailor, A.D. 1531.

     His articles:  -- That he lodged oftentimes in his house Richard
Bayfield, and other good men:  that he received his books into his
house, and used much reading in the New Testament:  he had also the
Testament of William Tracy:  he believed that there was no purgatory.

William Lincoln, prentice, A.D. 1532.

     His articles:  -- For having and receiving books from beyond the
sea, of Tyndale, Frith, Thorp, and others. Item, He doubted, whether
there were any purgatory; whether it were well done to set up candles
to saints, to go on pilgrimage, &c.

John Mel, of Boxted, A.D. 1532.

     His heresy was this:  -- For having and reading the New
Testament in English, the Psalter in English, and the book called A B
C.

John Medwel, servant to Master Carket, scrivener.

     This Medwel lay in prison twenty-four weeks, till he was almost
lame. His heresies was these:  -- That he doubted whether there was
any purgatory. He would not trust in pardons, but rather in the
promises of Christ. He doubted whether the merits of any but only of
Christ did help him. He doubted whether pilgrimages, and setting up
of candles to images, were meritorious or not. He thought he should
not put his trust in any saint. Item, he had in his custody, the New
Testament in English, the Examination of Thorp, The Wicked Mammon, a
book of Matrimony.

Christopher Fulman, servant to a goldsmith, A.D. 1532.

     This young man was attached, for receiving certain books at
Antwerp of George Constantine, and transporting them over into
England, and selling them to sundry persons, being books prohibited
by the proclamation. Item, He thought then those books to have been
good, and that he had been in error in times past.

Margaret Bowgas, A.D. 1532.

     Her heresies were these:  -- Being asked if she would go on
pilgrimage. she said, " I believe in God, and he can do me more good
than our Lady, or any other saint; and as for them, they shall come
to me, if they will," &c. Then Richard Sharpies, parson of Milend, by
Colchester, asked her if she said her Ave Maria. "I say," said she,
"Hail Mary, but I will say no further." Then said he, if she left not
those opinions, she would bear a faggot. "If I do, better, then, I
shall," said she; adding moreover, "that she would not go from that,
to die there-for: " to whom the priest answered and said, She would be
burned. Hereunto Margaret, again replying, asked the priest, "Who
made martyrs?"  "Tyrants," quoth the priest, "make martyrs, for they
put martyrs to death." "So they shall, or mar, me," quoth Margaret.
At length. with much ado, and great persuasion, she gave over to
Foxford, the chancellor, and submitted herself.

John Tyrel, an Irishman, of Billerica, tailor.

     His articles were these:  -- That the sacrament of the altar was
not the body of Christ, but only a cake of bread. Furthermore, the
occasion being asked, how he fell into that heresy, he answered and
said, that about three weeks before Midsummer last past, he heard
Master Hugh Latimer preach at St. Mary, Abchurch, that men should
leave going on pilgrimage abroad, and do their pilgrimage to their
poor neighbours. Also the said Master Latimer in his sermon did set
at little the sacrament of the altar.

William Lancaster, tailor, A.D. 1532.

     The case laid to this man was, that he had in his keeping the
book of Wickliff's Wicket. Item, That he believed the sacrament of
the altar, after the words of consecration, not to be the body of
Christ really, &c. Item, Upon the day of Assumption, he said, that if
it were not for the speech of the people, he would not receive the
sacrament of the altar.

Robert Topley, friar, A.D. 1532.

     His articles:  -- He being a Friar Augustine of Clare, forsook
his habit, and going in a secular man's weed ten years, married a
wife, called Margaret Nixon, having by her a child; and afterwards,
being brought before the bishop, he was by him abjured, and condemned
to be imprisoned in his former monastery; but at last he escaped out,
and returned to his wife again.

Thomas Topley, Augustine Friar, at Stoke-clare.

     By the occasion of this Robert Topley aforesaid, place is
offered to speak something likewise of Thomas Topley, his brother
belike, and also a friar of the same order and house of Stoke-clare.
This Thomas Topley had been converted before by one Richard Foxe,
priest of Bumstead, and Miles Coverdale, insomuch that he, being
induced, partly by them, partly by reading certain books, cast off
both his order and habit, and went like a secular priest. Whereupon
he was espied, and brought to Cuthbert, bishop of London, A.D. 1528,
before whom he made this confession as followeth: 

     "All Christian men, beware of consenting to Erasmus's Fables,
for by consenting to them, they have caused me to shrink in my faith,
that I promised to God at my christening by my witnesses. First, as
touching these Fables, I read in Colloquium, by the instruction of
Sir Richard Foxe, of certain pilgrims, which, as the book doth say,
made a vow to go to St. James, and as they went, one of them died,
and he desired his fellows to salute St. James in his name; and
another died homeward, and he desired that they would salute his wife
and his children; and the third died at Florence, and his fellow
said, he supposed that he was in heaven, and yet he said that he was
a great liar. Thus I mused of these opinions so greatly, that my mind
was almost withdrawn from devotion to saints. Notwithstanding, I
consented that the divine service of them was very good, and is;
though I have not had such sweetness in it as I should have had,
because of such fables, and also because of other foolish pastimes;
as dancing, tennis, and such other, which I think have been great
occasions that the goodness of God hath been void in me, and vice in
strength.

     Moreover, it fortuned thus, about half a year ago, that the
said Sir Richard went forth, and desired me to serve his cure for
him; and as I was in his chamber, I found a certain book called
Wickliff's Wicket, whereby I felt in my conscience a great wavering
for the time that I did read upon it, and afterwards, also, when I
remembered it, it wounded my conscience very sore. Nevertheless, I
consented not to it, until I had heard him preach, and that was upon
St. Anthony's day. Yet my mind was still much troubled with the said
book, (which did make the sacrament of Christ's body, in form of
bread, but a remembrance of Christ's passion,) till I heard Sir Miles
Coverdale preach, and then my mind was sore withdrawn from that
blessed sacrament, insomuch that I took it then but for the
remembrance of Christ's body. Thus I have wretchedly wrapped my soul
with sin, for because I have not been stedfast in that holy order
that God hath called me unto by baptism, neither in the holy order
that God and St. Augustine have called me to by my religion," &c.

     Furthermore, he said and confessed, that in the Lent last past,
as he was walking in the field at Bumstead, with Sir Miles Coverdale,
late friar of the same order, going in the habit of a secular priest,
which had preached the fourth Sunday in Lent at Bumstead, they did
commune together of Erasmus's works, and also upon confession. The
which Sir Miles said, and did hold, that it was sufficient for a man
to be contrite for his sins betwixt God and his conscience, without
confession made to a priest; which opinion this respondent thought to
be true, and did affirm and hold the same at that time. Also he
saith, that at the said sermon, made by the said Sir Miles Coverdale
at Bumstead, he heard him preach against worshipping of images in the
church, saying and preaching, that men in no wise should honour or
worship them; which likewise he thought to be true, because he had no
learning to defend it.

William Gardiner, Augustine Friar, of Clare.

     With this Topley I may also join William Gardiner, one of the
same order and house of Clare, who likewise, by the motion of the
said Richard Foxe, curate of Bumstead, and by showing him certain
books to read, was brought likewise to the like learning and
judgment, and was for the same abjured by Cuthbert, bishop, the same
year, 1528.

Richard Johnson, of Boxted, and Alice his wife.

     This Richard and his wife were favourers of God's word, and had
been troubled for the same of long time. They came from Salisbury to
Boxted by reason of persecution, where they continued a good space.
At length, by resort of good men, they began to be suspected, and
especially for a book of Wickliff's Wicket, which was in their house,
theywere convented before Stokesley, bishop of London, and there
abjured.

     So great was the trouble of those times, that it would
overcharge any story to recite the names of all them which during
those bitter days, before the coming in of Queen Anne, either were
driven out of the realm, or were cast out from their goods and
houses, or brought to open shame by abjuration. Such decrees and
injunctions then were set forth by the bishops, such laws and
proclamations were provided, such watch and narrow search was used,
such ways were taken by force of oath to make one detect another so
subtilly, that scarcely any good man could or did escape their hands,
but either his name was known, or else his person was taken. Yet,
nevertheless, so mightily the power of God's gospel did work in the
hearts of good men, that the number of them did nothing lessen for
all this violence or policy of the adversaries, but rather increased,
in such sort as our story also almost suffereth not to recite the
particular names of all and singular such as then groaned under the
same cross of affliction and persecution of those days; of which
number were these: 

Arthur and Gefferey Lome.
John Tibauld, his mother, his wife, his two sons, and his two
daughters.
Edmund Tibauld, and his wife.
Henry Butcher, and his wife.
William Butcher, and his wife.
George Preston, and his wife.
Joan Smith, widow; also her sons Robert and Richard, and her
daughters Margaret and Elizabeth.
Robert Hempsteed, and his wife.
Thomas Hempsteed, and his wife.
John Hempsteed, their son.
Robert Faire.
William Chatwals.
Joan Smith, widow, otherwise called Agnes, widow; also her sons John,
Thomas, and Christopher, and her daughters Joan and Alice. John
Wiggen.
Nicholas Holden's wife.
Alice Shipwright.
Henry Brown.
John Craneford.

     All these were of the town of Bumstead, who being detected by
Sir Richard Foxe, their curate, and partly by Tibauld, were brought
up to the bishop of London, and all put together in one house, to the
number of thirty-five, to be examined and abjured by the said bishop.

     Moreover, in other towns about Suffolk and Essex, others also
were detected, as in the town of Byrbrook, these following: 

Isabel Choote, widow; also her sons John, William, Christopher, and
Robert; her daughter Margaret, and Katharine her maid.
Thomas Choote, and his wife.
Harvie, and his wife.
Thomas, his son.
Agnes, his daughter.
Bateman, and his wife.
John Smith, and his wife.
Thomas Butcher, and his wife.
Robert Catlin, a spoon-maker.
Christmas, and his wife.
William Bechwith, his wife and his two sons. John Pickas, and his
wife.
William Pickas, his brother.
Girling, his wife and his daughter.
Matthew's wife.
Johnson, his wife and his son.
Thomas Hills.
Roger Tanner.
Christopher Raven, and his wife.
John Chapman, his servant.
Richard Chapman, his servant, and brother to John Chapman.

     Christopher remaineth yet alive, and hath been of a long time a
great harbourer of many good men and women that were in trouble and
distress, and received them to his house, as Thomas Bate, Simon
Smith, the priest's wife, Roger Tanner, with a number more, which ye
may see and read in our first edition.

     Touching this Richard Chapman, this, by the way, is to be
noted, that as he was in his coat and shirt enjoined, bare-head,
bare-foot, and bare-leg, to go before the procession, and to kneel
upon the cold steps in the church all the sermon time, a little lad,
seeing him kneel upon the cold stone with his bare knees, and having
pity on him, came to him, and having nothing else to give him,
brought him his cap to kneel upon; for which the boy was immediately
taken into the vestry, and there unmercifully beaten, for his mercy
showed to the poor penitent.

     Beside these, divers others were about London, Colchester, and
other places also, partakers of the same cross and affliction for the
like cause of the gospel, in which number come in these which
hereafter follow.

Peter Fenne, priest. Robert Best.
John Turke.
William Raylond of Colchester.
Henry Raylond, his son.
Marion Matthew, or Westden.
Dorothy Long.
Thomas Parker.
M. Forman, bachelor of divinity, parson of Honey Lane.
Robert Necton.
Katharine Swane.
Mark Cowbridge of Colchester.
Widow Denby.
Robert Hedil of Colchester.
Robert Wigge, William Bull, and George Cooper, of London.
John Toy, of St. Faith's, London.
Richard Foster of London.
Sebastian Harris, curate of Kensington.
Alice Gardener, John Tomson, and John Bradley and his wife, of
Colchester.
John Hubert, of Esdonland, and his wife.
William Butcher, whose father's grandfather was burned for the same
religion.
Abraham Water of Colchester.

     All these in this table contained, were troubled and abjured,
A.D. 1527, and A.D. 1528.

John Wily the elder.
Katharine Wily, his wife.
John Wily, son of John Wily the elder. Christian Wily, his wife.
William Wily, another son.
Margaret Wily, his wife.
Lucy Wily, and Agnes Wily, two young girls.

     These eight persons were accused A.D. 1532, for eating pottage
and flesh-meat, five years before, upon St. James's even.

     Also another time, upon St. Peter's even, as Katharine Wily did
lie in childbed, the other wives, with the two girls, were found
eating all together of a broth made with the fore-part of a rack of
mutton.

     Item, The aforesaid John Wily the elder had a primer in English
in his house, and other books.

     Also he had a young daughter of ten years old, which could
render by heart the most part of the twenty-fourth chapter of St.
Matthew. Also could rehearse without book, The Disputation between
the Clerk and the Friar.

     Item, The said John Wily had in his house a treatise of William
Thorp, and Sir John Oldcastle.

A note of Richard Bayfield above mentioned.

     Mention was made before of Richard Bayfield, monk of Bury, who
in these perilous days, amongst other good saints of God, suffered
death, as ye have heard; but how, and by whom he was detected, hath
not been showed; which now, as in searching out of registers we have
found, so we thought good here to adjoin the same, with the words and
confession of the same Edmund Peerson, which detected him in manner
as followeth: 

The accusation of Edmund Peerson against Richard Bayfield.

     "The thirteenth day of September, at four o'clock in the
afternoon, A.D. 1527, Sir Richard Bayfield said, that my lord of
London's commissary was a plain Pharisee; wherefore he would speak
with him, and by his wholesome doctrine, he trusted in God, he should
make him a perfect Christian man, and me also, for I was a Pharisee
as yet, he said.

     "Also he said that he cared not even if the commissary and the
chancellor both heard him; for the chancellor, he said, was also a
Pharisee, and he trusted to make him a Christian man.

     "Also he said he was entreated by his friends, and, in a
manner, constrained to abide in the city against his will, to make
the chancellor, and many more, perfect Christian men; for as yet many
were Pharisees, and knew not the perfect declaration of the
Scripture.

     "Also he said that Master Arthur and Bilney were, and be, more
pure and more perfect in their living to God, than was, or is, the
commissary, the chancellor, my lord of London, or my lord cardinal.

     "Also he said that if Arthur and Bilney suffer death in the
quarrels and opinions that they be in or hold, they shall be martyrs
before God in heaven.

     "Also he said, After Arthur and Bilney were put cruelly to
death, yet should there be hundreds of men that should preach the
same that they have preached.

     "Also he said that he would favour Arthur and Bilney, he knew
their living to be so good; for they did wear no shirts of linen
cloth, but shirts of hair, and ever were fasting, praying, or doing
some other good deeds. And as for one of them, whatsoever he have of
money in his purse, he will distribute it, for the love of God, to
poor people.

     "Also he said that no man should give laud or praise, in any
manner of wise, to any creature, or to any saint in heaven, but only
to God; To God alone be all honour and glory.

     "Also he said, 'Ah, good Sir Edmund! ye be far from the
knowledge and understanding of the Scripture, for as yet ye be a
Pharisee, with many others of your company:  but I trust in God, I
shall make you, and many other more, good and perfect Christian men,
ere I depart from the city; for I purpose to read a common lecture
every day at St. Foster's church, which lecture shall be to the
edifying of your souls that be false Pharisees.'

     "Also he said that Bilney preached nothing at Wilsdon, but what
was true.

     "Also he said that Bilney preached true at Wilsdon, if he said
that our Lady's crown of Wilsdon, her rings and beads that were
offered to her, were bestowed amongst harlots, by the ministers of
Christ's church; 'for that I have seen myself,' he said, 'here in
London, and that will I abide by.'

     "Also he said, He did not fear to commune and argue in Arthur's
and Bilney's opinions and articles, even if it were with my lord
cardinal.

     "Also he said that he would hold Arthur's and Bilney's opinions
and articles, and abide by them, that they were true opinions, to
suffer death therefor; 'I know them,' said he, 'for such noble and
excellent men in learning.'

     "Also he said, If he were before my lord cardinal, he would not
let to speak to him, and to tell him, that he hath done naughtily in
imprisoning Arthur and Bilney, who were better disposed in their
livings to God, than my lord cardinal, or my lord of London, as holy
as they make themselves.

     "Also he said, My lord cardinal is no perfect nor good man to
God, for he keepeth not the commandments of God; for Christ (he said)
never taught him to follow riches, nor to seek for promotions or
dignities of this world, nor did Christ ever teach him to wear shoes
of silver and gilt, set with pearl and precious stones; nor bad
Christ ever two crosses of silver, two axes, or a pillar of silver
and gilt.

     "Also he said that every priest might preach the gospel without
licence of the pope, my lord cardinal, my lord of London, or any
other man; and that he would abide by:  and thus he verified it, as it
is written, Mark xvi., Christ commanded every priest to go forth
throughout all the world, and preach the word of God by the authority
of this gospel; and not to run to the pope, nor to any other man, for
licence:  and that he would abide by, he said.

     "Also he said, 'Well, Sir Edmund! say you what you will, and
every man, and my lord cardinal also, and yet will I say, and abide
by it, my lord cardinal doth punish Arthur and Bilney unjustly, for
there be no truer Christian men in all the world living, than they
two be; and that punishment that my lord cardinal doth to them, he
doth it by might and power, as one who would say, This may I do, and
this will I do:  who shall say nay? but he doth it of no justice.'

     "Also about the fourteenth day of October last past, at three
o'clock at afternoon, Sir Richard Bayfield came to St. Edmund's in
Lombard Street, where he found me, Sir Edmund Peerson, Sir James
Smith, and Sir Miles Garnet, standing at the uttermost gate of the
parsonage; and Sir Edmund said to Sir Richard Bayfield, 'How many
Christian men have ye made, since ye came to the city?' Quoth Sir
Richard Bayfield, 'I came even now to make thee a Christian man, and
these two other gentlemen with thee; for well I know ye be all three
Pharisees as yet.'

     "Also he said to Sir Edmund, that Arthur and Bilney were better
Christian men than he was, or any of them that did punish Arthur and
Bilney.

"By me, EDMUND PEERSON."



181. KING HENRY'S BREACH WITH ROME

     And thus we have, as in a gross sum, compiled together the
names and causes, though not of all, yet of a great, and too great, a
number of good men and good women, which in those sorrowful days
(from the year of our Lord 1527, to this present year 1533, that is,
till the coming in of Queen Anne) were manifold ways vexed and
persecuted under the tyranny of the bishop of Rome. Where again we
have to note, that from this present year of our Lord 1533, during
the time of the said Queen Anne, we read of no great persecution, nor
any abjuration to have been in the church of England, save only that
the registers of London make mention of certain Dutchmen counted for
Anabaptists, of whom ten were put to death in sundry places of the
realm, A.D. 1535; other ten repented and were saved. Where note
again, that two also of the said company, albeit the definitive
sentence was read, yet notwithstanding were pardoned by the king;
which was contrary to the pope's law.

     Now to proceed forth in our matter; After that the bishops and
heads of the clergy had thus a long time taken their pleasure,
exercising their cruel authority against the poor wasted flock of the
Lord, and began, furthermore, to stretch forth their rigour and
austerity, to attach and molest also other great persons of the
temporalty; so it fell, that in the beginning of the next or second
year following, which was A.D. 1534, a parliament was called by the
king about the fifteenth day of January:  in which parliament, the
commons, renewing their old griefs, complained of the cruelty of the
prelates and ordinaries, for calling men before them ex officio. For
such was then the usage of the ordinaries and their officials, that
they would send for men, and lay accusations to them of heresy, only
declaring to them that they were accused; and would minister articles
to them, but no accuser should be brought forth:  whereby the commons
were grievously annoyed and oppressed;, for the Aparty so cited must
either abjure or do worse:  for purgation he might none make.

     As these matters were long debating in the commons' house, at
last it was agreed that the temporal men should put their griefs in
writing, and deliver them to the king. Whereupon, on the eighteenth
day of March, the common speaker, accompanied with certain knights
and burgesses of the commons' house, came to the king's presence, and
there declared how the temporal men of his realm were sore aggrieved
with the cruel demeanour of the prelates and ordinaries, which
touched their bodies and goods so nearly, that they of necessity were
enforced to make their humble suit, by their speaker, unto his Grace,
to take such order and redress in the case, as to his high wisdom
might seem most convenient, &c.

     Unto this request of the commons, although the king at that
time gave no present grant, but suspended them with a delay, yet
notwithstanding, this sufficiently declared the grudging minds of the
temporal men against the spiritually, lacking nothing but God's
helping hand to work in the king's heart for reformation of such
things, which they all did see to be out of frame. Neither did the
Lord's divine providence fail in time of need, but eftsoons
ministered a ready remedy in time expedient. He saw the pride and
cruelty of the spiritual clergy grown to such a height as was
intolerable. He saw again, and heard the groaning hearts, the bitter
afflictions, of his oppressed flock; his truth decayed, his religion
profaned, the glory of his Son defaced, his church lamentably wasted.
Wherefore it was high time for his high majesty to look upon the
matter (as he did indeed) by a strange and wondrous means, which was
through the king's divorcement from Lady Katharine, dowager, and
marrying with Lady Anne Bullen, in this present year; which was the
first occasion and beginning of all this public reformation which
hath followed since, in this church of England, and to this present
day, according as ye shall hear.

The marriage between King Henry and Queen Anne Bullen; and Queen
Katharine divorced.
 IN the first entry of this king's reign ye heard
before, how, after the death of Prince Arthur, the Lady Katharine,
princess dowager, and wife to Prince Arthur, by the consent both of
her father and his, and also by the advice of the nobles of this
realm, to the end her dowry might remain still within the realm, was
espoused, after the decease of her husband, to his next brother,
which was this King Henry.

     Thus then, after the declaration of these things gone before,
next cometh to our hands (by the order and process of the time we are
now about) to treat of the marvellous and most gracious work of the
holy providence of God, beginning now to work, at this present time,
here in England, that which neither durst be attempted before by any
prince within this realm, nor yet could ever be hoped for by any
subject; concerning the abolishing and overthrow of the pope's
supremacy here in the English church:  who through the false pretended
title of his usurped authority, and through the vain fear of his
keys, and cursed cursings and excommunications, did so deeply sit in
the consciences of men; did keep all princes and kings so under him;
briefly, did so plant himself in all churches, taking such deep root
in the hearts of all Christian people so long time, that it seemed
not only hard, but also impossible, for man's power to abolish the
same. But that which passeth man's strength, God here beginneth to
take in hand, to supplant the old tyranny, and subtle supremacy of
the Romish bishop. The occasion hereof began thus, (through the
secret providence of God,) by a certain unlawful marriage between
King Henry the Eighth, and the Lady Katharine, his brother's wife;
which marriage, being found unlawful, and so concluded by all
universities, not to be dispensed withal by any man, at length
brought forth a verity long hid before; that is, that the pope was
not what he was accounted to be; and, again, that he presumptuously
took more upon him than he was able to dispense withal.

     These little beginnings being once called into question, gave
great light to men, and ministered withal great occasion to seek
further:  insomuch that at length the pope was espied, both to usurp
that which he could not claim, and to claim that which he ought not
to usurp. As touching the first doubt of this unlawful marriage,
whether it came of the king himself, or of the cardinal, or of the
Spaniards, as the chronicles themselves do not fully express, so I
cannot assuredly affirm. This is certain, that it was not without the
singular providence of God, (whereby to bring greater things to
pass,) that the king's conscience herein seemed to be so troubled,
according as the words of his own oration, had unto his commons, do
declare; whose oration hereafter followeth, to give testimony of the
same.

     This marriage seemed very strange and hard, for one brother to
marry the wife of another. But what can be in this earth so hard or
difficult, wherewith the pope, the omnipotent vicar of Christ, cannot
by favour dispense, if it please him? The pope which then ruled at
Rome, was Pope Julius the Second, by whose dispensation, this
marriage, which neither sense of nature would admit, nor God's law
would bear, was concluded, approved, and ratified; and so continued
as lawful, without any doubt or scruple, the space of nearly twenty
years, till about the time that a certain doubt began first to be
moved by the Spaniards themselves, of the emperor's council, A.D.
1523; at what time Charles the emperor, being here in England,
promised to marry the Lady Mary, daughter to the king of England;
with which promise the Spaniards themselves were not well contented,
objecting this, among many other causes, that the said Lady Mary was
begotten of the king of England by his brother's wife.

     Whereupon the emperor, forsaking that marriage, did couple
himself with Lady Isabel, daughter to King Emanuel of Portugal. This
marriage was done A.D. 1526. After this marriage of the emperor, the
next year following, King Henry, being disappointed thus of the
emperor, entered talk, or rather was laboured to by the French
ambassadors, for the said Lady Mary to be married to the French
king's son, duke of Orleans; upon the talk whereof, after long
debating, at length the matter was put off by a certain doubt of the
president of Paris, casting the like objection as the Spaniards had
done before; which was, Whether the marriage between the king, and
the mother of this Lady Mary, which had been his brother's wife
before, were good or no? And so the marriage, twice unluckily
attempted, in like sort brake off again, and was rejected, which
happened A.D. 1527.

     The king, upon the occasion hereof casting many things in his
mind, began to consider the cause more deeply, first, with himself,
after, with certain of his nearest council; wherein two things there
were which chiefly pricked his mind, whereof the one touched his
conscience, the other concerned the state of his realm. For if that
marriage with his brother's wife stood unlawful by the law of God,
then neither was his conscience clear in retaining the mother, nor
yet the state of the realm firm by succession of the daughter. It
happened the same time that the cardinal, which was then nearest
about the king, had fallen out with the emperor, for not helping him
to the papacy, as ye before have heard; for which cause he helped to
set the matter forward by all the practice he might. Thus the king,
perplexed in his conscience, and careful for the commonwealth, and
partly also incited by the cardinal, could not so rest; but inquired
further to feel what the word of God, and learning, would say unto
it. Neither was the case so hard, after it began once to come in
public question, but that by the word of God, and the judgments of
the best learned clerks, and also by the censure of the chief
universities of all Christendom, to the number of ten and more, it
was soon discussed to be unlawful.

     All these censures, books, and writings, of so many doctors,
clerks, and universities, sent from all quarters of Christendom to
the king, albeit they might suffice to have fully resolved, and did
indeed resolve, the king's conscience touching this scruple of his
marriage; yet would he not straightway use that advantage which
learning did give him, unless he had withal the assent as well of the
pope, as also the emperor; wherein he perceived no little difficulty.
For the pope, he thought, seeing the marriage was authorized before
by the dispensation of his predecessor, would hardly turn his keys
about to undo that which the pope before him had locked; and much
less would he suffer those keys to be foiled, or to come in any
doubt; which was like to come, if that marriage were proved
undispensable by God's word, which his predecessor, through his
plenary power, had licensed before. Again, the emperor, he thought,
would be no less hard for his part, on the other side, forasmuch as
the said Lady Katharine was the emperor's near aunt, and a Spaniard
born. Yet, nevertheless, his purpose was to prove and feel what they
both would say unto it; and therefore he sent Stephen Gardiner to
Rome, to weigh with Pope Clement. To the emperor was sent Sir
Nicholas Harvey, knight, ambassador in the court of Gaunt. First,
Pope Clement, not weighing belike the full importance and sequel of
the matter, sent Cardinal Campeius (as is said) into England, joined
with the cardinal of York.

     At the coming of these legates, the king, first opening unto
them the grief of his conscience, seemed with great reasons and
persuasions sufficiently to have drawn the good will of those two
legates to his side; who also, of their own accord, pretended no less
but to show a willing inclination to further the king's cause. But
yet the mouths of the common people, and in especial of women, and
such others as favoured the queen, and talked their pleasure, were
not stopped. Wherefore, to satisfy the blind surmises and foolish
communication of these also, who, seeing the coming of the cardinals,
cast out such lewd words, as that the king would, "for his own
pleasure," have another wife, with like unbeseeming talk; he
therefore, willing that all men should know the truth of his
proceedings, caused all his nobility, judges, and counsellors, with
divers other persons, to resort to his palace of Bridewell, the
eighth day of November, A.D. 1529, where,openly speaking in his great
chamber, he had these words in effect, as followeth: 

The king's oration to his subjects.

     "Our trusty and well-beloved subjects, both you of the
nobility, and you of the meaner sort:  it is not unknown unto you, how
that we, both by God's provision, and true and lawful inheritance,
have reigned over this realm of England almost the term of twenty
years; during which time, we have so ordered us (thanked be God!)
that no outward enemy hath oppressed you, nor taken any thing from
us, nor have we invaded any realm, but we have had victory and
honour, so that we think that neither you, nor any of your
predecessors, ever lived more quietly, more wealthily, or in more
estimation, under any of our noble progenitors. But when we remember
our mortality, and that we must die, then we think that all our
doings in our lifetime are clearly defaced, and worthy of no memory,
if we leave you in trouble at the time of our death; for if our true
heir be not known at the time of our death, see what mischief and
trouble shall succeed to you, and to your children. The experience
thereof some of you have seen after the death of our noble
grandfather, King Edward the Fourth; and some have heard what
mischief and manslaughter continued in this realm between the houses
of York and Lancaster, by which dissension this realm was like to
have been clearly destroyed.

     "And although it hath pleased Almighty God to send us a fair
daughter of a noble woman, and of me begotten, to our great comfort
and joy; yet it hath been told us, by divers great clerks, that
neither she is our lawful daughter, nor her mother our lawful wife,
but that we live together abominably and detestably in open adultery;
insomuch that when our ambassador was last in France, and motion was
made that the duke of Orleans should marry our said daughter, one of
the chief counsellors to the French king said, It were well done, to
know whether she be the king of England's lawful daughter or not; for
well known it is, that he begot her on his brother's wife, which is
directly against God's law and his precept. Think you, my lords, that
these words touch not my body and soul? Think you that these doings
do not daily and hourly trouble my conscience, and vex my spirits?
Yes, we doubt not but if it were your cause, every man would seek
remedy, when the peril of your soul and the loss of your inheritance
is openly laid unto you. For this only cause I protest before God,
and on the word of a prince, I have asked counsel of the greatest
clerks in Christendom; and for this cause I have sent for this
legate, as a man indifferent, only to know the truth, and so to
settle my conscience, and for none other cause, as God can judge. And
as touching the queen, if it be adjudged by the law of God that she
is my lawful wife, there was never thing more pleasant, or more
acceptable to me in my life, both for the discharge and clearing of
my conscience, and also for the good qualities and conditions which I
know to be in her. For I assure you all, that beside her noble
parentage of which she is descended, (as you well know,) she is a
woman of most gentleness, of most humility and buxomness, yea, and in
all good qualities appertaining to nobility, she is without
comparison, as I, these twenty years almost, have had the true
experiment; so that if I were to marry again, if the marriage might
be good, I would surely choose her above all other women. But if it
be determined by judgment, that our marriage was against God's law,
and clearly void, then shall I not only sorrow the departing from so
good a lady and loving a companion, but much more lament and bewail
my unfortunate chance, that I have so long lived in adultery, to
God's great displeasure, and have no true heir of my body to inherit
this realm. These be the sores that vex my mind, these be the pangs
that trouble my conscience, and for these griefs I seek a remedy.
Therefore I require you all, as our trust and confidence is in you,
to declare to our subjects our mind and intent, according to our true
meaning; and desire them to pray with us that the very truth may be
known, for the discharge of our conscience, and saving of our soul: 
and for the declaration hereof I have assembled you together, and now
you may depart."

     Shortly after this oration of the king, wherewith he stirred
the hearts of a number, then the two legates, being requested of the
king, for discharge of his conscience, to judge and determine upon
the cause, went to the queen lying then in the palace of Bridewell,
and declared to her, how they were deputed judges indifferent,
between the king and her, to hear and determine, whether the marriage
between them stood with God's law or not.

     When she understood the cause of their coming, being thereat
something astonied at the first, after a little pausing with herself,
thus she began, answering for herself.

     "Alas, my lords, (said she,) is it now a question whether I be
the king's lawful wife or no, when I have been married to him almost
twenty years, and in the mean season question was never made before?
Divers prelates yet being alive, and lords also, and privy
councillors with the king at that time, then adjudged our marriage
lawful and honest; and now to say it is detestable and abominable, I
think it great marvel:  and, in especial, when I consider what a wise
prince the king's father was, and also the love and natural affection
that King Ferdinand, my father, bare unto me, I think in myself, that
neither of our fathers were so uncircumspect, so unwise, and of so
small imagination, but they foresaw what might follow of our
marriage; and in especial, the king, my father, sent to the court of
Rome, and there, after long suit, with great cost and charge,
obtained a licence and dispensation, that I, being the one brother's
wife, and peradventure carnally known, might, without scruple of
conscience, marry with the other brother lawfully, which licence,
under lead, I have yet to show:  which things make me to say, and
surely believe, that our marriage was both lawful, good, and godly.

     "But of this trouble I may only thank you, my lord cardinal of
York. For because I have wondered at your high pride and vain glory,
and abhorred your voluptuous life and abominable lechery, and little
regarded your presumptuous power and tyranny, therefore, of malice
you have kindled this fire, and set this matter abroach; and, in
especial, for the great malice that you bear to my nephew the
emperor, whom I perfectly know you hate worse than a scorpion,
because he would not satisfy your ambition, and make you pope by
force:  and therefore you have said more than once, that you would
trouble him and his friends; and you have kept him true promise; for
all his wars and vexations he may only thank you. And as for me, his
poor aunt and kinswoman, what trouble you have put me to, by this
new-found doubt, God knoweth; to whom I commit my cause, according to
the truth."

     The cardinal of York excused himself, saying, That he was not
the beginner nor the mover of the doubt, and that it was sore against
his will that ever the marriage should come in question; but he said
that by his superior, the bishop of Rome, he was deputed as a judge
to hear the cause; which he sware on his profession to hear
indifferently. But whatsoever was said, she believed him not; and so
the legates took their leave of her, and departed.

     These words were spoken in French, and written by Cardinal
Campeius's secretary, who was present; and afterwards, by Edward
Hall, translated into English.

     By these premises it is sufficient to judge and understand what
the whole occasion was, that brought this marriage first into doubt,
so that there needeth not any further declaration in words upon this
matter. But this one thing will I say, if I might be bold to speak
what I think:  other men may think what they list. This I suppose,
that the stay of this marriage was taken in good time, and not
without the singular favour of God's providence. For if that one
child, coming of this aforesaid marriage, did so greatly endanger
this whole realm of England to be entangled with the Spanish nation,
that if God's mighty hand had not been betwixt, God only knoweth what
misery might have ensued; what peril then should thereby have
followed, if, in the continuance of this marriage, more issue had
sprung thereof!

     But to return again to our matter concerning the whole process
and discourse of this divorcement, briefly to comprehend in few
words, that which might be collected out of many; after this answer
was given of the queen, and her appeal made to the pope, the king, to
try out the matter by Scriptures and by learning, sent first to the
pope, then to most part of all universities, to have it decided to
the uttermost.

     In the next year ensuing, A.D. 1530, at the Black Friars' of
London was prepared a solemn place for the two legates:  who, coming
with their crosses, pillars, axes, and all other Romish ceremonies
accordingly, were set in two chairs covered with cloth of gold, and
cushions of the same. When all things were ready, then the king and
the queen were ascited by Dr. Sampson to appear before the said
legates the twenty-eighth day of May; where (the commission of the
cardinals first being read, wherein it was appointed by the court of
Rome, that they should be the hearers and judges in the cause between
them both) the king was called by name, who appeared by two proctors.
Then the queen was called, who being accompanied with four bishops,
and others of her council, and a great company of ladies, came
personally herself before the legates; who there, after her
obeisance, with a sad gravity of countenance, having not many words
with them, appealed from the legates, as judges not competent, to the
court of Rome, and so departed. Notwithstanding this appeal, the
cardinals sat weekly, and every day arguments on both sides were
brought, but nothing definitively was determined.

     As the time passed on, in the month of June, the king being
desirous to see an end of the controversy, came to the court, and the
queen came also, where he, standing under his cloth of estate,
uttered these or like words, which can best declare his own mind, and
which here I thought to notify, that they who have not the chronicles
present, may here read his mind, and the better understand the
matter.

The king's oration to the legates.

     "My lords, legates of the see apostolic, who be deputed judges
in this great and weighty matter, I most heartily beseech you to
ponder my mind and intent, which only is to have a final end for the
discharge of my conscience. For every good Christian man knoweth what
pain and what unquietness he suffereth, which have his conscience
grieved. For I assure you, on my honour, that this matter hath so
vexed my mind, and troubled my spirits, that I can scantly study any
thing which should be profitable for my realm and people:  and for to
have a quietness in body and soul is my desire and request, and not
for any grudge that I bear to her that I have married; for I dare
say, that for her womanhood, wisdom, nobility, and gentleness, never
prince had such another:  and therefore, if I would willingly change,
I were not wise. Wherefore my suit is to you, my lords, at this time,
to have a speedy end, according to right, for the quietness of my
mind and conscience only, and for no other cause, as God knoweth."

     When the king had thus said, the queen departed without saying
any thing. The queen again, on the other part, (who had before
appealed to the pope,) assisted with her councillors and doctors, who
were four bishops, that is, Warham of Canterbury, West of Ely, Fisher
of Rochester, Standish of St. Asaph, with other learned men whom the
king had licensed her to choose, was called to know whether she would
abide by her appeal, or answer there before the legates. Her proctor
answered, that she would abide by her appeal. That notwithstanding,
the councillors on both sides every day almost met, and debated this
matter substantially, so that at last the divines were all of one
opinion that the marriage was against the law of God, if she were
carnally known by the first brother, which thing she clearly denied.
But to that was answered, that Prince Arthur, her husband, confessed
the act done, by certain words spoken; which, being recorded in other
chronicles, I had rather should there be read, than by me here
uttered. Furthermore, at the time of the death of Prince Arthur, she
thought and judged that she was with child, and for that cause the
king was deferred from the title and creation of the prince of Wales
almost half a year:  which thing could not have been judged, if she
had not been carnally known.

     Also she herself caused a bull to be purchased, in which were
these words, "peradventure carnally known;" which words were not in
the first bull granted by July, at her second marriage to the king.
Which second bull, with that clause, was only purchased to dispense
with the second matrimony, although there were carnal copulation
before:  which bull needed not to have been purchased, if there had
been no carnal copulation, for then the first bull had been
sufficient.

     Moreover, for the more clear evidence of this matter, that
Prince Arthur had carnal knowledge of the said Lady Katharine his
wife, it appeareth in a certain book of records which we have to show
touching this marriage, that the same time when Prince Arthur was
first married with this Lady Katharine, daughter to King Ferdinand,
certain ambassadors of Ferdinand's council were then sent hither into
England for the said purpose, to see and to testify concerning the
full consummation of the said matrimonial conjunction; which 
councillors here resident, being solemnly sworn, not only did affirm
to both their parents, that the matrimony was consummated by that
act, but also did send over into Spain, to her father, such
demonstrations of their mutual conjunction as here I will not name,
sparing the reverence of chaste ears. Which demonstrations otherwise,
in those records being named and testified, do sufficiently put the
matter out of all doubt and question.

     Besides that, in the same records appeareth that both he and
she not only were of such years as were meet and able to explete the
consummation hereof, but also they were and did lie together both
here and in Wales, by the space of three quarters of a year.

     Thus, when the divines on her side were beaten from the ground,
then they fell to persuasions of natural reasons, how this should not
be undone for three causes. One was, because, if it should be broken,
the only child of the king should be a bastard, which were a great
mischief to the realm. Secondly, the separation should be cause of
great unkindness between her kindred and this realm. And the third
cause was, that the continuance of so long space had made the
marriage honest. These persuasions, with many others, were set forth
by the queen's council, and in especial by the bishop of Rochester,
which stood stiff in her cause. But yet God's precept was not
answered; wherefore they left that ground, and fell to pleading, that
the court of Rome had dispensed with that marriage. To this some
lawyers said, that no earthly person is able to dispense with the
positive law of God.

     When the legates heard the opinions of the divines, and saw
whereunto the end of this question would tend, forasmuch as men began
so to dispute of the authority of the court of Rome, and especially
because the cardinal of York perceived the king to cast favour to the
Lady Anne, whom he knew to be a Lutheran, they thought best to wind
themselves out of that brake betimes; and so Cardinal Campeius,
dissembling the matter, conveyed himself home to Rome again, as is
partly above touched. The king, seeing himself thus to be deferred
and deluded by the cardinals, took it to no little grief; whereupon
the fall of the cardinal of York followed not long after.

     This was A.D. 1530. Shortly after it happened, the same year,
that the king by his ambassadors was advertised, that the emperor and
the pope were both together at Bologna. Wherefore he directed Sir
Thomas Bullen, lately created earl of Wiltshire, and Dr. Stokesley,
afterwards bishop of London, and Dr. Lee, afterwards bishop of York,
with his message to the pope's court, where also the emperor was.
Pope Clement, understanding the king's case and request, and fearing
what might follow after, if learning and Scripture here should take
place against the authority of their dispensations; and moreover
doubting the emperor's displeasure, bare himself strange off from the
matter, answering the ambassadors with this delay, that he presently
would not define in the case, but would hear the full matter disputed
when he came to Rome, and according to right he would do justice.

     Although the king owed no such service to the pope, to stand to
his arbitrement either in this case, or in any other, having both the
Scripture to lead him, and his law in his own hands to warrant him,
yet, for quietness' sake, and for that he would not rashly break
order, (which rather was a disorder indeed,) he bare so long as
conveniently he might. At length, after long delays and much
dissembling, when he saw no hope of redress, he began somewhat to
quicken and to look about him, what was best both for his own
conscience, and the establishment of his realm to do.

     No man here doubteth, but that all this was wrought not by
man's device, but by the secret purpose of the Lord himself, to bring
to pass further things, as afterwards followed, which his divine
providence was disposed to work. For else, as touching the king's
intent and purpose, he never meant nor minded any such thing as to
seek the ruin of the pope, but rather sought all means contrary, how
both to establish the see of Rome, and also to obtain the good will
of the same see and court of Rome, if it might have been gotten. And
therefore, intending to sue his divorce from Rome, at the first
beginning, his device was, by Stephen Gardiner, his ambassador at
Rome, to exalt the cardinal of York, as is before showed, to be made
pope and universal bishop, to the end that he, ruling that apostolic
see, the matter of his unlawful marriage, which so troubled his
conscience, might come to a quiet conclusion, without any further
rumour of the world:  which purpose of his, if it had taken effect as
he had devised it, and the English cardinal had once been made pope,
no doubt but the authority of that see had never been exterminated
out of England. But God, being more merciful unto us, took a better
way than so; for both without and contrary to the king's expectation,
he so brought to pass, that neither the cardinal of York was pope,
(which should have been an infinite cost to the king,) and yet
nevertheless the king sped for his purpose too, and that much better
than he looked for. For he was rid, by lawful divorcement, not only
from that unlawful marriage which clogged his conscience, but also
from the miserable yoke of the pope's usurped dominion, which clogged
the whole realm; and all at one time.

     Thus God's holy providence ruling the matter, as I said, when
the king could get no favourable grant of the pope touching his
cause, being so good and honest, he was forced to take the redress of
his right into his own hands, and seeing this Gordian knot would not
be loosed at Rome, he was driven against his will, as God would, to
play the noble Alexander himself, and with the sword of his princely
authority knapped the knot at one stroke clean asunder, loosing, as
it were, with one solution infinite questions. For where the doctors
and canonists had long disputed, and yet could never thoroughly
discuss the largeness and fulness of the pope's two swords, both
temporal and spiritual; the king, with one sword, did so cut off both
his swords, that he despatched them both clean out of England, as ye
shall see more anon. But first the king, like a prudent prince,
before he would come to the head of the sore, thought best to pare
away such rank flesh and putrefied places as were about it; and
therefore, following his own proverb, like as one going about to cast
down an old rotten wall, will not begin with the foundation first,
but with the stones that lie at the top, so he, to prepare his way
better unto the pope, first began with the cardinal, casting him, by
the law of præmunire, out of his goods and possessions:  and so at
length, by poisoning himself, he procured his own death; which was
A.D. 1530.

     This done, shortly after, about the year 1532, the king, to
provide betimes against mischiefs that might come from Rome, gave
forth eftsoons this proclamation, touching the abolishing of the
pope, and establishing of the king's supremacy; the tenor whereof
here followeth: 

     "The king's Highness straitly chargeth and commandeth, that no
manner of person, what estate, degree, or condition soever he or they
be of, do purchase, or attempt to purchase, from the court of Rome,
or elsewhere, or use and put in execution, divulge or publish any
thing heretofore, within this year past purchased, or to be purchased
hereafter,containing matter prejudicial to the high authority,
jurisdiction, and prerogative royal of this his said realm, or to the
let, hinderance, or impeachment of his Grace's noble and virtuous
intended purposes in the premises, upon pain of incurring his
Highness's indignation, and imprisonment and further punishment of
their bodies for their so doing, at his Grace's pleasure, to the
dreadful example of all others."

     It chanced about the same time, or a little before, that the
king, taking more heart unto him, partly encouraged by the treatise
afore mentioned, called "The Supplication of Beggars," which he had
diligently read and perused, and partly provoked by the pride and
stoutness of the clergy, brake off with the cardinal, caused him to
be attainted in the præmunire, and afterwards also to he apprehended.

     After this was done, the king, then proceeding further, caused
the rest of the spiritual lords to be called by process into the
king's bench to make their appearance, forasmuch as the whole clergy
of England, in supporting and maintaining the power legantine of the
cardinal, by the reason thereof were all entangled likewise in the
præmunire, and therefore were called into the king's bench to answer.
But before the day of their appearance, the prelates together in
their convocation concluded among themselves a humble submission in
writing, and offered the king for a subsidy or contribution, that he
would be their good lord, and release them of their præmunire by act
of parliament, first to be gathered in the province of Canterbury a
hundred thousand pounds; and in the province of York, eighteen
thousand eight hundred and forty pounds and ten pence:  the which
offer with much labour was accepted, and their pardon promised. In
this submission the clergy called the king supreme head of the church
of England, which thing they never confessed before; whereupon many
things followed, as after (God willing) ye shall hear.

     But first, forasmuch as we are in hand now with the matter, we
will borrow by the way a few words of the reader, to speak of this
clergy-money, of one hundred and eighteen thousand eight hundred and
forty pounds and ten pence, to be levied to the king, as is above
touched. For the levying of which sum an order was taken among the
prelates, that every bishop in his diocese should call before him all
the priests, parsons, and vicars, among whom Dr. Stokesley, bishop of
London, a man then counted to be of some wit and learning, but of
little discretion and humanity, (which caused him to be out of the
favour of the common people,) called before him all the priests
within the city of London, whether they were curates or
stipendiaries, the first day of September, being Friday, in the
chapter-house of St. Paul; at which day the priests appeared, and the
bishop's policy was to have only six or eight priests together, and
by persuasions to have caused them to grant some portion towards the
payment of the aforesaid hundred thousand pounds. But the number of
the priests was so great, (for they were six hundred at least, and
with them came many temporal men to hear the matter,) that the bishop
was disappointed of his purpose; for when the bishop's officers
called in certain priests by name into the chapter-house, with that a
great number entered, for they put aside the bishop's officers that
kept the door.

     After this the officers got the door shut again. Then the
priests without said, "We will not be kept without, and our fellows
be within:  we know not what the bishop will do with them." The
temporal men, being present, comforted and encouraged the priests to
enter, so that by force they opened the door, and one struck the
bishop's officer over the face, and entered the chapter-house, and
many temporal men with them; and long it was ere any silence could be
made. At last, when they were appeased, the bishop stood up and said,
"Brethren! I marvel not a little why you be so heady, and know not
what shall be said to you; therefore I pray you to keep silence, and
to hear me patiently. My friends all, you know well that we be men
frail of condition, and no angels; and by frailty and lack of wisdom
we have misdemeaned ourselves towards the king, our sovereign lord,
and his laws, so that all we of the clergy were in the præmunire; by
reason whereof, all our promotions, lands, goods, and chattels, were
to him forfeit, and our bodies ready to be imprisoned:  yet his Grace,
moved with pity and compassion, demanded of us what we could say, why
he should not extend his laws upon us. Then the fathers of the clergy
humbly besought his Grace of mercy:  to whom he answered, that he was
ever inclined to mercy. Then, for all our great offences we had
little penance; for where he might, by the rigour of his law, have
taken all our livelihood, goods, and chattels, he was contented with
one hundred thousand pounds, to be paid in five years. And although
this sum be more than we may easily bear, yet by the rigour of his
laws we should have borne the whole burden. Wherefore, my brethren! I
charitably exhort you to bear your parts of your livelihood and
salary, toward the payment of this sum granted."

     Then it was shortly said to the bishop,

     "My Lord! twenty nobles a year is but bare living for a priest;
for now victuals and every thing are so dear, that poverty in a
manner enforceth us to say nay. Besides that, my Lord, we never
offended in the præmunire; for we never meddled with the cardinal's
faculties:  let the bishops and abbots who have offended pay."

     Then the bishop's officers gave to the priests high words,
which caused them to be the more obstinate. Also divers temporal men
who were present comforted the priests, and bade them agree to no
payment. In this rumour divers of the bishop's servants were buffeted
and stricken, so that the bishop began to be afraid, and with fair
words appeased the noise; and for all things which were done or said
there he pardoned them, and gave to them his blessing, and prayed
them to depart in charity. Then they departed, thinking to hear no
more of the matter, but they were deceived; for the bishop went to
Sir Thomas More, then being lord chancellor, (who greatly favoured
the bishop and the clergy,) and to him made a grievous complaint, and
declared the fact very grievously. Whereupon commandment was sent to
Sir Thomas Pargitor, mayor of the city, to attach certain priests and
temporal men:  and so fifteen priests and five temporal men were
arrested; of the which some were sent to the Tower, some to the Fleet
and other prisons, where they remained long after.

     This being done A.D. 1532, it followeth moreover the same year,
that divers preachings were in the realm, one contrary to another,
concerning the king's marriage,; and in especial one Thomas Abel,
clerk, which was the queen's chaplain, to please her withal, both
preached, and also wrote a book, in defence of the said marriage;
whereby divers simple men were persuaded. Wherefore the king caused
to be compiled and reduced into a book the determination of the
universities, with the judgments of great clerks; which book being
printed and set abroad, did again satisfy all indifferent and
reasonable persons, which were not too much wedded to their wills.

     Mention was made a little before, of a parliament begun the
fifteenth day of January, A.D. 1533, in the which parliament the
commons had put up a supplication, complaining of the strait dealing
of the clergy in their proceeding ex officio. This complaint,
although at first it seemed not to be greatly tendered of the king,
yet in prorogation of the parliament the time so wrought withal, that
the king, having more clear understanding of the abuses and
enormities of the clergy, and, in especial, of the corrupt authority
of the see of Rome, provided certain acts against the same.

     "First, as concerning the laws, decrees, ordinances, and
constitutions made and established by the pretended authority of the
bishops of Rome, to the advancement of their worldly glory, that
whoso did or spake any thing either against their usurped power, or
against the said laws, decrees, or constitutions of theirs, not
approved nor grounded upon Holy Scripture, or else being repugnant to
the king's prerogative royal, should therefore stand in no danger,
nor be impeachable of heresy. And likewise touching such
constitutions, ordinances, and canons provincial or synodal, which
were made in this realm in the convocation of bishops, being either
prejudicial to the king's prerogative, or not ratified before by the
king's assent, or being otherwise onerous to the king and his
subjects, or in any wise repugnant to the laws and statutes of this
realm, they were committed to the examination and judgment of thirty-
two persons chosen by the king out of the higher and lower house, to
be determined either to stand in strength, or to be abrogated at
their discretions:  and further, that all the clergy of this realm,
submitting themselves to the king, should and did promise never
hereafter to presume to assemble in their convocations without the
king's writ, or to enact or execute such constitutions without his
royal assent, &e.

     Further, in the same parliament was enacted and decreed, that
in causes and matters happening in contention, no person should
appeal, provoke, or sue, out of the king's dominions to the court of
Rome, under pain of provisors, provision, or præmunire.

     Item, In the same parliament was defined and concluded, that
all exportation of annates and first-fruits of archbishoprics and
bishoprics out of this realm to the see of Rome, for any bulls,
breves, or palls, or expedition of any such thing, should utterly
cease.

     Also, for the investing of archbishops, bishops, or other of
any ecclesiastical dignity, such order in the said parliament was
taken, that the king should send a licence under the great seal, with
a letter missive, to the prior and convent, or to the dean and
chapter of those cathedral churches where the see was vacant, by the
virtue of which licence or letters missive, they, within twelve days,
should choose the said person nominated by the king, and no other;
and that election to stand effectual to all intents:  which election
being done, then the party elect to make first his oath and fealty to
the king, if it were a bishop that was elect; then the king, by his
letters patent, to signify the said election to the archbishop of
that province, and two other bishops, or else to four bishops within
this realm to be assigned to that office, without any other suing,
procuring, or obtaining any bulls, breves, or other things from the
see of Rome.

     Moreover, against all other whatsoever intolerable exactions
and great sums of money used to be paid out of this realm to the
bishop of Rome, in pensions, censures, Peter-pence, procurations,
fruits, suits for provisions, and expeditions of bulls for
archbishops and bishops, for delegacies and rescripts in causes of
contentions and appeals, jurisdictions legative; also for
dispensations, licences, faculties, grants, relaxations, writs called
perinde valere, rehabilitations, abolitions, canonizations, and other
infinite sorts of bulls, breves, and instruments of sundry natures,
the number whereof were tedious particularly to be recited:  in the
said parliament it was ordained, that all such uncharitable
usurpations, exactions, pensions, censures, portions, and Peter-
pence, wont to be paid to the see of Rome, should utterly surcease,
and never more to be levied; so that the king, with his honourable
council, should have power and authority from time to time, for the
ordering, redress, and reformation of all manner of indulgences,
privileges, &c., within this realm.

     Where is to be noted by the way, as touching these Peter-pence
aforesaid, that the same were first brought in and imposed by King
Ina, about A.D. 720; which Ina, king of the West Saxons, caused
through all his dominion, in every house having a chimney, a penny to
be collected and paid to the bishop of Rome in the name of St. Peter;
and thereof were they called Peter-pence. The same likewise did Offa,
king of Mercians, after him, about A.D. 794. And these Peter-pence
ever since, or for the most part, have used of a long custom to be
gathered and summoned by the pope's collectors here in England, from
the time of Ina aforesaid, to this present parliament, A.D. 1533.

     Finally, by the authority of the parliament it was consulted
and considered concerning the legality of the lawful succession unto
the crown, in ratifying and enabling the heirs of the king's body,
and Queen Anne. In the which parliament, moreover, the degrees of
marriage plainly and clearly were explained and set forth, such as be
expressly prohibited by God's laws, as in this table may appear.

A table of degrees prohibited, by Gods law, to marry.

The son not to marry the mother, nor step-mother.
The brother not to marry the sister.
The father not to marry his son's daughter, nor his daughter's
daughter.
The son not to marry his father's daughter, gotten by his step-
mother.
The son not to marry his aunt, being either his father's or his
mother's sister.
The son not to marry his uncle's wife.
The father not to marry his son's wife.
The brother not to marry his brother's wife.
No man to marry his wife's daughter.
No man to marry his wife's son's daughter.
No man to marry his wife's daughter's daughter. No man to marry his
wife's sister.
All these degrees be prohibited by the Scripture.

     All these things thus being defined and determined in this
aforesaid parliament, and it also being in the same parliament
concluded, that no man, of what estate, degree, or condition soever,
hath any power to dispense with God's laws; it was therefore, by the
authority aforesaid, agreeing with the authority of God's word,
assented that the marriage aforetime solemnized between the king and
the Lady Katharine, being before wife to Prince Arthur the king's
brother, and carnally known by him, (as is above proved,) should be
absolutely deemed and adjudged to be unlawful and against the law of
God, and also reputed and taken to be of no value or effect; and that
the separation thereof by Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury,
should stand good and effectual to all intents; and also that the
lawful matrimony between the king and the Lady Anne his wife, should
be established, approved, and ratified for good and consonant to the
laws of Almighty God. And further, also, for the establishing of this
king's lawful succession, it was fully by the said parliament
adjudged, that the inheritance of the crown should remain to the
heirs of their two bodies, that is, of the king, and Queen Anne his
wife.

     During the time of this parliament, before the marriage of
Queen Anne, there was one Temse in the commons house, who moved the
commons to sue to the king to take the queen again into his company;
declaring certain great mischiefs like to ensue thereof, as in
bastardizing the Lady Mary, the king's only child, and divers other
inconveniences. This being reported to the king's ears, he sent
immediately to Sir Thomas Audley, speaker then of the parliament,
expressing unto him, amongst other matters, that he marvelled much
why one of the parliament did so openly speak of the absence of the
queen from him; which matter was not to be determined there, for it
touched (said he) his soul; and he wished the matrimony were good,
for then had he never been so vexed in conscience. But the doctors of
universities (said he) have determined the marriage to be void, and
detestable before God; which grudge of conscience (he said) caused
him to abstain from her company, and no foolish or wanton appetite.
"For I am," said he, "forty-one years old, at which age the lust of
man is not so quick as it is in youth. And, saving in Spain and
Portugal,it hath not been seen, that one man hath married two
sisters, the one being carnally known before:  but the brother to
marry the brother's wife, was so abhorred amongst all nations, that I
never heard that any Christian so did, but myself. Wherefore you see
my conscience troubled, and so I pray you report." And so the
speaker, departing, declared to the commons the king's saying.

     It was touched, a little before, how that the pope had lost
great part of his authority and jurisdiction in this realm of
England; now it followeth to infer, how, and by what occasion, his
whole power and authority began utterly to be abolished, by the
reason and occasion of the most virtuous and noble lady, Anne Bullen,
who was not as yet married to the king, howbeit in great favour:  by
whose godly means and most virtuous counsel the king's mind was daily
inclined better and better. Insomuch that, not long after, the king,
belike perceiving the minds of the clergy not much favouring his
cause, sent for the speaker again, and twelve of the commons house,
having with him eight lords, and said to them, "Well-beloved
subjects! we had thought the clergy of our realm had been our
subjects wholly, but now we have well perceived that they be but half
our subjects, yea, and scarce our subjects. For all the prelates at
their consecration make an oath to the pope, clean contrary to the
oath that they make unto us, so that they seem to be his subjects,
and not ours." And so the king, delivering to them the copy of both
the oaths, required them to invent some order that he might not thus
be deluded of his spiritual subjects. The speaker thus departed, and
caused the oaths to be read in the commons house, the very tenor
whereof here ensueth.

The oath of the clergy to the pope.

     "I, John, bishop or abbot of A., from this hour forward shall
be faithful and obedient to St. Peter, and to the holy Church of
Rome, and to my lord the pope and his successors canonically
entering. I shall not be of counsel or consent, that they shall lose
either life or member, or shall be taken or suffer any violence, or
any wrong by any means. Their counsel to me credited by them, their
messengers or letters, I shall not willingly discover to any person.
The papacy of Rome, the rulers of the holy fathers, and regalities of
St. Peter, I shall help and retain, and defend against all men. The
legate of the see apos- tolic, going and coming, I shall honourably
entreat. The rights, honours, privileges, and authorities of the
Church of Rome, and of the pope and his successors, I shall cause to
he conserved, defended, augmented, and promoted; I shall not be in
counsel, treaty, or any act, in which any thing shall be imagined
against him or the Church of Rome, their rights, estates, honours, or
powers:  and if I know any such to be moved or compassed, I shall
resist it to my power; and as soon as I can, I shall advertise him,
or such as may give him knowledge. The rules of the holy fathers, the
decrees, ordinances, sentences, dispositions, reservations,
provisions, and commandments apostolic, to my power I shall keep, and
cause to be kept of others. Heretics, schismatics, and rebels to our
holy father and his successors, I shall resist and persecute to my
power; I shall come to the synod when I am called, except I be letted
by a canonical impediment. The lights of the apostles I shall visit
personally, or by my deputy. I shall not alienate or sell my
possessions without the pope's council. So God me help, and the holy 
evangelists."

     This oath of the clergymen, which they were wont to make to the
bishop of Rome, (now Pope Quondam,) was abolished and made void by
statute, and a new oath ministered and confirmed for the same,
wherein they acknowledged the king to be the supreme head, under
Christ, in this Church of England, as by tenor thereof may appear
hereunder ensuing.

The oath of the clergy to the king.

     "I, John B., of A., utterly renounce, and clearly forsake, all
such clauses, words, sentences, and grants, which I have or shall
have hereafter of the pope's Holiness, of and for the bishopric of
A., that in any wise have been, are, or hereafter may be, hurtful or
prejudicial to your Highness, your heirs, successors, dignity,
privilege, or estate royal:  and also I do swear that I shall be
faithful and true, and faith and truth I shall bear, to you my
sovereign lord, and to your heirs, kings of the same, of life and
limb, and earthly worship above all creatures, to live and die with
you and yours against all people:  and diligently I shall be attendant
to all your needs and business, after my wit and power:  and your
counsel I shall keep and hold, acknowledging myself to hold my
bishopric of you only, beseeching you of restitution of the
temporalties of the same; promising (as before) that I shall be a
faithful, true, and obedient subject unto your said Highness, heirs,
and successors, during my life:  and the services and other things due
to your Highness, for the restitution of the temporalties of the same
bishopric, I shall truly do, and obediently perform. So God me help,
and all saints."

     These oaths thus being recited and opened to the people, were
the occasion that the pope lost all his interest and jurisdiction
here in England within a short while after. Upon the occasion and
reason whereof, the matter falling out more and more against the
pope, Sir Thomas More, of whom mention is made before, being a great
maintainer of the pope, and a heavy troubler of Christ's people, and
now not liking well of this oath, by God's good work was enforced to
resign up his chancellorship, and to deliver up the great seal of
England into the king's hands. After whom succeeded Sir Thomas
Audley, keeper of the great seal, a man in eloquence and gifts of
tongue no less incomparable, than also for his godly-disposed mind;
and for his favourable inclination to Christ's religion, worthy of
much commendation.

     These things being done in the parliament, the king, within 
short time after, proceeded to the marriage of the aforesaid Lady
Anne Bullen, mother to our most noble queen now, who, without all
controversy, was a special comforter and aider of all the professors
of Christ's gospel, as well of the learned as the unlearned; her life
being also directed according to the same, as her weekly alms did
manifestly declare; who, besides the ordinary of a hundred crowns,
and other apparel that she gave weekly, a year before she was
crowned, both to men and women, gave also wonderfully much privy alms
to widows and other poor householders, continually, till she was
apprehended; and she ever gave three or four pounds at a time to the
poor people, to buy them kine withal, and sent her sub-almoner to the
towns about where she lay, that the parishioners should make a bill
of all the poor householders in their parish; and some towns received
seven, eight, or ten pounds to buy kine withal, according as the
number of the poor in the towns were. She also maintained many
learned men at Cambridge. Likewise did the earl of Wiltshire, her
father, and the Lord Rochford, her brother, and by them these men
were brought in favour with the king; of whom some are yet alive, and
can testify the same; would to God that they were now as great
professors of the gospel of Christ, as then they appeared to be; who
were Dr. Heath and Dr. Thirlby; with whom was joined the Lord Paget,
who, at that present, was an earnest protestant, and gave unto one
Raynold West, Luther's books, and other books of the Germans, as
Francis. Lambert. De Sectis; and at that time he read Melancthon's
Rhetoric openly in Trinity-hall, in Cambridge, and was with his
Master Gardiner, a maintainer of Dr. Barnes, and all the protestants
that were then in Cambridge, and helped many religious persons out of
their cowls.

     It hath been reported unto us by divers credible persons which
were about this queen, and daily acquainted with her doings,
concerning her liberal and bountiful distribution to the poor, how
her Grace carried ever about her a certain little purse, out of the
which she was wont daily to scatter abroad some alms to the needy,
thinking no day well spent wherein some man had not fared the better
by some benefit at her hands. And this I write by the relation of
certain noble personages which were the chief and principal of her
waiting maids about her, specially the duchess of Richmond by name.

     Also concerning the order of her ladies and gentlewomen about
her, one that was her silk woman, a gentlewoman not now alive, but of
great credit, and also of fame for her worthy doings, did credibly
report, that in all her time she never saw better order among the
ladies and gentlewomen of the court, than was in this good queen's
days, who kept her maids and such as were about her so occupied in
sewing and working of shirts and smocks for the poor, that neither
was there seen any idleness then among them, nor any leisure to
follow such pastimes as daily are seen now-a-days to reign in
princes' courts.

     Thus the king, been divorced from the lady dowager, his
brother's wife, married this gracious lady, making a prosperous and
happy change for us, being divorced from the aforesaid princess, and
also from the pope, both at one time. Notwithstanding, as good and
godly purposes are never without some incommodity or trouble
following, so it happened in this divorcement, that the said
princess, procuring from Rome the pope's curse, caused both the king
and the realm to be interdicted, whereof more is hereafter to be
spoken.

     In the mean time, Queen Anne, shortly after her marriage, being
great with child, the next year following, which was 1533, after the
first divorcement publicly proclaimed, was crowned with high
solemnity at Westminster; and not long, after her coronation, the
seventh day of September, she was brought to bed, and delivered of a
fair lady; for whose good deliverance Te Deum was sung in all places,
and great preparation made for the christening.

     The mayor and his brethren, with forty of the chief citizens,
were commanded to be present, with all the nobles and gentlemen. The
king's palace, and all the walls between that and the Friars, were
hanged with arras, as was the Friars' church. Also the font was of
silver, and stood in the midst of the church, three steps high, which
was covered with a fine cloth, and divers gentlemen, with aprons and
towels about their necks, gave attendance about it. Over the font
hung a fair canopy of crimson satin, fringed with gold. About it was
a rail covered with say. Between the quire and the body of the church
was a close place with a pan of fire to make the child ready in.
These things thus ordered, the child was brought into the hall, and
then every man set forward. First the citizens, two and two:  then,
the gentlemen, esquires, and chaplains:  next after followed the
aldermen, and the mayor alone. Next the mayor followed the king's
council:  then the king's chappel:  then barons, bishops, and earls.
Then came the earl of Essex, bearing the covered basons, gilt. After
him the marquis of Exeter, with the taper of virgin-wax. Next him the
marquis of Dorset, bearing the salt. Behind him the Lady Mary of
Norfolk, bearing the chrism, which was very rich of pearl and stone.
The old duchess of Norfolk bare the child in a mantle of purple
velvet, with a long train furred with ermine. The duke of Norfolk,
with his marshal-rod, went on the right hand of the said duchess, and
the duke of Suffolk on the left hand. Before them went the officers
of arms. The countess of Kent bare the long train of the child's
mantle. Between the countess and the child went the earl of Wiltshire
on the right hand, and the earl of Derby on the left hand, supporting
the said train. In the midst, over the child, was borne a canopy by
the Lord Rochford, the Lord Hussey, the Lord William Howard, and the
Lord Thomas Howard the elder. In this order they came unto the church 
door, where the bishop of London met it, with divers abbots and
bishops, and began the observances of the sacrament. The archbishop
of Canterbury was godfather, and the old duchess of Norfolk, and the
old marchioness of Dorset, widows, were godmothers, and the child was
named Elizabeth.

     After all things were done at the church door, the child was
brought to the font, and christened. This done, Garter, the chief
king-at-arms, cried aloud, "God, of his infinite goodness, send
prosperous life and long, to the high and mighty princess of England,
ELIZABETH." Then the trumpets blew, and the child was brought up to
the altar, and immediately confirmed by the archbishop, the
marchioness of Exeter being godmother. Then the archbishop of
Canterbury gave the princess a standing cup of gold. The duchess of
Norfolk gave her a standing cup of gold, fretted with pearl. The
marchioness of Dorset gave three gilt bowls, pounced, with a cover.
The marchioness of Exeter, three standing bowls, gilt, and graven,
with a cover. And so, after a solemn banquet, ended with hypocras,
wafers, and such like, in great plenty, they returned in like order
again unto the court with the princess; and so departed

     At the marriage of this noble lady, as there was no small joy
unto all good and godly men, and no less hope of prosperous success
to God's true religion, so in like manner, on the contrary part, the
papists wanted not their malicious and secret attempts, as by the
false hypocrisy and feigned holiness of a false feigned hypocrite,
this year being espied and found out, may sufficiently appear what
their devilish devices and purposes were. For certain monks, friars,
and other evil-disposed persons, of a devilish intent, had put into
the heads of many of the king's subjects, that they had a revelation
of God and his saints, that he was highly displeased with King Henry
for the divorcement of the Lady Katharine; and surmised, among other
things, that God had revealed to a nun, named Elizabeth Barton, whom
they called The holy maid of Kent, that in case the king proceeded in
the said divorce, be should not be king of this realm one month
after, and in the reputation of God, not one day nor hour. This
Elizabeth Barton, by false dissimulation, practised and showed to the
people marvellous alteration of her visage and other parts of her
body, as if she had been rapt, or in a trance; and in those feigned
trances, by false hypocrisy, (as though she had been inspired of
God,) she spake many words in rebuking of sin, and reproving the
gospel, which she called heresy; and among them uttered divers things
to the great reproach of the king and queen, and to the establishing
of idolatry, pilgrimage, and the derogation of God's glory:  which her
naughtiness being espied out by the great labour and diligence of the
archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Cromwell, and Master Hugh Latimer,
she was condemned and put to death, with certain of her affinity and
counsel, in the month of April, A.D. 1533. The names of which
conspirators with her were these:  Edward Bocking, monk, of
Canterbury; Richard Master, parson, of Aldington; John Dering, monk,
of Canterbury; Hugh Rich, friar, warden of the Grey Friars, of
Canterbury; Richard Risby; Henry Gold, bachelor of divinity, and
parson of Aldermary; Fisher, bishop of Rochester; John Adeson,
priest, his chaplain; Thomas Laurence, the bishop's registrar, of
Canterbury; Edward Thwaits; Thomas Abel:  of which persons, the said
Elizabeth Barton, Henry Gold, Richard Master, Edward Bocking, John
Dering, Hugh Rich, Richard Risby, were attainted of treason by act of
parliament, and put to execution.

     The residue, as Fisher bishop of Rochester, Thomas Gold, Thomas
Laurence, Edward Thwaits, John Adeson, Thomas Abel, being convicted
and attainted of misprision, were condemned to prison, and forfeited
their goods and possessions to the king.

     Edward Hall, a writer of our English stories, making mention of
this Elizabeth Barton aforesaid, adjoineth next in his book the
narration of one Pavier, or Pavy, a notorious enemy, no doubt, to
God's truth. This Pavier, being the town-clerk of the city of London,
was a man (saith he) that in no case could abide to hear that the
gospel should be in English:  insomuch that the said Hall himself
heard him once say unto him, and to others by swearing a great oath,
that if he thought the king's Highness would set forth the Scripture
in English, and let it be read of the people by his authority, rather
than he would so long live, he would cut his own throat. But he broke
promise, saith Hall; for he did not cut his throat with a knife, but
with a halter did hang himself. Of what mind and intent he so did,
God judge. My information further addeth this, touching the said
Pavier or Pavy, that he was a bitter enemy, very busy at the burning
of Richard Bainham above mentioned; who, hearing the said Bainham at
the stake speaking against purgatory and transubstantiation, "Set
fire," said he, "to this heretic, and burn him." And as the train of
gunpowder came toward the martyr, he lifted up his eyes and hands to
heaven, saying to Pavier, "God forgive thee, and show thee more mercy
than thou dost to me. The Lord forgive Sir Thomas More, and pray for
me, all good people;" and so continued he praying, till the fire took
his bowels and his head, &c.

     After Bainham's martyrdom, the next year following, this
Pavier, the town-clerk of the city, went and bought ropes. Which 
done, he went up to a high garret in his house to pray, as he was
wont to do, to a rood which he had there, before which he bitterly
wept:  and as his own maid; coming up, found him so doing, he bade her
take the rusty sword, and go make it clean, and trouble him no more
and immediately he tied up the rope, and hung himself. The maid's
heart still throbbed, and so came up, and found him but newly hanged.
Then, having no power to help him, she ran crying to the church to
her mistress to fetch her home. His servants and clerks he had sent
out before to Finsbury, and to Master Edney, serjeant to the lord
mayor, dwelling over Bishop's-gate, to tarry for him at Finsbury-
court till he came:  but he had despatched himself before, so that
they might long look for him before he could come. This was A.D.
1533.

     To this story of Pavier may also be added the like terrible
example of Doctor Foxford, chancellor to the bishop of London, a
cruel persecutor, and a common butcher of the good saints of God; who
was the condemner of all those afore named, who were put to death,
troubled, or abjured under Bishop Stokesley, through all the diocese
of London. This Foxford died about this present year and time; of
whose terrible end it was then certainly reported and affirmed, by
such as were of right good credit, unto certain persons, of whom some
be yet alive, that he died suddenly sitting in his chair, his belly
being burst, and his entrails falling out before him.

     About the same time died William Warham, archbishop of
Canterbury; in whose room succeeded Thomas Cranmer, which was the
king's chaplain, and a great disputer against the unlawful marriage
of the Lady Katharine, princess dowager; being then so called by act
of parliament.

     Ye heard before, how the parliament had enacted that no person,
after a certain day, should appeal to Rome for any cause: 
notwithstanding which act, the queen, now called princess dowager,
had appealed to the court of Rome before that act made; so that it
was doubted whether that appeal was good or not. This question was
well handled in the parliament house, but much better in the
convocation house; and yet in both houses it was alleged, yea, and by
books showed, that in the councils of Chalcedon, Africa, Toledo, and
divers other famous councils in the primitive church, yea, in the
time of St. Augustine, it was affirmed, declared, and determined,
that a cause arising in one province, should be determined in the
same, and that neither the patriarch of Constantinople should meddle
in causes moved into the jurisdiction of the patriarch of Antioch,
nor any bishop should intermeddle within another's province or
country. Which things were so clerkly opened, and so cunningly set
forth to all intents, that every man that had wit, and was determined
to follow the truth, and not wilfully wedded to his own mind, might
plainly see, that all appeals made to Rome were clearly void, and of
none effect:  which doctrines and counsels were showed to the Lady
Katharine, princess dowager; but she (as women love to lose no
dignity) ever continued in her old song, trusting more to the pope's
partiality, than to the determination of Christ's verity.

     Whereupon the archbishop of Canterbury, Cranmer above named,
accompanied with the bishops of London, Winchester, Bath, Lincoln,
and divers other great clerks in a great number, rode to Dunstable,
which is six miles from Ampthill, where the princess dowager lay and
there, by a doctor, called Dr. Lee, she was ascited to appear before
the said archbishop, in cause of matrimony, in the said town of
Dunstable. And at the day of appearance she would not appear, but
made default, and so was called peremptorily, every day, fifteen days
together; and at last, for lack of appearance, and for contumacy, by
the assent of all the learned men there being present, she was
divorced from the king, and their marriage declared to be void and of
none effect; which sentence given, the archbishop and all the others
returned back again.

     Here note, that although this divorce following after the new
marriage needed not at all to be made, the first marriage being no
marriage at all before God, yet, to satisfy the voice of the people,
more than for any necessity, the king was contented, through the
persuasions of some, so to do. For else, as touching God and
conscience, what great need was there of any divorce, where before
God no marriage was to be accounted, but rather an incestuous and
detestable adultery, as the act of parliament doth term it? But to
our matter again.

     After the dissolution of this first marriage made between the
king and the lady princess dowager, she nevertheless, bearing a stout
mind, would not yet relent, neither to the determination of the
universities, nor to the censure of the clergy, nor of the whole
realm; but, following the counsel rather of a few Spaniards, to
molest the king and the realm by suit and means made to the pope,
procured certain writings, first of monition and aggravation, then of
excommunication and interdiction, to be sent down from Rome, wherein
the pope had interdicted both the king and the whole realm. But the
pope's curser being not the hardiest man, belike, that ever showed
his head, thought it much more sure for him to discharge his popish
carriage without the king's reach; and so, keeping himself aloof off,
(like a pretty man,) set up his writings in the town of Dunkirk in
Flanders:  in which town first, upon the north door of the church was
set up a monition, that the king of England should surcease the suit
of divorce; which John Butler, clerk, then commissary of Calais, by
commandment, took down in the night.

     After that, before Whitsun-week, there was set up in the same
place an excommunication, aggravation, reaggravation, and
interdiction; for which also the said Butler, by commandment, was
sent to Dunkirk, to take it down. And because the council of Calais
would be certified of his diligence therein, they sent a servant of
the Lord Lisle, then deputy of Calais, whose name was Cranvel; and
upon Wednesday in Whitsun-week, at seven o'clock in the morning, he
took it down whole, and brought it with him, and delivered the same
to the lord deputy aforesaid:  which was about the year 1533.

     This being known and certified unto the king, he was motioned
by his council, that such as were about her, and moved her thereunto,
should be put from her. And therefore the duke of Suffolk was sent to
Bugden, beside Huntingdon, where the said Lady Katharine lay; who,
perceiving her stomach to continue froward still, in answering him
with high words, and suddenly so in a fury to part from him into her
privy chamber, and shut the door, brake up the order of her court,
and discharged a great sort of her household servants; and yet left
her a convenient number to serve her like a princess. They that
remained still, were sworn to serve her as princess only, and not as
queen; of whom some said, they were once sworn to serve her as queen,
and otherwise would not serve; and so were dismissed. The others who
were sworn to serve her as princess, she utterly refused for her
servants, and so she remained with the fewer, living after this about
the space of two years.

     And thus much hast thou, good reader, touching the king's
divorcement; by occasion whereof it pleased God so to work, through
his secret and unsearchable wisdom, that the pope, who so long had
played rex in England, lost his whole jurisdiction and supremacy.

The abolishing of the pope out of England.
  THESE things thus finished and despatched
concerning the marriage of Queen Anne, and divorce of Lady Katharine,
dowager, next followeth the year 1534; in the which was assembled the
high court of parliament again, after many prorogations, upon the
third day of February; wherein was made an act of succession, for the
more surety of the crown, to the which every person being of lawful
age should be sworn. During this parliament time, every Sunday
preached at Paul's Cross a bishop, which declared the pope not to be
head of the church.

     After this, commissions were sent over all England, to take the
oath of all men and women to the act of succession; at which few
repined, except Pr. John Fisher, bishop of Rochester; Sir Thomas
More, late lord chancellor; and Dr. Nicholas Wilson, parson of St.
Thomas the Apostle's in London. Wherefore these three persons, after
long exhortation to them made by the bishop of Canterbury at Lambeth,
refusing to be sworn, were sent to the Tower, where they remained,
and were oftentimes motioned to be sworn. But the bishop and Sir
Thomas More excused them by their writings, in which they said that
they had written before that the said Lady Katharine was queen, and
therefore could not well go from that which they had written.
Likewise the doctor excused, that he in preaching had called her
queen, and therefore now could not well unsay it again. Howbeit, at
length, he was well contented to dissemble the matter, and so
escaped:  but the other two stood against all the realm in their
opinion.

     From the month of March this parliament furthermore was
prorogued to the third day of November abovesaid; at what time,
amongst divers other statutes, most graciously, and by the blessed
will of God it was enacted, that the pope, and all his college of
cardinals, with his pardons and indulgences, which so long had
clogged this realm of England, to the miserable slaughter of so many
good men, and which never could be removed away before, were now
abolished, eradicated, and exploded out of this land, and sent home
again to their own country of Rome, from whence they came. God be
everlastingly praised therefore, Amen!



182. ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE POPE'S SUPREMACY

The book of Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, "De vera Obedientia."

     You have heard before of Stephen Gardiner, of Lee, of Tonstal,
and of Stokesley, how of their voluntary mind they made their
profession unto the king, every one severally taking and accepting a
corporal oath, utterly and for ever to renounce and reject the
usurped superiority of the bishop of Rome. Now, for a further
testimony and declaration of their judgments and opinions which then
they were of, following the force both of truth and of time then
present, ye shall hear, over and besides their oaths, what the
aforesaid bishops in their own books, prologues, and sermons, do
write, and publish abroad in print, touching the said cause of the
pope's supremacy.

     And first, God willing, to begin with Stephen Gardiner's book,
"De vera Obedientia," we will briefly note out a few of his own
words, wherein, with great Scripture proofs and good deliberation, he
not only confuteth the pope's usurped authority, but also proveth the
marriage between the king and Queen Katharine, his brother's wife,
not to be good nor lawful, in these words: 

     "Of the which moral precepts in the old law, to speak of some,
(for to rehearse all it needs not,) the Levitical precepts touching
forbidden and incestuous marriages, as far as they concern chaste and
pure wedlock, wherein the original of man's increase consisteth, are
always to be reputed of such sort, that although they were first
given to the Jews, yet because they appertain to the law of nature,
and expound the same more plainly to us, therefore they belong as
well to all manner of people of the whole world for evermore. In
which doubtless both the voice of nature and God's commandment
agreeing in one, have forbidden that which is contrary and diverse
from the one and from the other. And amongst these, since there is
commandment that a man shall not marry his brother's wife, what could
the king's excellent Majesty do, otherwise than he did, by the whole
consent of the people, and judgment of his church; that is, to be
divorced from unlawful marriage, and use lawful and permitted
copulation? and obeying (as meet it was) conformably unto the
commandment, cast off her, whom neither law nor right permitted him
to retain, and take him to chaste and lawful marriage? Wherein
although the sentence of God's word (whereunto all things ought to
stoop) might have sufficed, yet his Majesty was content to have the
assisting consents of the most notable grave men, and the censures of
the most famous universities of the whole world; and all to the
intent that men should see he did both what he might do, and ought to
do, uprightly; seeing the best learned and most worthy men have
subscribed unto it; showing therein such obedience as God's word
requireth of every good and godly man; so it may be said, that both
he obeyed God, and obeyed him truly:  of which obedience, forasmuch as
I am purposed to speak, I could not pass this thing over with
silence, whereof occasion so commodiously was offered me to speak."

     Moreover, the said Gardiner, in the before-named book "De vera
Obedientia," what constancy he pretendeth, what arguments he
inferreth, how earnestly and pithily he disputeth on the king's side,
against the usurped state of the bishop of Rome's authority, by the
words of his book it may appear:  whereof a brief collection here
followeth.

Reasons of Gardiner, bishop-of Winchester, against the pope's
supremacy.

     In the process of his aforesaid book, he, alleging the old
distinction of the papists, wherein they give to the prince the
regiment of things temporal, and to the church that of things
spiritual, comparing the one to the greater light, the other to the
lesser light, he confuteth and derideth the same distinction,
declaring the sword of the church to extend no further than to
teaching and excommunication, and referreth all preeminence to the
sword of the prince; alleging for this the second Psalm:  And now, you
kings, be wise, and be learned, ye that judge the earth, &c.

     Also the example of Solomon, who, being a king according to his
father's appointment, ordained the offices of the priests in their
ministries, and Levites in their order, that they might give thanks,
andminister before the priests, after the order of every day, and
porters in their divisions, gate by gate. And speaking more of the
said Solomon, he saith, "For so commanded the man of God; neither did
the priests nor Levites omit anything of all that he had commanded,"
&c.

     Beside this, he allegeth also the example of King Hezekiah. He
allegeth moreover the example and fact of Justinian, which made laws
touching the faith, bishops, clerks, heretics, and such others.

     Aaron (saith he) obeyed Moses:  Solomon gave sentence upon
Abiathar the high priest.

     Alexander the king, in the Maccabees, writeth thus to Jonathan: 
Now we have made thee this day the high priest of thy people, &c. So
did Demetrius to Simon.

     Then, coming to the words of Christ spoken to Peter, Thou art
Peter, &c., upon which words the pope pretendeth to build all his
authority:  to this he answereth, that if Christ, by those words, had
limited to Peter any such special state or pre-eminency above all
princes, then were it not true that is written, Jesus began to teach
and to do; forasmuch as the words of Christ should then be contrary
to his own facts and example, who, in all his life, never either
usurped to himself any such domination above princes, (showing
himself rather subject unto princes,) nor yet did ever permit in his
apostles any such example of ambition to be seen; but rather rebuked
them for seeking any manner of priority amongst them.

     And where he reasoneth of the king's style and title, being
called king of England and of France, defender of the faith, lord of
Ireland, and supreme head in earth of the Church of England
immediately under Christ, &c., thus he addeth his mind and censure,
saying, that he seeth no cause in this title, why any man should be
offended, that the king is called head of the Church of England,
rather than of the realm of England; and addeth his reason thereunto,
saying, "If the prince and king of England be the head of his
kingdom, that is, of all Englishmen that be his subjects, is there
any cause why the same English subjects should not be subject to the
same head likewise in this respect, because they are Christians; that
is to say, for the title of godliness? as though that God, who is the
cause of all obedience, should now be the cause of rebellion?"

     At length thus he concludeth with an exclamation saying, "To
say," saith he, "that a king is the head of the kingdom, and not of
the church, what an absurd and a foolish saying is this!"

     And further, adding further for example the sub jection of the
servant and wife:  "If the servant, saith he, "be subject to his
master, or wife to her husband, being infidels, doth their conversion
afterwards, or the name of Christians, make them less subjects than
they were before? As religion therefore doth not alter the authority
of the master over the servant, nor of the husband over the wife; no
more," saith he, "doth it between the prince and subject.

     "Paul, making no exception or distinction of subjection, save
only of that which belonged to God, willeth all men to obey their
princes; and what princes? Those princes which bear the sword. And
although we are bound by the Scripture to obey our bishops and
spiritual pastors of the church, yet that obedience diminisheth
nothing the chief and head authority that ought to be given to the
prince, no more than the obedience of the servant to his master, or
of the wife to her husband, exempteth them from subjection due to
their superior powers."

     And herewithal he inferreth a principle of the law:  "Divers
jurisdictions," saith he, "proceeding from one person, do not mar nor
hinder themselves, but rather do confirm and fortify one another."

     Again, whereas the bishop of Rome, under the name of Peter,
doth appropriate to himself the highest place in the church, for that
he is the successor of Peter; thereunto he answereth in one word, but
in that one word he answereth enough, and to the full:  "I would,"
saith he, "he were; for so in very deed he might well exceed and pass
all kings and princes, if not in pre-eminency of dignity, yet in
admiration and excellency of virtue:  in which kind of superiority the
Lord Christ would his apostles and ministers to go before all kings
and emperors in the whole world."

     After this, in prosecuting the argument of Peter's confession,
he argueth thus, and saith, that as flesh and blood did not reveal to
Peter that confession, so neither was that prerogative given to the
flesh and blood of Peter, but to the better part, that is, to the
spirit of Peter; which is to mean in respect of the spiritual
confession of Peter, and not in respect of any carnal place or
person, &c.

     Item, If the scholar ought not to be above the master, how then
could either Peter take that upon him, which Christ his Master so
constantly did refuse; or how can the bishop of Rome now claim that
by succession, whereof no example is to be found either in the head,
or his predecessor before him? for so we read in Eusebius, both of
Peter, James, and John, that they did arrogate no such primacy unto
them, but were content that James, surnamed Justus, should be the
bishop of the apostles.

     And as for the name and signification of the word primacy, if
it be taken for the nomination, or the first place given, so he
granteth that Peter had the preferment of the first name and place in
the order of the apostles, But it followeth not, that with this
primacy he had also a kingdom given. And though he were bid of the
Lord to confirm his brethren, yet was he not bid to exercise an
empery upon his brethren:  for so were they not his brethren, but his
subjects.

     That Peter was first or chief in the number of those who
confessed Christ, it is not to be denied; for first he confessed,
first he taught the Jews, first he stood in defence of the verity,
and was the first and chief prolocutor among them. But yet that
maketh not, that he should therefore arrogate a general primacy and
rule over all other states and authorities of the world; no more than
Apelles, because he is noted the first and chief of all painters,
therefore ought to bear rule over all painters:  or because the
university of Paris is nominated for the first and chief of other
universities, shall therefore the French king, and all other princes
in their public administration, wherein they are set of God, become
subjects and underlings to that university?

     Thus, after many other reasons and persuasions contained in
said book De Obedientia, (for I do but superficially skim over the
top only of his probations and arguments,) finally, in the end of his
probation, he concludeth the whole sum of his mind in this effect;
first, denying that the bishop of Rome had ever any such extern
jurisdiction assigned to him absolutely from God, to reign over kings
and princes:  for the peroration whereof he hath alleged sufficiently,
as he saith, the examples and doings of Christ himself, which ought
to be to us all a sufficient document.

     As concerning the term of "primacy," albeit it be used
sometimes by the fathers, yet the matter, being well considered and
rightly expounded, maketh nothing for the large dominion of the
bishop of Rome, which now he doth usurp.

     Also as for the prerogatives granted unto Peter, by the which
prerogatives our Saviour would crown his own gifts given unto him,
crowning not the flesh and blood of Peter, but the marvellous
testimony of his confession, all this maketh nothing for the pope's
purpose.

     Likewise as concerning the local succession of Peter, the pope
hath nothing thereby to claim. If he will be successor of Peter, he
must succeed him in faith, doctrine, and conditions, and in so doing,
he neither will seek, nor yet shall need to seek, for honour, but
shall be honoured of all good men, according as a good man should be;
and that much more than he, being a good man, would require.

     And thus Stephen Winchester, taking his leave, and bidding the
pope farewell, endeth with a friendly exhortation, willing him to be
wise and circumspect, and not to strive stubbornly against the truth.
"The light of the gospel," saith he, "so spreadeth his beams in all
men's eyes, that the works of the gospel be known, the mysteries of
Christ's doctrine are opened; both learned and unlearned, men and
women, being Englishmen born, do see and perceive, that they have
nothing to do with Rome, or with the bishop of Rome, but that every
prince, in his own dominion, is to be taken and accepted as a vicar
of God, and vicegerent of Christ in his own bounds." And therefore,
seeing this order is taken of God, and one in the church should bear
the office of teaching, another should bear the office of ruling,
(which office is only limited to princes,) he exhorteth him to
consider the truth, and to follow the same, wherein consisteth our
true and special obedience, &c.

     To this book of Stephen Winchester, De Obedientia, we will
adjoin, for good fellowship, the Preface also of Edmund Bonner,
archdeacon then of Leicester, prefixed before the same; to the intent
that the reader, seeing the judgments of these men as they were then,
and again the sudden mutation afterwards of the said parties to the
contrary opinion, may learn thereby what vain-glory and pomp of this
world can work in the frail nature of man, where God's grace lacketh
to sustain. The Preface of Bonner, before the said book of
Winchester, De Obedientia, proceedeth thus in effect, as followeth: 

     "Forasmuch as some there be, no doubt, (as the judgments of men
be always variable,) which think the controversy which is between the
king's royal Majesty and the bishop of Rome consisteth in this point,
for that his Majesty hath taken the most excellent and most virtuous
Lady Anne to wife, which in very deed is far otherwise, and nothing
so:  to the intent, therefore, that all true hearty favourers of the 
gospel of Christ, who hate not, but love the truth, may the more
fully understand the chief point of the controversy, and because they
shall not be ignorant what is the whole voice and resolute
determination of the best and greatest learned bishops, with all the
nobles and commons of England, not only in that cause of matrimony,
but also in defending the doctrine of the gospel; here shall be
published the oration of the bishop of Winchester, (a man excellently
learned in all kinds of learning,) entitled, De Vera Obedientia that
is, Concerning True Obedience. But as touching this bishop's worthy
praises, there shall be nothing spoken of me at this time, not only
because they are infinite, but because they are far better known to
all Christendom, than becometh me here to make rehearsal.

     And as for the oration itself, (which as it is most learned, so
is it most elegant,) to what purpose should I make any words of it,
seeing it praiseth itself enough, and seeing good wine needeth no 
tavern-bush to utter it? But yet in this oration, whosoever thou art,
most gentle reader! thou shalt, besides other matters, see it notably
and learnedly, handled, of what importance, and how invincible, the
power and excellency of God's truth is, which as it may now and then
be pressed of the enemies, so it cannot possibly be oppressed and
darkened after such' sort, but it showeth itself again at length more
glorious and more welcome. Thou shalt see also touching obedience,
that it is subject to truth, and what is to be judged true obedience.
Besides this, of men's traditions, which for the most part he most
repugnant against the truth of God's law. And there, by the way, he
speaketh of the king's said Highness's marriage, which, by the ripe
judgment, authority, and privilege of the most and principal
universities of the world, and then with the consent of the whole
church of England, he contracted with the most excellent and most
noble lady, Queen Anne. After that, touching the king's Majesty's
title, as pertaining to the supreme head of the church of England.
Last of all, of the false pretended supremacy, of the bishop of Rome
in the realm of England most justly abrogated:  and how all other
bishops, being fellow-like to him in their function, yea, and in some
points above him within their own provinces, were beforetime bound to
the king by their oath.

     "But be thou most surely persuaded of this, good reader! that
the bishop of Rome, if there were no cause else but only this
marriage, would easily content himself, especially having some good
morsel or other given him to chew upon. But when he seeth so mighty a
king, being a right virtuous and a great learned prince, so sincerely
and so heartily favour the gospel of Christ, and perceiveth the
yearly and great prey, (yea, so large a prey, that it came to as much
almost as all the king's revenues,) snapped out of his hands, and
that he can no longer exercise his tyranny in the king's Majesty's
realm, (alas, heretofore too cruel and bitter,) nor make laws, as he
hath done many, to the contumely and reproach of the majesty of God,
which is evident that he hath done in time past, under the title of
the catholic church, and the authority of Peter and Paul, (when
notwithstanding he was a very ravening wolf, dressed in sheep's
clothing, calling himself the servant of servants,) to the great
damage of the Christian commonwealth -- here, here began all the
mischief; hereof rose these discords, these deadly malices, and so
great and terrible bustling:  for if it were not thus, could any man
believe that this Jupiter of Olympus (who falsely hath arrogated unto
himself an absolute power without controlment) would have wrought so
diligently, by all means possible, to stir up all other kings and
princes so traitorously against this so good and godly, and so true a
gospel-like prince, as he hath done? Neither let it move thee, gentle
reader! that Winchester did not before now apply to this opinion:  for
he himself, in this oration, showeth the cause why he did it not. And
if he had said never a word, yet thou knowest well what a witty part
it is for a man to suspend his judgment, and not to be too rash in
giving of sentence. It is an old-said saw; "Mary Magdalene profited
us less in her quick belief that Christ was risen, than Thomas that
was longer in doubt." A man may rightly call him Fabius, that with
his advised taking of leisure restored the matter. Albeit I speak not
this as though Winchester had not bolted out this matter secretly
with himself beforehand (for he without doubt tried it out long ago);
but that, running fair and softly, he would first, with his painful
study, pluck the matter out of the dark, (although of itself it was
clear enough, but by reason of sundry opinions it was lapped up in
darkness,) and then did he debate it wittily to and fro; and so, at
last, after long and great deliberation had in the matter, because
there is no better counsellor than leisure and time, he would
resolutely, with his learned and consummate judgment, confirm it.

     "Thou shouldst, gentle reader, esteem his censure and authority
to be of more weighty credence, inasmuch as the matter was not
rashly, and at all adventures, but with judgment (as thou seest) and
with wisdom examined and discussed. And this is no new example, to be
against the tyranny of the bishop of Rome, seeing that not only this
man, but many men oftentimes, yea, and right great learned men afore
now, have done the same even in writing; whereby they both painted
him out in his right colours, and made his sleights, falsehood,
frauds, and deceitful wiles, openly known to the world. Therefore, if
thou at any time heretofore have doubted either of true obedience, or
of the king's Majesty's marriage or title, or else of the bishop of
Rome's false pretended supremacy, as, if thou hadst a good smelling
nose, and a sound judgment, I think thou didst not; yet, having read
this oration, (which, if thou favour the truth, and hate the tyranny
of the bishop of Rome, and his Satanical, fraudulent falsehood, shall
doubtless wonderfully content thee,) forsake thine error, and
acknowledge the truth now freely offered thee at length, considering
with thyself, that it is better late so to do, than never to repent.

     "Fare thou heartily well, most gentle reader; and not only love
this most valiant king of England and of France, who undoubtedly was
by the providence of God born to defend the gospel, but also honour
him and serve him most obediently. As for this Winchester, who was
long ago, without doubt, reputed among the greatest learned men, give
him thy good word, with highest commendation."
The end of Bishop Bonner's prologue.


     What man reading and advising this book of Winchester, De Vera
Obedientia, with Bonner's Preface before the same, would ever have
thought any alteration could so work in man's heart, to make these
men thus to turn the cat in the pan, as they say, and to start so
suddenly from the truth so manifestly known, so pithily proved, so
vehemently defended, and (as it seemed) so faithfully subscribed? If
they dissembled all this that they wrote, subscribed, and sware unto,
what perjury most execrable was it before God and man! If they meant
good faith, and spake then as they thought, what pestilent blindness
is this so suddenly fallen upon them, to make that false now, which
was true before; or that to be now true, which before was false! Thus
to say and unsay, and then to say again, to do and undo, and, as a
man would say, to play fast or loose with truth; truly a man may say
is not the doing of a man which is in any case to be trusted,
whatsoever he doth or saith. But here a man may see what man is of
himself, when God's good humble Spirit lacketh to be his guide.

     Furthermore, to add unto them the judgment also and arguments
of Tonstal, bishop of Durham, let us see how he agreeth with them, or
rather much exceedeth them, in his sermon made before King Henry upon
Palm Sunday, remaining yet in print; in the which sermon, disputing
against the wrongful supremacy of the bishop of Rome, he proveth by
manifest grounds most effectuously, both out of the Scripture,
ancient doctors, and of councils; not only that the bishop of Rome
hath no such authority by the word of God committed to him, as he
doth challenge; but also, in requiring and challenging the same, he
reproveth and condemneth him with great zeal and ardent spirit, to be
a proud Lucifer; disobedient to the ordinary powers of God set over
him; contrary to Christ and Peter:  and finally, in raising up war
against us for the same, he therefore rebuketh and defieth him, as a
most detestable sower of discord, and a murderer of Christian men.

Notes on Tonstal's sermon against the pope's supremacy.

     First, by the Scripture, he reasoneth thus, and proveth, that
all good men ought to obey the authorities and governors of the
world, as emperors, kings, and princes of all sorts, what name soever
the said supreme powers do bear or use for their countries in which
they be; for so St. Peter doth plainly teach us, saying, Be ye
subject to every human creature for God's cause, whether it be king,
as chief head, or dukes or governors, &c. So that St. Peter, in; his
Epistle, commandeth all worldly princes in their office to be obeyed
as the ministers of God, by all Christian men:  and according unto the
same, St. Paul saith, Let every living man be subject to the high
powers:  for the high powers be of God, and whosoever resisteth the
high powers, resisteth the ordinance of God, and purchaseth thereby
to himself damnation.

     And in the same place of Tonstal it followeth:  And lest men
should forget their duty of obedience to their princes, it is thrice
repeated, that they be the ministers of God, whose place in their
governance they represent:  so that unto them all men must obey,
apostles, patriarchs, primates, archbishops, bishops, priests, and
all of the clergy, &c. "And therefore," saith he, "the bishop of Rome
oweth to his sovereign and superior like subjection by the word of
God, taught unto us by Peter and Paul, as other bishops do to their
princes, under whom they be."

     Also, another express commandment we have of Christ, who, upon
the occasion of his disciples striving for superiority, discusseth
the matter, saying on this wise, The kings of the people and nations
have dominion over them, and those that have power over them be
called gracious lords; but so it shall not be amongst you:  but
whosoever amongst you is the greater, shall be as the younger; and
whosoever amongst you shall be chief, shall be as a servant and a
minister, &c.

     And again, Christ speaking to Pilate of his kingdom, declareth
that his kingdom is not of this world, and "therefore," saith
Tonstal, "those that go about to make of Christ's spiritual kingdom a
worldly kingdom, do fall into the error of some heretics, that look
that Christ, after the day of judgment, shall reign with all his
saints here in the earth carnally in Jerusalem; as the Jews do
believe that Messias is yet to come, and when he shall come, he shall
reign worldly in Jerusalem."

     By these and such other places it may well appear, that Christ,
neither before his incarnation, (as Tonstal saith,) nor after his
incarnation, did ever alter the authority of worldly kings and
princes, but by his own word commanded them still to be obeyed of
their subjects, as they had been in the ancient time before, &c. And
for example of the same, he allegeth first the example of Christ
himself, who, being asked of the Jews, whether they should give
tribute to Cæsar, or no, he bade them give to Cæsar those things that
be his, and to God those things that be his; signifying, that tribute
was due to Cæsar, and that their souls were due to God.

     Also in the seventeenth of Matthew, it appeareth that Christ
bade Peter pay tribute for him and his disciples, when it was
demanded of him. And why? Because he would not change the order of
obeisance to worldly princes due by their subjects, &c.

     Another example of Christ he citeth out of John vi., where,
after Christ had fed five thousand and more, with a few loaves, and
fewer fishes, and that the Jews would have taken him, and made him
their king, he fled from them, and would not consent unto them:  "For
the kingdom," saith he, "that he came to set in earth, was not a
worldly and temporal kingdom, but a heavenly and spiritual kingdom;"
that is, to reign spiritually, by grace and faith, in the hearts of
all Christian and faithful people, of what degree or of what nation
soever they be, and to turn all people and nations which at his
coming were carnal and lived after the lusts of the flesh, to be
spiritual, and to live after the lusts of the Spirit, that Christ,
with his Father of heaven, might reign in the hearts of all men, &c.

     And here, in these examples of Christ's humility, further is to
be noted, how Christ the Son of God did submit himself not only to
the rulers and powers of this world, but also dejected himself, and
in a manner became servant to his own apostles:  so far off was he
from all ambitious and pompous seeking of worldly honour. For so it
appeared in him, not only by washing the feet of his apostles, but
also the same time, a little before his passion, when the apostles
fell at contention among themselves, who among them should be
superior, he, setting before them the example of his own subjection,
asketh this question:  Who is superior; he that sitteth at the table,
or he that serveth at the table? Is not he superior that sitteth? but
I am amongst you as he that ministereth and serveth, &c.

     The like examples Tonstal also inferreth of Peter's humility.
For where we read in the Acts, how the centurion, a nobleman of great
age, did prostrate himself upon the ground at the feet of Peter; then
Peter, not suffering that, eftsoons took him up, and bade him rise,
saying, I am also a man as thou art.

     So likewise did the angel, to whom when John would have fallen
down to have adored him who showed him those visions, the angel said
unto him, See thou do not so; for I am the servant of God, as thou
art, &c.

     Again, in the aforesaid Peter, what an example of reverent
humility is to be seen in this, that notwithstanding he, with other
apostles, had his commission to go over all the world, yet
nevertheless he, being at Joppa, and sent for by Cornelius, durst not
go unto him without the vision of a sheet let down from heaven; by
which vision he was admonished not to refuse the Gentiles:  or else he
knew in himself no such primacy over all people and places given unto
him, nor any such commission so large above the others, &c.

     Furthermore, the said Peter, being rebuked of Paul his fellow
brother, took no scorn thereof, but was content, submitting himself
to due correction.

     But here, saith Tonstal, steppeth in the bishop of Rome, and
saith that Peter had authority given him above all the residue of the
apostles, and allegeth the words of Christ spoken to him, Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and will give to
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven:  and whatsoever thou shalt
bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven. "This said Christ," saith
the pope, "and St. Peter is buried at Rome, whose successor I am, and
ought to rule the church, as Peter did, and to be porter of heaven
gates, as Peter was," &c. "And Christ said also to Peter, after his
resurrection, Feed my sheep; which he spake to him only, so that
thereby he had authority over all that be of Christ's flock; and I,
as his successor, have the same. And therefore whoso will not obey
me, king or prince, I will curse him, and deprive him of his kingdom
or seigniory:  for all power is given to me that Christ hath, and I am
his vicar-general, as Peter was here in earth over all, and none but
I, as Christ is in heaven."

     This ambitious and pompous objection (saith Tonstal) of the
pope and his adherents, hath of late years much troubled the world,
and made dissension, debate, and open war in all parts of
Christendom, and all by a wrong interpretation of the Scripture; who,
if he would take those places after the right sense of them, as both
the apostles themselves taught us, and all the ancient best learned
interpreters do expound them, the matter were soon at a point. But
otherwise, since they pervert the Scriptures, and preach another
gospel in that point to us, than ever the apostles preached, we have
therein a gene- ral rule to follow:  That though an angel came from
heaven, and would tell us such new exposition of those places as are
now made, to turn the words which were spoken for spiritual authority
of preaching the word of God, and ministering of the sacraments, to a
worldly authority, we ought to reject him:  as St. Paul willeth us in
Galatians i.

     To open therefore the true sense of the Scripture in the places
aforesaid, and first to begin with Matthew xvi., here is to be
observed, that the question being put in general of Christ to all his
apostles, what they thought or judged of him, Peter, answering for
them all, (as he was always ready to answer,) said, Thou art Christ, 
the Son of the living God. To whom Jesus answered again, Blessed be
thou, Simon the son of Jonah, for flesh and blood hath not revealed
this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven:  and I say unto
thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. That is to say, Upon
this rock of thy confession of me to be the Son of God, I will build
my church; for this faith containeth the whole summary of our faith
and salvation, as it is written in Rom. x.:  The word of faith that we
do preach is at hand, in thy mouth and in thy heart. For if thou
confess with thy mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and with thy heart do
believe that God raised him from death to life, thou shalt be saved,
&c. And this confession being first uttered by the mouth of Peter,
upon the same confession of his, and not upon the person of Peter,
Christ buildeth his church, as Chrysostom expoundeth that place in
the twenty-sixth sermon, of the feast of Pentecost, saying, Not upon
the person of Peter, but upon the faith, Christ hath builded his
church. And what is the faith? This:  Thou art Christ, the Son of the
living God. What is to say, Upon this rock? That is, Upon this
confession of Peter, &c. And with this saying of Chrysostom all
ancient expositors, (saith Tonstal,) treating of that place, do
agree; for if we should expound that place, that the church is build-
ed upon the person of Peter, we should put another foundation of the
church than Christ; which is directly against St. Paul, saying, No
man may put any other foundation, but that which is put already,
which is Christ Jesus, &c.

     And because Peter was the first of all the apostles that
confessed this, That Christ is the Son of God, by the which faith all
men must be saved; thereof cometh the primacy; that is, the first
place or standing of Peter in the number of all the apostles.

     And as Peter was the first of them that confessed Christ to be
the Son of God, so was he most ardent in his faith, most bold and
hardy in Christ, as appeared by his coming out of the ship in the
great tempest:  and also most vehement in his Master's cause, as
appeared by drawing out his sword:  and afterwards the Lord's
resurrection is declared in the Acts, where the Jews, withstanding
the apostles preaching the faith of Christ, Peter, as most ardent in
faith, was ever most ready to defend the faith against the impugners
thereof, speaking for them all unto the people, &c.; and therefore
hath these honourable names given him by the ancient interpreters,
that sometimes he is called the mouth of the apostles; the chief of
the apostles; sometimes the prince of the apostles, sometimes the
president of the whole church, and sometimes hath the name of primacy
or priority attributed unto him. And yet that the said Peter,
notwithstanding these honourable names given to him, should not have
a rule, or a judicial power, above all the other apostles, it is
plain by St. Paul and many others.

     First, St. Paul plainly declareth the same, saying, that as the
apostleship of the circumcision, that is, of the Jews, was given by
Christ to Peter; so, was the apostleship of the Gentiles given to me
among the Gentiles. Hereby it appeareth that Paul knew no primacy of
Peter concerning people and places, but among the Jews. And thereof
St. Ambrose, expounding that place, saith thus, The primacy of the
Jews was given chiefly to Peter, albeit James and John were joined
with him; as the primacy of the Gentiles was given to Paul, albeit
Barnabas was joined with him:  so that Peter had no rule over all.

     Also in Acts x., when Peter was sent for to Cornelius, a
Gentile, he durst not go to him without a special vision given him
from heaven by the Lord.

     Item, That all the apostles had like dignity and authority, it
appeareth by St. Paul, where he saith, Now ye are not strangers, nor
foreigners, but ye be citizens with the saints, and of the household
of Almighty God, builded, saith he, upon the foundations of the
apostles and the prophets, Christ being the corner-stone; upon whom
every edifice being builded, groweth up to an holy temple in our
Lord, &c. Here he saith that they be builded not upon the foundation
of Peter only, but upon the foundation of the apostles:  so that all
they be in the foundation set upon Christ the very rock, whereupon
standeth the whole church.

     In the Apocalypse also, the new city, and the heavenly
Jerusalem of Almighty God, is described by the Holy Ghost, not with
one foundation only of Peter, but with twelve foundations, after the
number of the apostles.

     St. Cyprian giveth record likewise to the same, that the
apostles had equal power and dignity given to them by Christ; and
because all should preach one thing, therefore the beginning thereof
first came by one, which was Peter, who confessed for them all, that
Christ was the Son of the living God. Saying further, that in the
church there is one office of all the bishops, whereof every man hath
a part allowedwholly unto him. Now, if the bishop of Rome may meddle
over all, where he will, then every man hath not wholly his part, for
the bishop of Rome may also meddle in his part jointly with him; so
that now he hath it not wholly:  which is against Cyprian.

     St. Augustine likewise, expounding the Gospel of John, in the
fiftieth Treatise, speaketh there of the keys of Peter, which he
saith were given of Christ to Peter, not for himself alone, but for
the whole church.

     Cyril, expounding the last chapter of John, and there speaking
of the words of Christ spoken unto Peter, Feed my sheep, &c., thus
understandeth the same:  That because Peter had thrice denied Christ,
whereby he thought himself he had lost his apostleship, Christ, to
comfort him again, and to restore him to his office that he had lost,
asked him thrice whether be loved him; and so restored him again to
his office, which else he durst not have presumed unto; saying unto
him, Feed my sheep, &c.; with which exposition the ancient holy
expositors of that place do likewise agree. So that by these words of
feeding Christ's sheep, the bishop of Rome can take no advantage to
maintain his universal pastoralty over all Christian dominions.

     Again, whereas the bishop of Rome saith that Peter, by these
words of Christ spoken to him, hath a pre-eminency above the others,
St. Paul proveth the contrary, where he, speaking to the bishops
assembled at Miletus, saith to them, Take heed to yourselves, and to
all your flock, in which the Holy Ghost hath put you to govern, &c.

     And Peter himself likewise saith, Ye that be priests, feed the
flock of God among you, &c. So that by these scriptures conferred
together, it may appear, that neither Matthew xvi., nor John xxi., do
prove that Peter had power, authority, or dignity given him of Christ
over all the others, that they should be under him. And yet,
notwithstanding his primacy, in that he, first of all the apostles,
confessed Christ to be the Son of the living God, (with which
confession all the other apostles did consent, and also preached the
same,) standeth still; which confession first by Peter made, all
others that will be saved must follow also, and be taught to confess
the same. And thus the bishop of Rome's power over all, which he
would prove by those places wrongfully alleged for his purpose,
utterly quaileth, and is not proved. And thus much for the Scriptures
and doctors.

     Now, further proceeding in this matter, the said Tonstal cometh
to councils, and examples of the primitive church, as followeth: 

     Faustinus, legate to the bishop of Rome, in the sixth council
of Carthage, alleged that the bishop of Rome ought to have the
ordering of all great matters, in all places, by his supreme
authority, bringing no Scripture for him (for at that time no
Scripture was thought to make for it); but alleged for him, and that
untruly, that the first council of Nice made for his purpose. After
this, when the book was brought forth, and no such article found in
it, but the contrary, yet the council at that time sent to
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, where the patriarchal sees
were, to have the true copy of the council of Nice, which was sent
unto them. And another copy also was sent from Rome, whither also
they sent for the same purpose.

     After that the copy was brought to them, and no such article
found in it, but in the fifth chapter thereof the contrary, that all
causes ecclesiastical should either be determined with the diocese,
or else, if any were aggrieved, then to appeal to the council
provincial, and there the matter to take full end, so that for no
such causes men should go out of their provinces; the whole council
of Carthage wrote to Celestine, at that time being bishop of Rome,
that since the council of Nice had no such article in it, as was
untruly alleged by Faustinus, but the contrary, they desired him to
abstain hereafter to make any more such demand; denouncing unto him,
that they would not suffer any cause, great or small, to be brought
by appeal out of their country; and thereupon made a law, that no man
should appeal out of the country of Africa, upon pain to be denounced
accursed. Wherewith the bishop of Rome ever after held him content,
and made no more business with them, seeing he had nought to say for
himself to the contrary. And at this council St. Augustine was
present, and subscribed his hand. Read more hereof before.

     It was determined also, in the sixth article of the said
council of Nice, that in the Orient the bishop of Antioch should be
chief; in Egypt the bishop of Alexandria; about Rome the bishop of
Rome; and likewise in other countries the metropolitans should have
their pre-eminence:  so that the bishop of Rome never had meddling in
those countries. And in the next article . following, the bishop of
Jerusalem (which city before had been destroyed, and almost desolate)
was restored to his old prerogative, to be the chief in Palestine and
in the country of Jewry.

     By this ye see how the patriarch of Rome, during all this time
of the primitive church, had no such primacy pre-eminent above other
patriarchs, much less over kings and emperors, as may appear by
Agatho, bishop of Rome, long after that, in whose time was the sixth
council general; which Agatho, after his election, sent to the
emperor, then being at Constantinople, to have his election allowed,
before he would be consecrated, after the old custom at the time
used.

     In like sort, another bishop of Rome, called Vitalianus, did
the same, as it is written in the decrees; distinct. 63. Cap. Agatho.
The like did St. Ambrose and St. Gregory before them, as it is
written in the chapter Cum longe, in the same Distinction, During all
this time the bishops of Rome followed well the doctrine of St. Peter
and St. Paul, left unto them, to be subjects, and to obey their
princes.

     Thus, after that Bishop Tonstal, playing the earnest Lutheran,
both by Scriptures and ancient doctors, also by examples sufficient
of the primitive church, hath proved and declared, how the bishops of
Rome ought to submit themselves to the higher powers whom God hath
appointed every creature in this world to obey; now let us likewise
see how the said Bishop Tonstal describeth unto us the bi- shop of
Rome's disobedience intolerable, his pride incomparable, and his
malignant malice most execrable.

     And first, speaking of the disobedience of Adam and Eve, then
of the pride of Nebuchadnezzar, and of Lucifer, at length he
compareth the bishops of Rome to them all; who first, for
disobedience, refuse to obey God's commandment, and, contrary to his
word, will be above their governors, in refusing to obey them.

     Secondly, Besides this rebellious disobedience in these bishops
of Rome, not sufferable, their pride moreover so far exceedeth all
measure, that they will have their princes, to whom they owe
subjection, prostrate upon the ground, to adore them by godly honour
upon the earth; and to kiss their feet, as if they were God, whereas
they be but wretched men; and yet they look that their princes should
do it unto them, and also that all other Christian men, owing them no
subjection, should do the same.

     And who be these, I pray you, that men may know them? Surely
(saith he) the bishops of Rome be those whom I do mean, who,
following the pride of Lucifer their father, make themselves fellows
to God, and do exalt their seat above the stars of God and do ascend
above the clouds, and will be like to Almighty God. By stars of God
be meant the angels of heaven; for as stars do show unto us in part
the light of heaven, so do angels, sent unto men, show the heavenly
light of the grace of God to those to whom they be sent. And the
clouds signified in the Old Testament the prophets, and in the New do
signify the apostles and preachers of the word of God; for as the
clouds do conceive and gather in the sky moisture, which they after
pour down upon the ground, to make it thereby more fruitful, so the
prophets in the Old Testament, and the apostles and preachers in the
New, do pour into our ears the moisture of their heavenly doctrine of
the word of God, to make therewith, by grace, our souls, being sear
and dry, to bring forth fruit of the Spirit. Thus do all ancient
expositors, and amongst them St. Augustine, interpret to be meant in
Scripture stars and clouds, in the exposition of Psalm cxlvii.

     But St. John the evangelist writeth in the nineteenth chapter
of the Apocalypse, and in the twenty-second also, that when he would
have fallen down at the angel's foot, that did show him those visions
there written, to have adored him with godly worship, the angel said
unto him, See thou do not so, for I am the servant of God, as thou
art:  give adoration and godly worship to God, and not to me. Here it
appeareth that the bishops of Rome, suffering all men prostrate
before them to kiss their feet, (yea, the same princes, to whom they
owe subjection,) do climb up above the stars and angels too, offering
their feet to be kissed, with shoes and all. For so I saw myself,
being present four and thirty years ago, when Julius, then bishop of
Rome, stood on his feet, and one of his chamberlains held up his
skirt, because it stood not (as he thought) with his dignity that he
should do it himself, that his shoe might appear, whilst a nobleman
of great age did prostrate himself upon the ground, and kissed his
shoe; which he stately suffered to be done, as of duty. Where
methinks I saw Cornelius the centurion, captain of the Italian band,
spoken of in Acts x., submitting himself to Peter, and much honouring
him; but I saw not Peter there to take him up, and to bid him rise,
saying, I am a man as thou art, as St. Peter did say to Cornelius:  so
that the bishops of Rome, admitting such adoration due unto God, do
climb above the heavenly clouds; that is to say, above the apostles
sent into the world by Christ, to water the earthly and carnal hearts
of men, by their heavenly doctrine of the word of God.

     Thus Bishop Tonstal, having described the passing pride of the
pope, surmounting like Lucifer above bishops, apostles, angels, and
stars of heaven, proceeding then further to the latter end of his
sermon, cometh to speak of his rage and malice most furious and
pestilent, in that he, being justly put from his kingdom here to
wreak his spiteful malice, stirreth up war against us, and bloweth
the horn of mischief in giving our land for a spoil and prey to all,
whosoever, at his setting on, will come and invade us. But let us
hear his own words, preaching to the king and all Englishmen,
touching both the pope's malice, and the treason of Cardinal Pole.

     "Now," saith he, "because he can no longer in this realm
wrongfully use his usurped power in all things, as he was wont to do,
and suck out of this realm, by avarice insatiable; innumerable sums
of money yearly, to the great exhausting of the same; he therefore,
moved and replete with furious ire and pestilent malice, goeth about
to stir all Christian nations that will give ears to his devilish
enchantments, to move war against this realm of England, giving it in
prey to all those that by his instigation will invade it."

     And here, expounding these aforesaid words, "To give in prey,"
he declareth what great mischief they contain, and willeth every true
Englishman well to mark the same.

     "First, to make this realm," saith he, "a prey to all
adventurers, all spoilers, all sycophants, all forlorn hopes, all
cormorants, all raveners of the world, that will invade this realm,
is to say, Thou possessor of any lands of this realm, of what degree
soever thou be, from the highest to the lowest, shalt be slain and
destroyed, and thy lands taken from thee by those that will have all
for themselves; and thou mayst be sure to be slain, for they will not
suffer thee, nor any of thy progeny, to live to make any claim
afterwards, or to be revenged; for that were their unsurety. Thy wife
shall be abused before thy face; thy daughter likewise defloured
before thee; thy children slain before thine eyes; thy house spoiled;
thy cattle driven away, and sold before thy visage; thy plate, thy
money, by force taken from thee; all thy goods, wherein thou hast any
delight, or hast gathered for thy children, ravened, broken, and
distributed in thy presence, that every ravener may have his share.
Thou merchant art sure to be slain, for thou hast either money or
ware, or both, which they search for. Thou bishop or priest,
whatsoever thou be, shalt never escape, because thou wouldst not take
the bishop of Rome's part, and rebel against God and thy prince, as
he doth. If thou shalt flee and escape for a season, whatsoever thou
be, thou shalt see and hear of so much misery and abomination, that
thou shalt judge them happy that be dead before; for sure it is thou
shalt not finally escape:  for, to take the whole realm in prey, is to 
kill the whole people, and to take the place for themselves, as they
will do if they can,

     "And the bishop of Rome now of late, to set forth his pestilent
malice the more, hath allured to his purpose a subject of this realm,
Reginald Pole, coming of a noble blood, and thereby the more arrant
traitor, to go about from prince to prince, and from country to
country, to stir them to war against this realm, and to destroy the
same, being his native country; whose pestilent purpose, the princes
that he breaketh it unto have in much abomination, both for that the
bishop of Rome (who, being a bishop, should procure peace) is a
stirrer of war, and because this most arrant and unkind traitor is
his minister to so devilish a purpose, to destroy the country that he
was born in; which any heathen man would abhor to do."

     And so continuing in his discourse against Cardinal Pole and
the bishop of Rome, for stirring the people to war and mischief, he
further saith, and saith truly, thus: 

     "For these many years past, little war hath been in these parts
of Christendom, but the bishop of Rome either hath been a stirrer of
it, or a nourisher of it, and seldom any compounder of it, unless it
were for his ambition or profit. Wherefore since, as St. Paul saith,
that God is not the God of dissension, but of peace, who commandeth,
by his word, peace alway to be kept, we are sure that all those that
go about to break peace between realms, and to bring them to war, are
the children of the devil, what holy names soever they may pretend to
cloak their pestilent malice withal; which cloaking under hypocrisy
is double devilishness, and of Christ most detested, because under
his blessed name they do play the devil's part."

     And in the latter end of his sermon, concluding with Ezekiel
xxxix., where the prophet speaketh against Gog and Magog going about
to destroy the people of God, and prophesieth against them, that the
people of God shall vanquish and overthrow them on the mountains of
Israel, that none of them shall escape, but their carcases shall
there be devoured of kites and crows, and birds of the air; so
likewise saith he of these our enemies, wishing, that if they shall
persist in their pestilent malice to make invasion into this realm,
then their great captain Gog (the bishop of Rome he meaneth) may come
with them, to drink with them of the same cup which he maliciously
goeth about to prepare for us, that the people of God might after
live quietly in peace.

     We have heard hitherto the oaths, censures, and judgments of
certain particular bishops, of York, of 'Winchester, of London, of
Durham, and also of Edmund Bonner, archdeacon then of Leicester,
against the pope's unlawful usurpation. Now, for the more
fortification of the matter, and satisfying of the reader, it shall
not be much out of purpose, besides the consent and approbation of
these aforesaid, to infer also the public and general agreement of
the whole clergy of England, as in a total sum together, confirmed
and ratified in their own public book, made and set forth by them
about the same time, called then The Bishops' Book; in the which
book, although many things were very slender and imperfect, yet, as
touching this cause of the bishop of Rome's regality, we will hear
(God willing) what their whole opinion and provincial determination
did conclude, according as by their own words in the same book is to
be seen word for word, as followeth, subscribed also with their own
names; the catalogue of whom, under their own confession, shall
appear: 

     "We think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people committed unto their spiritual charge,
that whereas certain men do imagine and affirm, that Christ should
give unto the bishop of Rome power and authority, not only to he head
and governor of all priests and bishops in Christ's church, but also
to have and occupy the whole monarchy of the world in his hands, and
that he may thereby lawfully depose kings and princes from their
realms, dominions, and seigniories, and so transfer and give the same
to such persons as him liketh, that is utterly false and untrue; for
Christ never gave unto St. Peter, or unto any of the apostles or
their successors, any such authority. And the apostles, St. Peter and
St. Paul, do teach and command, that all Christian people, as well
priests and bishops, as others, should be obedient and subject unto
the princes and potentates of the world, although they were infidels.

     "And as for the bishop of Rome, it was many hundred years after
Christ, before he could acquire or get any primacy or governance
above any other bishops, out of his province in Italy; since which
time he hath ever usurped more and more. And though some part of his
power was given to him by the consent of the emperors, kings, and
princes, and by the consent also of the clergy in general councils
assembled; yet surely he attained the most part thereof by marvellous
subtlety and craft, and especially by colluding with great kings and
princes, sometimes training them into his devotion by pretence and
colour of holiness and sanctimony, and sometimes constraining them by
force and tyranny. Whereby the said bishops of Rome aspired and rose
at length unto such greatness in strength and authority, that they
presumed and took upon them to be heads, and to put laws by their own
authority, not only unto all other bishops within Christendom, but
also unto the emperors, kings, and other the princes and lords of the
world; and that, under the pretence of the authority committed unto
them by the gospel. Wherein the said bishops of Rome do not only
abuse and pervert the true sense and meaning of Christ's word, but
they do also clean contrary to the use and custom of the primitive
church; and so do manifestly violate, as well the holy canons made in
the church immediately after the time of the apostles, and also in
the decrees and constitutions made in that behalf by the holy fathers
of the catholic church, assembled in the first general councils. And
finally, they do transgress their own profession, made in their
creation. For all the bishops of Rome always, when they be
consecrated and made bishops of that see, do make a solemn profession
and vow, that they shall inviolablyt observe and keep all the
ordinances made in the eight first general councils; among which it
isspecially provided and enacted, that all causes shall be finished
and determined within the province where the same began, and that by
the bishops of the same province; and divers other such canons were
then made and confirmed by the said councils, to repress and take
away out of the church all such primacy and jurisdiction over kings
and bishops, as the bishops of Rome pretend now to have over the
same. And we find that divers good fathers, bishops of Rome, did
greatly reprove, yea, and abhor (as a thing clean contrary to the
gospel,and the decrees of the church) that any bishop of Rome, or
elsewhere, should presume, usurp, or take upon him, the title and
name of universal bishop, or of the head of all priests, or of the
highest priest, or any such-like title. For confirmation whereof, it
is out of all doubt, that there is no mention made, either in
Scripture, or in the writings of any authentical doctor or author of
the church, being within the time of the apostles themselves, or
between the bishops themselves, that the were all equal in power,
order, authority and jurisdiction. And in that there is now, and
since the time of the apostles, any such diversity or difference
amongst the bishops, it was devised by the ancient fahers of the
primitive church, for the conservation of good order and the unity of
the catholic church; and that either by the consent and authority, or
else at least by the permission and sufferance, of the princes and
civil powers for the time ruling."

     This doctrine was subscribed and allowed by the witness and
testimony of these bishops and other learned men, whose names
hereunder follow, as appeareth in The Bishops' Book before named.

Thomas Cantuariensis.
Edovardus Eboracensis.
Johannes Londinensis.
Cuthbertus Dunelmensis.
Stephanus Wintoniensis.
Robertus Carliolensis.
Johannes Exoniensis.
Johannes Lincolniensis.
Johannes Barthoniensis.
Rolandus Coventr. et Lichfield.
Thomas Eliensis.
Nicolaus Sarum.
Johannes Bangor.
Edovardus Herefordiensis.
Hugo Wigorniensis.
Johannes Roffensis.
Richardus Cicestrensis.
Gulielmus Norwicensis.
Gulielmus Menevensis.
Robertus Assavensis.
Robertus Landavensis.

Richardus Wolman, Archidiac Sudbur.
Gulielmus Knight Archidiacon Richmond.
Johan. Bel, Archidiac. Glocester.
Edmundus Bonner, Archidiacon Leicester.
Gulielmus Skippe, Archidiacon Dorset.
Nicolaus Heth, Archidiac. Staff
Cuthbertus Marshal, Archidiac Nottingham.
Richardus Curren, Archidiacon Oxon.

Gulielmus Cliffe.
Galfridus Dounes.
Robertus Oking.
Radulphus Bradford.
Richardus Smith.
Simon Matthew.
Johannes Prin.
Gulielmus Buckmaster.
Gulielmus May.
Nicolaus Wotton.
Richardus Cox.
Johannes Edmunds.
Thomas Robertson.
Johannes Baker.
Thomas Barret.
Johannes Hase.
Johannes Tyson.


     These were doctors of divinity, and of both laws.



183. FOOLS AND TRAITORS WHO CLUNG TO THE POPE

     Judge now thyself,loving reader, by these things heretofore
confessed, alleged, allowed, proved, and confirmed, by pen set forth,
by words defended, and by oath subscribed by these bishops and
doctors, if either Martin Luther himself, or any Lutheran else, could
or did ever say more against the proud usurpation of the bishop of
Rome, than these men have done. If they dissembled otherwise than
they meant, who could ever dissemble so deeply, speaking so pithily?
If they meant as they spake, who could ever turn head to tail so
suddenly and so shortly as these men did? But because these things we
write for edification of others, rather than for commendation of
them, let us mark therefore their reasons, and let the persons go.

     Concerning the argument of which epistle, here is first to be
understood, that about this time, or not much after, Cardinal Pole,
brother to the Lord Montague, was attainted of high treason, and fled
away unto Rome, where, within a short time after, he was made
cardinal of St. Mary Cosmeden; of whom more is to be spoken
hereafter, the Lord so permitting, when we come to the time of Queen
Mary. In the mean time, he remaining at Rome, there was directed unto
him a certain epistle exhortatory by Stokesley, bishop of London, and
Tonstal, bishop of Durham, persuading him to relinquish and abandon
the supremacy of the pope, and to conform himself to the religion of
his king.

     When all other the king's subjects, and the learned of the
realm, had taken and accepted the oath of the king's supremacy, only
Fisher, the bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More, refused (as is
afore said) to be sworn; who therefore, falling into the danger of
the law, were committed to the Tower, and executed for the same, A.D.
1535. This John Fisher aforesaid had written before against
Œcolampadius, whose book is yet extant, and afterwards against
Luther.

     Also, amongst other his acts, he had been a great enemy and
persecutor of John Frith, the godly and learned martyr of Jesus
Christ, whom he and Sir Thomas More caused to be burned a year and a
half before:  and, shortly after, the said Fisher, to his confusion,
was charged with Elizabeth Barton, (called the holy maid of Kent,)
and found guilty by act of parliament, as is above recorded. For his
learning and other virtues of life this bishop was well reputed and
reported of by many, and also much lamented by some. But whatsoever
his learning was, pity it was that he, being endued with that
knowledge, should be so far drowned in such superstition; more pity
that he was so obstinate in his ignorance; but most pity of all, that
he so abused the learning he had, to such cruelty as he did. But this
commonly we see come to pass, as the Lord saith, that whoso striketh
with the sword shall perish with the sword, and they that stain their
hands with blood, seldom do bring their bodies dry to the grave; as
commonly appeareth by the end of bloody tyrants, and especially such
as be persecutors of Christ's poor members; in the number of whom
were this bishop and Sir Thomas More, by whom good John Frith,
Tewkesbury, Thomas Hitten, Bayfield, with divers other good saints of
God, were brought to their death. It was said that the pope, to
recompense Bishop Fisher for his faithful service, had elected him
cardinal, and sent him a cardinal's hat as far as Calais; but the
head that it should stand upon, was as high as London bridge ere ever
the pope's hat could come to him. Thus Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas
More, who a little before had put John Frith to death for heresy
against the pope, were themselves executed and beheaded for treason
against the king, the one the twenty-second of June, the other the
sixth of July, A.D. 1535.

     Of Sir Thomas More something hath been touched before, who was
also counted a man both witty and learned:  but whatsoever he was
besides, a bitter persecutor he was of good men, and a wretched enemy
against the truth of the gospel, as by his books left behind him may
appear; wherein most slanderously and contumeliously he writeth
against Luther, Zuinglius, Tyndale, Frith, Barnes, Bayfield, Bainham,
Tewkesbury; falsely belying their articles and doctrine, as (God
granting me life) I have sufficient matter to prove against him.

     Briefly, as he was a sore persecutor of them that stood in
defence of the gospel, so again, on the other side, such a blind
devotion he bare to the pope-holy see of Rome, and so wilfully stood
in the pope's quarrel against his own prince, that he would not give
over till he had brought the scaffold of the Tower-hill, with the axe
and all, upon his own neck.

     Edward Hall in his Chronicle, writing of the death and manners
of this Sir Thomas More, seems to stand in doubt whether to call him
a foolish wise man, or a wise foolish man:  for, as by nature he was
endued with a great wit, so the same again was so mingled (saith he)
with taunting and mocking, that it seemed to them that best knew him,
that he thought nothing to be well spoken, except he had ministered
some mock in the Communication; insomuch as, at his coming to the
Tower, one of the officers demanding his upper garment for his fee,
meaning his gown, he answered that he should have it, and took him
his cap, saying it was the uppermost garment that he had. Likewise,
even going to his death, at the Tower gate, a poor woman called unto
him, and besought him to declare that he had certain evidences of
hers in the time that he was in office, (which, after he was
apprehended, she could not come by,) and that he would entreat that
she might have them again, or else she was undone. He answered, "Good
woman, have patience a little while, for the king is so good unto me,
that even within this half hour he will discharge me of all
businesses, and help thee himself." Also, when he went up the stair
of the scaffold, he desired one of the sheriff's officers to give him
his hand to help him up, and said, "When I come down again, let me
shift for myself as well as I can." Also the hangman kneeled down to
him, asking him forgiveness of his death, as the manner is; to whom
he answered, "I forgive thee; but I promise thee that thou shalt
never have honesty of the striking off my head, my neck is so short."
Also, even when he should lay down his head on the block, he, having
a great grey beard, stroked out his beard, and said to the hangman,
"I pray you let me lay my beard over the block, lest you should cut
it;" thus with a mock he ended his life.

     There is no doubt but that the pope's Holiness hath hallowed
and dignified those two persons long since for catholic martyrs: 
neither is it to be doubted, but after a hundred years expired, they
shall be also shrined and porthosed, dying as they did in the quarrel
of the Church of Rome, that is, in taking the bishop of Rome's part
against their own ordinary and natural prince. Whereunto (because the
matter asketh a long discourse, and a peculiar tractation) I have not
in this place much to contend with Cope, my friend. This briefly for
a memorandum may suffice; that if the causes of true martyrdom ought
to be pondered, and not to be numbered, and if the end of martyrs is
to be weighed by judgment, and not by affection; then the cause and
quarrel of these men standing as it doth, and being tried by God's
word, perhaps in the pope's kingdom they may go for martyrs, in whose
cause they died; but certes in Christ's kingdom their cause will not
stand, howsoever they stand themselves.

     The like also is to be said of the three monks of the Charter-
house, Exmew, Middlemore, and Neudigate, who the same year, in the
month of June, were likewise attached and arraigned at Westminster,
for speaking certain traitorous words against the king's crown and
dignity; for which they were hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn: 
whom also, because Cope, my good friend, doth repute and accept in 
the number of holy catholic martyrs, here would be asked of him a
question:  What martyrs be they,who, standing before the judge, deny
their own words and sayings, and plead not guilty, so as these
Carthusians did? Whereby it appeareth, that they would neither have
stood nor have died in that cause, as they did, if they might
otherwise have escaped by denying. Wherefore, if my friend Cope had
been so well advised in setting out his martyrs as God might have
made him, he would first have seen the true records, and been sure of
the ground of such matters, whereupon he so confidently pronounceth,
and so censoriously controlleth others.

     In the same cause and quarrel of treason also, the same year, a
little before these aforesaid, in the month of May, were executed
with the like punishment, John Houghton, prior of the charter-house
in London; Robert Laurence, prior of the charter-house of Belvail;
Austin Webster, prior of the charter-house of Exham.

     Besides and with these priors suffered likewise at the same
time, two other priests, one called Reginald, brother of Sion, the
other named John Haile, vicar of Thistleworth. Divers other Charter-
house monks also of London were then put in prison, to the number of
nine or ten, and in the same prison died; for whom we will, the Lord
willing, reserve another place, hereafter to treat of them more at
large.

     In the mean time, forasmuch as the aforesaid Cope, in his
doughty dialogues, speaking of these nine worthies, doth commend them
so highly, and especially the three priors above recited, here by the
way I would desire Master Cope simply and directly to answer me to a
thing or two that I would put to him; and first of this John
Houghton, that angelical prior of the Charter-house, his old
companion and acquaintance, of whom he thus writeth:  Atqui cum
Johannem ilium Houghtonum cogito, non tam hominem quam angelum in
humana forma intueri mihi videor, cujus eminentes virtutes, divinas
dotes, et heroicam animi magnitudinem, nemo unquam poterit satin pro
dignitate explicare, &c. By these his own words it must needs be
confessed, that the author of these dialogues, whosoever he was, had
well seen and considered the form and personable stature, proportion,
and shape, of his excellent body, with such admiration of his
personage, that, "as he saith, as oft as I call the said John
Houghton to mind, it seemeth to me even as though I saw an angel in
the shape and form of a man:  whose eminent virtues, moreover, whose
divine gifts and heroical greatness of mind, no man," saith he, "may
sufficiently express." And how old was this Master Cope then, would I
know, when he saw and discerned all this? for, as I understand,
Master Cope, being yet at this present scarce come to the age of
forty years, he could not then be above nine years old (the other
suffering A.D. 1535); in the which age, in my mind, Master Cope had
small discretion to judge either of any such angelical proportion of
this man's personage, or of his divine qualities and heroical
celsitude of his mind; and yet he remembereth him in his dialogues: 
which thing, among many other probabilities, maketh me vehemently to
suspect that these dialogues, printed in Antwerp, A.D. 1566, were
brought over by Master Cope there to be printed, but were penned and
framed by another PseudoCopus, whatsoever, or in what fleet soever,
he was, unless my marks do greatly fail me. But as the case is of no
great weight, so I let it pass, returning to other matters of greater
importance.

     Shortly after the overthrow of the pope, consequently began by
little and little to follow the ruin of abbeys and religious houses
in England, in a right order and method by God's divine providence.
For neither could the fall of monasteries have followed after, unless
that suppression of the pope had gone before; neither could any true
reformation of the church have been attempted, unless the subversion
of those superstitious houses had been joined withal.

     Whereupon, the same year, in the month of October, the king,
having then Thomas Cromwell of his council, sent Dr. Lee to visit the
abbeys, priories, and nunneries in all England, and to set at liberty
all such religious persons as desired to be free, and all others that
were under the age of four and twenty years; providing withal, that
such monks, canons, and friars as were dismissed, should have given
them by the abbot or prior, instead of their habit, a secular
priest's gown, and forty shillings of money, and likewise the nuns to
have such apparel as secular women did then commonly use, and be
suffered to go where they would; at which time also, from the said
abbeys and monasteries were taken their chief jewels and relics.

     When the king had thus established his supremacy, and all
things were well quieted within the realm, he, like a wise prince,
and having wise counsel about him, forecasting with himself what
foreign dangers might fall unto him by other countries about, which
were all as yet in subjection to the bishop of Rome, save only a few
German princes, and misdoubting the malice of the pope, to provide
therefore betimes for perils that might ensue, thought good to keep
in, by all means possible, with other princes.

     And first, to entertain the favour of the French king, who had
been sick a little before, and now was lately recovered to health, in
signification of public joy and friendship, the king commanded a
solemn and famous procession to be ordained through the city of
London, with the waits, and children of  the grammar schools, with
the masters and ushers in their array:  then followed the orders of
the friars and canons, and the priors with their pomp of copes,
crosses, candlesticks, and vergers before them. After these followed
the next pageant of clerks and priests of London, all in copes
likewise. Then the monks of Westminster and other abbeys, with their
glorious gardeviance of crosses, candlesticks, and vergers before
them, in like sort. Last of all came the choir of St. Paul's, with
their residentiaries; the bishop of London and the abbots following
after in their pontificalibus. After these courses of the clergy went
the companies of the city, with the lord mayor and aldermen in their
best apparel, after their degrees. And lest it might be thought this
procession of the church of London to make but a small or beggarly
show, the furniture of the gay copes there worn, was counted to the
number of seven hundred and fourteen. Moreover, to fill up the joy of
this procession, and for the more high service to Almighty God,
besides the singing choirs, and chanting of the priests, there lacked
no minstrels withal, to pipe at the processions. Briefly, here lacked
nothing else but only the ordnance to shoot off also. But because
that is used in the processions at Rome, therefore, for difference'
sake, the same is reserved only for the pope's own processions, and
for none other, in the month of October.

     This grand procession was appointed for a triumph or a
thanksgiving for the late recovery of the French king's health, as is
afore said.

     Over and besides this, the king, to nourish and retain amity
with kings and princes, (lest the pope, being exiled now out of
England, should incite them to war against him,) directed sundry
ambassadors and messengers with letters and instructions. To the
emperor was sent Sir Francis Wyat, to the French king Sir Thomas
Bryan, and Dr. Edward Foxe, who was also sent to the princes of
Germany; to the Scottish king was sent Sir Ralph Sadler, gentleman of
the king's privy-chamber.

     In Scotland at the same time were cast abroad divers railing
ballets and slanderous rhymes against the king of England, for
casting off the lady dowager, and for abolishing the pope; for which
cause the aforesaid Sir Ralph Sadler, being sent into Scotland with
lessons and instructions how to address himself accordingly, after he
had obtained access unto the king, and audience to be heard, first
declareth the affectuous and hearty commendations from the king's
Majesty, his Grace's uncle, and withal delivered his letters of
credence:  which done, after a few words of courtly entertainment, as
occasion served him to speak, the said Sir Ralph Sadler, obtaining
audience, thus began in the king his master's behalf to declare, as
followeth

     "Whereas there is nothing, after the glory of Almighty God, in
this world so much to be tendered by kings, princes, or any honest
persons, or so highly to be regarded and defended, as their honour,
estimation, good fame, and name, which whosoever neglecteth is to be
esteemed unnatural; and unless a man labour to avoid and extinguish
the false reports, slanders, and defamations made of him by malicious
persons, he may well be suspected in conscience to condemn himself;
the king your uncle, considering the same, and hearing of sundry
ballets, criminations, and infamous libels made and untruly forged
and devised in Scotland against his Grace, by your Grace's subjects,
not only upon trust to find with your Grace such natural affection,
friendship, and amity, as the nearness of blood between uncle and
nephew, necessitude of reverence, proximity both of kin and dominions
together doth require; but also upon assurance that your Grace and
wisdom will consider how these slanders and defamations, although
they were but against a private person, whatsoever he were, most
commonly redound and are imputed to the whole degree and estate; as
the defamation of kings toucheth kings, and so of other degrees and
dignities:  doth send at this time to your Grace, his nephew, (others
he might have sent more worthy; but me at this time, for lack of a
better, hath he sent,) to desire, pray, and require your Grace,
according as the nearness of blood, connexion of estate, and other
things before expressed, of right and justice do require beseeching
your Grace gently to weigh and balance, and well to ponder, the
malice of these the said slanderers, and to call in again all the
said defamatory ballets, libels, and other writings, punishing the
authors and setters-forth thereof according to their demerits. And
furthermore, to cause open proclamations to be made through your
realm, that none of the inhabitants there shall, in any manner of
wise, so misuse himself hereafter, upon such great pain and
punishment as to your Grace and your council shall be thought
convenient for the transgression thereof:  so that others, by their
correction, and by the fearful example of the penalty, may beware how
to commit the like offence in time coming.

     "The example of such slanders is very pernicious to all kings;
for, by such slanders of other princes, the slanderers take boldness
so to deal afterwards with their own king, as they have done with
others; and the next step from such slanderous words is to attempt
deeds, and so to fall to sedition; of the importance and danger
whereof no man is ignorant.

     "Wherefore your Grace, at the contemplation of your dear uncle,
in tendering his proceedings, shall do well to follow therein the
loving steps of his good brother and ally, the French king, who hath
already at Rouen, and sundry places else, caused certain slanderous
preachers to be sore punished; and further directed commissions
through his realm for repressing the same. As also other princes
shall be ready (his Majesty trusteth) to do the like in their
dominions, if like occasion shall be given to require the same of 
them. In which so doing, your Gracemay be assured, in this your
gentle dealing in that part, to win your uncle's most sincere and
kind heart, to the increase of your amity and alliance, which as to
you shall be most honourable, so shall it be no less profitable unto
him.

     "And thus to conclude with the first part of my narration,
concerning the slanderous and defamatory libels, lest I should seem
with prolixity of matter more than needs to abuse your Grace's
silence, I will now descend to the other point of that which I have
to utter unto your Grace, as touching the pope's nuncio, or
messenger; of whose late arrival the king's Majesty, your uncle,
having partly intelligence, but not certainly knowing the special
cause of his coming from Rome, and yet fearing, by the common bruit
and talk of your subjects, what his errand should be (that is, to
practise some annoyance, by his pretended censures against the king's
Majesty, your uncle); he therefore, premonishing your Grace before,
as fearing the worst, most justly maketh his complaint thereof unto
your Grace, his nephew, requiring you, that forasmuch as the
aforesaid bruits and reports are slanderous to his Majesty, and
seeing that neither the emperor, nor the French king, nor any other
princes, have consented thereto, or understood thereof, the king's
Majesty, therefore, your uncle, willing to stop those bruits and
talks, desireth and most heartily prayeth your Grace, at his instant
request, to vouchsafe to consider and weigh,

     "First, The supremacy of princes, by the Holy Scripture granted
unto him and other princes in earth, under Christ, upon their
churches.

     "Secondly, To weigh what the gospel and God's word calleth a
church.

     "Also what superstitions, idolatries, and blind abuses have
crept into all realms, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, by
reason thereof. 	"Fourthly, What is to be understood by the true
censure or excommunication of the church, and how no such can be in
the power of the bishop of Rome, or of any other man, against his
Majesty, or any other prince; having so just ground to avoid from the
root, and to abolish that execrable authority, which the bishop of
Rome hath usurped, and doth usurp, upon all princes, to their great
detriment and damage.

     "As touching the consideration of which four points, although
the king's Majesty, your uncle, doubteth not your Grace to be
furnished and provided with sufficient knowledge, rightly to discern
and judge upon the same; yet, if it shall so please your Grace
further to know your uncle's mind touching the said points, I assure
your Highness, in the behalf of your aforesaid uncle, his Majesty,
that he will not stick to send unto you such learned, wise, and
discreet men, as shall amply inform you thereof, and of such other
things as your Grace, having once a smack thereof, shall think most
worthy for a prince to know.

     "His request therefore to your Highness is, that you will
consider of what moment and importance it shall be unto your Grace,
(having the Scots your subjects so evil instructed in the premises,)
for you to assent and agree to any such censure, and so, by such
example, to give such an upper-hand over yourself and other princes,
to that usurper of Rome, as is very like hereafter to happen in other
places of Christendom, wheresoever the true declaration of the truth
and word of God shall have free course, to scourge them, unless they
will adore, worship, and kiss the feet of that corrupt holiness,
which desireth nothing else but pride, and the universal thrall of
Christendom under Rome's yokes.

     "But because the censures of that nuncio be not yet opened, but
lie secret and uncertain under muttering, I shall cease further to
proceed therein, till further occasion shall minister to me more
certain matter to say and to judge. In the mean time, forasmuch as it
is most certainly come to the intelligence of the king's Majesty,
that the abbot of Arbroath should be chosen of late and elected to be
a cardinal in this your realm of Scotland, his Majesty therefore, for
the good love and hearty good will he beareth unto your Grace, as the
uncle is bound unto the nephew, knowing that you as yet perceive not
so well the hypocrisy and deceitful guile and malice of the Romans
and their practices, as he himself doth, by his long experience;
could not but, hearing thereof, advertise your Grace, that his advice
is, you should not suffer any of your subjects to take upon him that
red hat of pride, whereby he shall incontinently, the same being
received, (unless he be of a contrary nature to any man that ever was
yet of that sort,) not only be in manner discharged of his obedience,
and become the bishop of Rome's true liege man; but also shall
presume of his cardinalship to be your fellow, and to have the rule
as well as you. Then should the bishop of Rome creep into your own
very bosom, know all your secrets, and at last, unless you will be
yoked and serve their pleasure in all points, your Grace is like to
smart for it. The thing perchance, in the beginning, shall seem to
your Grace very honourable and pleasant; but wisdom would, to beware
of the tail, which is very black and bitter.

     "His Majesty's father, and grandfather to your Grace, had a
cardinal whereof he was weary, and never admitted others after his
decease, knowing the importable pride of them. In like manner also
his Highness, by the experience of one, hath utterly determined to
avoid all the sort:  so well his Grace hath known and experienced
their mischief, yoke, and thraldom, that thereby is laid upon
princes. By reason whereof, as his Highness is the more able by his
own experience to inform your Grace, so of good will and mere
propensity of heart, caused partly by nature and kin, partly by
conjunction and vicinity of dominions adjoining so near together, he
is no less ready to forewarn your Grace before, wishing that God will
so work in your princely heart and noble stomach, that his Majesty's
monition and friendly warning, as it proceedeth from a sincere
affection and tender care of his part unto his nephew, so it may
prevail and take place in your mind, that your Grace, wisely weighing
with yourself, what supreme right princes have, and ought to have,
over their churches and lands where they govern, and what little
cause the bishop of Rome hath thereto, to proceed by unjust censures
against them; your Grace may therein not only stand to the just
defence of your dear uncle, but also may endeavour to follow his
steps therein, and to take his counsel, which, he doubteth not, but
shall redound, not only to your Grace's honour, to the benefit, weal,
and profit of your realm and subjects; but, especially, to the glory
of Almighty God, and advancement of his true religion.

     "And thus have I expounded unto your Grace the sum of my errand
and message from the king's Majesty, your uncle, who, as he would be
glad to be advertised, by answer, of your Grace's purpose, mind, and
intention in this behalf, so, for my part, according to my charge and
duty, I shall be prepared and ready, with all diligence, to give mine
attendance upon your pleasure for the same accordingly."

     The king, considering the present state of his marriage, which
was not yet well digested nor accepted in the courts of other
princes, and also having intelligence of the strait amity intended by
the marriages between the emperor and the French king, and also of
the pope's inclination to pleasure the emperor; and further
understanding of the order and meaning of the French king's council,
not greatly favouring his purposes, sent therefore into France, for
his ambassador, Edward Foxe, doctor of divinity, his chaplain and
counsellor, with instructions and admonitions how to frame and
attemper himself in those the king's affairs.

     Furthermore, for the establishing of the king's succession to
the imperial crown of this realm, for the suppression of the pope,
and uniting the title of supremacy unto the king's crown, what order
was therein taken, and what penalty was set upon the same, may appear
by the act of parliament set forth A.D. 1534, in these words
following: 

     "If any person or persons, after the first of February next, do
maliciously imagine, invent, practise, or attempt to deprive the king
of the dignity, title, or name of his royal estate, &c., that then
every such person and persons so offending in any of the premises,
their aiders, counsellors, consenters, and abettors, being thereof
lawfully convicted, according to the laws and customs of this realm,
shall be reputed, accepted, and adjudged traitors; and that every
such offence in any the premises committed or done after the said
first day of February, shall be reputed, accepted, and adjudged high
treason; and the offenders therein, their aiders, consenters,
counsellors, and abettors, being lawfully convicted of any such
offence, shall have and suffer such pains of death and other
penalties, as are limited and accustomed in cases of high treason."

     Upon this and such other acts concluded in those parliaments,
what stomach the pope took, what stir he kept, and what practices he
wrought with Cardinal Pole, to stir up other nations to war against
us; what difficulty also there was with the emperor, with the French
king, and with the king of Scots, about the matter; and what labour
was used on the king's part, to reconcile the princes for his own
indemnity, to keep him from their wars and invasions, and especially
to obtain the pope's approbation, and to avoid his censures of
excommunication; and finally, what despiteful injuries and open
wrongs the pope wrought against him, upon the which pope the king had
bestowed so much money and great treasures before, all this,
likewise, by the premises may appear.

     Wherefore, to end now with these, and to go forward in our
story, as the order and computation of years do give, we have now
consequently to enter into the story of the good martyr of God,
William Tyndale, being this present year falsely betrayed and put to
death; which William Tyndale, as he was a special organ of the Lord
appointed, and as God's mattock to shake the inward roots and
foundation of the pope's proud prelacy; so the great prince of
darkness, with his impious imps, having a special malice against him,
left no way unsought how craftily to entrap him, and falsely to
betray him, maliciously to spill his life, as by the process of his
story here following may appear.



184. WILLIAM TYNDALE

The life and story of this true servant and martyr of God, who, for
his notable pains and travail, may well be called the apostle of
England in this our later age.
  WILLIAM Tyndale, the faithful minister and
constant martyr of Christ, was born about the borders of Wales, and
brought up from a child in the university of Oxford, where he, by
long continuance, grew up, and increased as well in the knowledge of
tongues, and other liberal arts, as especially in the knowledge of
the Scriptures, whereunto his mind was singularly addicted; insomuch
that he, lying then in Magdalen hall, read privily to certain
students and fellows of Magdalen college, some parcel of divinity;
instructing them in the knowledge and truth of the Scriptures. His
manners also and conversation being correspondent to the same, were
such, that all they that knew him, reputed and esteemed him to be a
man of most virtuous disposition, and of life unspotted.

     Thus he, in the university of Oxford, increasing more and more
in learning, and proceeding in degrees of the schools, spying his
time, removed from thence to the university of Cambridge, where after
he had likewise made his abode a certain space, being now further
ripened in the knowledge of God's word, leaving that university also,
he resorted to one Master Welch, a knight of Gloucestershire, and was
there schoolmaster to his children, and in good favour with his
master. This gentleman, as he kept a good ordinary commonly at his
table, there resorted to him many times sundry abbots, deans,
archdeacons, with divers other doctors, and great beneficed men; who
there, together with Master Tyndale sitting at the same table, did
use many times to enter into conversation, and talk of learned men,
as of Luther and of Erasmus; also of divers other controversies and
questions upon the Scripture.

     Then Master Tyndale, as he was learned and well practised in
God's matters, so he spared not to show unto them simply and plainly
his judgment in matters, as he thought; and when they at any time did
vary from Tyndale in opinions and judgment, he would show them in the
book, and lay plainly before them the open and manifest places of the
Scriptures, to confute their errors, and confirm his sayings. And
thus continued they for a certain season, reasoning and contending
together divers and sundry times, till at length they waxed weary,
and bare a secret grudge in their hearts against him.

     Not long after this, it happened that certain of these great
doctors had invited Master Welch and his wife to a banquet; where
they had talk at will and pleasure, uttering their blindness and
ignorance without any resistance or gainsaying. Then Master Welch and
his wife, coming home, and calling for Master Tyndale, began to
reason with him about those matters whereof the priests had talked
before at their banquet. Master Tyndale, answering by the Scriptures,
maintained the truth, and reproved their false opinions. Then said
the lady Welch, a stout and a wise woman, (as Tyndale reporteth,)
"Well," said she, there was such a doctor which may dispend a hundred
pounds, and another two hundred pounds, and another three hundred
pounds:  and what! were it reason, think you, that we should believe
you before them?"  Master Tyndale gave her no answer at that time,
and also after that, (because he saw it would not avail,) he talked
but little in those matters. At that time he was about the
translation of a book called Enchiridion Militis Christiani, which,
being translated, he delivered to his master and lady; who, after
they had read and well perused the same, the doctorly prelates were
no more so often called to the house, neither had they the cheer and
countenance when they came, as before they had:  which thing they
marking, and well perceiving, and supposing no less but it came by
the means of Master Tyndale, refrained themselves, and at last
utterly withdrew, and came no more there.

     As this grew on, the priests of the country, clustering
together, began to grudge and storm against Tyndale, railing against
him in alehouses and other places; of whom Tyndale himself, in his
prologue before the First Book of Moses, thus testifieth in his own
words, and reporteth that he suffereth much in that country by a sort
of unlearned priests, being full rude and ignorant, (saith he,) God
knoweth:  "which have seen no more Latin, than that only which they
read in their portueses and missals, (which yet many of them can
scarcely read,) except it be Albertus, De Secretis Mulierum, in which
yet, though they be never so sorrily learned, they pore day and
night, and make notes therein, and all to teach the midwives, as they
say; and also another called Lindwood, a book of constitutions to
gather tithes, mortuaries, offerings, customs, and other pillage,
which they call not theirs, but God's part, the duty of holy church,
to discharge their consciences withal. For they are bound that they
shall not diminish, but increase all things unto the uttermost of
their powers, which pertain to holy church." Thus these blind and
rude priests, flocking together to the alehouse, (for that was their
preaching place,) raged and railed against him, affirming that his
sayings were heresy; adding moreover unto his sayings, of their own
heads, more than ever he spake, and so accused him secretly to the
chancellor, and others of the bishop's officers.

     It followed not long after this, that there was a sitting of
the bishop's chancellor appointed, and warning was given to the
priests to appear, amongst whom Master Tyndale was also warned to be
there. And whether he had any misdoubt by their threatenings, or
knowledge given him that they would lay some things to his charge, it
is uncertain; but certain this is, (as he himself declared,) that he
doubted their privy accusations; so that he by the way, in going
thitherwards, cried in his mind heartily to God, to give him strength
fast to stand in the truth of his word.

     Then when the time came for his appearance before the
chancellor, he threatened him grievously, reviling and rating him as
though he had been a dog, and laid to his charge many things whereof
no accuser yet could be brought forth, (as commonly their manner is,
not to bring forth the accuser,) notwithstanding that the priests of
the country the same time were there present. And thus Master
Tyndale, after those examinations, escaping out of their hands,
departed home, and returned to his master again.

     There dwelt not far off a certain doctor, that had been an old
chancellor before to a bishop, who had been of old familiar
acquaintance with Master Tyndale, and also favoured him well; unto
whom Master Tyndale went and opened his mind upon divers questions of
the Scripture:  for to him he durst be bold to disclose his heart.
Unto whom the doctor said, "Do you not know that the pope is very
antichrist, whom the Scripture speaketh of? But beware what you say;
for if you shall be perceived to be of that opinion, it will cost you
your life: " and said moreover, "I have been an officer of his; but I
have given it up, and defy him and all his works." It was not long
after, but Master Tyndale happened to be in the company of a certain
divine, recounted for a learned man, and, in communing and disputing
with him, he drave him to that issue, that the said great doctor
burst out into these blasphemous words, and said, "We were better to
be without God's laws than the pope's." Master Tyndale, hearing this,
full of godly zeal, and not bearing that blasphemous saying, replied
again, and said, "I defy the pope, and all his laws;" and further
added, that if God spared him life, ere many years he would cause a
boy that driveth the plough to know more of the Scripture than he
did. After this, the grudge of the priests increasing still more and
more against Tyndale, they never ceased barking and rating at him, 
and laid many things sorely to his charge, saying that he was a
heretic in sophistry, a heretic in logic, a heretic in divinity; and
said moreover to him, that he bare himself bold of the gentlemen
there in that country; but notwithstanding, shortly he should be
otherwise talked withal. To whom Master Tyndale, answering again,
thus said, that he was contented they should bring him into any
country in all England, giving him ten pounds a year to live with,
and binding him to no more but to teach children, and to preach.

     To be short, Master Tyndale, being so molested and vexed in the
country by the priests, was constrained to leave that country, and to
seek another place; and so coming to Master Welch, he desired him of
his good will, that he might depart from him, saying on this wise to
him:  "Sir, I perceive that I shall not be suffered to tarry long here
in this country, neither shall you be able, though you would, to keep
me out of the hands of the spiritualty; and also what displeasure
might grow thereby to you by keeping me, God knoweth; for the which I
should be right sorry." So that in fine, Master Tyndale, with the
good will of his master, departed, and eftsoons came up to London,
and there preached awhile, according as he had done in the country
before, and especially about the town of Bristol, and also in the
said town, in the common place called St. Austin's Green.

     At length, he bethinking himself of Cuthbert Tonstal, then
bishop of London, and especially for the great commendation of
Erasmus, who, in his annotations, so extolleth him for his learning,
Tyndale thus cast with himself, that if he might attain unto his
service, he were a happy man. And so coming to Sir Henry Guildford,
the king's comptroller, and bringing with him an oration of
Isocrates, which he had then translated out of Greek into English, he
desired him to speak to the said bishop of London for him; which he
also did; and willed him moreover to write an epistle to the bishop, 
and to go himself with him. Which he did likewise, and delivered his
epistle to a servant of his, named William Hebilthwait, a man of his
old acquaintance. But God, who secretly disposeth the course of
things, saw that was not the best for Tyndale's purpose, nor for the
profit of his church, and therefore gave him to find little favour in
the bishop's sight; the answer of whom was this:  That his house was
full; he had more than he could well find:  and advised him to seek in
London abroad, where, he said, he could lack no service, &c. And so
remained he in London the space almost of a year, beholding and
marking with himself the course of the world, and especially the
demeanour of the preachers, how they boasted themselves, and set up
their authority and kingdom; beholding also the pomp of the prelates,
with other things more, which greatly misliked him; insomuch that he
understood, not only that there was no room in the bishop's house for
him to translate the New Testament, but also that there was no place
to do it in all England. And therefore, finding no place for his
purpose within the realm, and having some aid and provision, by God's
providence, ministered unto him by Humphrey Mummuth, above recited,
(as you may see before,) and certain other good men, he took his
leave of the realm, and departed into Germany, where the good man,
being inflamed with a tender care and zeal of his country, refused no
travail nor diligence, how, by all means possible, to reduce his 
brethren and countrymen of England to the same taste and
understanding of God's holy word and verity, which the Lord had
endued him withal. Whereupon, he considering in his mind, and partly
also conferring with John Frith, Tyndale thought with himself no way
more to conduce thereunto, than if the Scripture were turned into the
vulgar speech, that the poor people might also read and see the
simple plain word of God. For first, he, wisely casting in his mind,
perceived by experience, how that it was not possible to establish
the lay people in any truth, except the Scriptures were so plainly
laid before their eyes in their mother tongue, that they might see
the process, order, and meaning of the text; for else, whatsoever
truth should be taught them, these enemies of the truth would quench
it again, either with apparent reasons of sophistry, and traditions
of their own making, founded without all ground of Scripture; or else
juggling with the text, expounding it in such a sense as it were
impossible to gather of the text, if the right process, order, and
meaning thereof were seen.

     Again, right well he perceived and considered this only, or
most chiefly, to be the cause of all mischief in the church, that the
Scriptures of God were hidden from the people's eyes; for so long the
abominable doings and idolatries maintained by the Pharisaical clergy
could not be espied; and therefore all their labour was with might
and main to keep it down, so that either it should not be read at
all, or if it were, they would darken the right sense with the mist
of their sophistry, and so entangle those who rebuked or despised
their abominations, with arguments of philosophy, and with worldly
similitudes, and apparent reasons of natural wisdom; and, with
wresting the Scripture unto their own purpose, contrary unto the
process, order, and meaning of the text, would so delude them in
descanting upon it with allegories, and amaze them, expounding it in
many senses laid before the unlearned lay people, that though thou
felt in thy heart, and wert sure that all were false that they said,
yet couldst thou not solve their subtle riddles.

     For these and such other considerations this good man was moved
(and no doubt stirred up of God) to translate the Scripture into his
mother tongue, for the public utility and profit of the simple vulgar
people of his country; first setting in hand with the New Testament,
which he first translated about A.D. 1527. After that, he took in 
hand to translate the Old Testament, finishing the five books of
Moses, with sundry most learned and godly prologues prefixed before
every one, most worthy to be read and read again by all good
Christians, as the like also he did upon the New Testament. He wrote
also divers other works under sundry titles, amongst which is that
most worthy monument of his, entitled, "The Obedience of a Christian
Man," wherein, with singular dexterity, he instructeth all men in the
office and duty of Christian obedience; with divers other treatises,
as "The Wicked Mammon," "The Practice of Prelates;" with expositions
upon certain parts of the Scripture, and other books also, answering
to Sir Thomas More and other adversaries of the truth, no less
delectable, than also most fruitful to be read; which partly before
being unknown unto many, partly also being almost abolished and worn
out by time, the printer hereof, good reader, for conserving and
restoring such singular treasures, hath collected and set forth in
print the same in one general volume, all and whole together, as also
the works of John Frith, Barnes, and others, as are to be seen, most
special and profitable for thy reading.

     These books of William Tyndale being compiled, published, and
sent over into England, it cannot be spoken what a door of light they
opened to the eyes of the whole English nation, which before were
many years shut up in darkness.

     At his first departing out of the realm he took his journey
into the further parts of Germany, as into Saxony, where he had
conference with Luther and other learned men in those quarters; where
after that he had continued a certain season, he came down from
thence into the Netherlands, and had his most abiding in the town of
Antwerp, until the time of his apprehension; whereof more shall be
said (God willing) hereafter.

     Amongst his other books which he compiled, one work he made
also for the declaration of the sacrament (as it was then called) of
the altar; which he kept by him, considering how the people were not
as yet fully persuaded in other matters tending to superstitious
ceremonies and gross idolatry. Wherefore he thought as yet time was
not come to put forth that work, but rather that it should hinder the
people from other instructions, supposing that it would seem to them
odious to hear any such thing spoken or set forth at that time,
sounding against their great goddess Diana, that is, against their
mass, being had every where in great estimation, as was the goddess
Diana amongst the Ephesians, whom they thought to come from heaven.
Wherefore Master Tyndale, being a man both prudent in his doings, and
no less zealous in the setting forth of God's holy truth after such
sort as it might take most effect with the people, did forbear the
putting forth of that work, not doubting but, by God's merciful
grace, a time should come to have that abomination openly declared,
as it is at this present day:  the Lord Almighty be always praised
therefore. Amen!

     These godly books of Tyndale, and especially the New Testament
of his translation, after that they began to come into men's hands,
and to spread abroad, as they wrought great and singular profit to
the godly, so the ungodly (envying and disdaining that the people
should he any thing wiser than they, and again, fearing lest, by the
shining beams of truth, their false hypocrisy and works of darkness
should be discerned) began to stir with no small ado; like as at the
birth of Christ, Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. But
especially Satan, the prince of darkness, maligning the happy course
and success of the gospel, set to his might also, how to impeach and
hinder the blessed travails of that man; as by this, and also by
sundry other ways, may appear. For at what time Tyndale had
translated the Fifth Book of Moses, called Deuteronomy, minding to
print the same at Hamburgh, he sailed thitherward; where by the way,
upon the coast of Holland, he suffered shipwreck, by which he lost
all his books, writings, and copies, and so was compelled to begin
all again anew, to his hinderance, and doubling of his labours. Thus,
having lost by that ship, both money, his copies, and his time, he
came in another ship to Hamburgh, where, at his appointment, Master
Coverdale tarried for him, and helped him in the translating of the
whole five books of Moses, from Easter till December, in the house of
a worshipful widow, Mistress Margaret Van Emmerson, A.D. 1529; a
great sweating sickness being at the same time in the town. So,
having despatched his business at Hamburgh, he returned afterwards to
Antwerp again.

     Thus, as Satan is, and ever hath been, an enemy to all godly
endeavours, and chiefly to the promoting and furtherance of God's
word, as by this and many other experiments may be seen, so his
ministers and members, following the like quality of their master, be
not altogether idle for their parts; as also by the pope's chaplains
and God's enemies, and by their cruel handling of the said Master
Tyndale at the same time, both here in England and in Flanders, may
well appear.

     When God's will was, that the New Testament in the common
tongue should come abroad, Tyndale, the translator thereof, added to
the latter end a certain epistle, wherein he desired them that were
learned, to amend, if ought were found amiss. Wherefore if there had
been any such default deserving correction, it had been the part of
courtesy and gentleness, for men of knowledge and judgment to have
showed their learning therein, and to have redressed what was to be
amended. But the spiritual fathers then of the clergy, being not
willing to have that book to prosper, cried out upon it, bearing men
in hand that there were a thousand heresies in it, and that it was
not to be corrected, but utterly to be suppressed. Some said it was
not possible to translate the Scriptures into English; some, that it
was not lawful for the lay people to have it in their mother-tongue;
some, that it would make them all heretics. And to the intent to
induce the temporal rulers also unto their purpose, they made more
matter, and said that it would make the people to rebel and rise
against the king. All this Tyndale himself, in his own prologue
before the First Book of Moses, declareth; and addeth further,
showing what great pains were taken in examining that translation,
and comparing it with their own imaginations and terms, that with
less labour, he supposeth, they might have translated themselves a
great part of the Bible:  showing moreover, that they scanned and
examined every tittle and point in the said translation, in such
sort, and so narrowly, that there was not one i therein, but if it
lacked a prick over its head, they did note it, and numbered it unto
the ignorant people for a heresy. So great were then the froward
devices of the English clergy, (who should have been the guides of
light unto the people,) to drive the people from the text and
knowledge of the Scripture, which neither they would translate
themselves, nor yet abide it to he translated of others; to the
intent (as Tyndale saith) that the world being kept still in
darkness, they might sit in the consciences of the people through
vain superstition and false doctrine, to satisfy their lusts,
theirambition, and insatiable covetousness, and to exalt their own
honour above king and emperor, yea, and above God himself.

     The bishops and prelates of the realm, thus (as ye have heard)
incensed and inflamed in their minds, although having no cause,
against the Old and New Testament of the Lord newly translated by
Tyndale, and conspiring together with all their heads and counsels,
how to repeal the same, never rested before they had brought the king
at last to their consent; by reason whereof, a proclamation in all
haste was devised and set forth under public authority, but no just
reason showed, that the Testament of Tyndale's translation, with
other works besides, both of his, and of other writers, were
inhibited and abandoned, as ye heard before:  which was about A.D.
1527. And yet not contented herewith, they proceeded further, how to
entangle him in their nets, and to bereave him of his life; which how
they brought to pass, now it remaineth to be declared.

     In the registers of London it appeareth manifest, how that the
bishops and Sir Thomas More having any poor man under coram, that is,
to be examined before them, namely, such as had been at Antwerp, most
studiously would search and examine all things belonging to Tyndale,
where and with whom he hosted, whereabouts stood the house, what was
his stature, in what apparel he went, what resort he had, &c.:  all
which things when they had diligently learned, (as may appear by the
examination of Simon Smith and others,) then began they to work their
feats, as you shall hear by the relation of his own host.

     William Tyndale, being in the town of Antwerp, had been lodged
about one whole year in the house of Thomas Pointz an Englishman, who
kept there a house of English merchants; about which time came
thither one out of England, whose name was Henry Philips, his father
being customer of Poole, a comely fellow, like as he had been a
gentleman, having a servant with him:  but wherefore he came, or for
what purpose he was sent thither, no man could tell.

     Master Tyndale divers times was desired forth to dinner and
supper amongst merchants; by the means whereof this Henry Philips
became acquainted with him, so that within short space Master Tyndale
had a great confidence in him, and brought him to his lodging, to the
house of Thomas Pointz; and had him also once or twice with him to
dinner and supper, and further entered such friendship with him, that
through his procurement he lay in the same house of the said Pointz;
to whom he showed moreover his books, and other secrets of his study,
so little did Tyndale then mistrust this traitor.

     But Pointz, having no great confidence in the fellow, asked
Master Tyndale how he came acquainted with this Philips. Master
Tyndale answered, that he was an honest man, handsomely learned, and
very conformable. Then Pointz, perceiving that he bare such favour to
him, said no more, thinking that he was brought acquainted with him
by some friend of his. The said Philips, being in the town three or
four days, upon a time desired Pointz to walk with him forth of the
town to show him the commodities thereof, and in walking together
without the town, had communication of divers things, and some of the
king's affairs; by the which talk Pointz as yet suspected nothing,
but after, by the sequel of the matter, he perceived more what he
intended. In the mean time this he well perceived, that he bare no
great favour either to the setting forth of any good thing, or to the
proceedings of the king of England. But after, when the time was
past, Pointz perceived this to he his mind, to feel if he could
perceive by him, whether he might break with him in the matter, for
lucre of money, to help him to his purpose; for he perceived before
that he was monied, and would that Pointz should think no less:  but
by whom it was unknown. For he had desired Pointz before, to help him
to divers things; and such things as he named he required might be of
the best, "for," said he, "I have money enough;" but of this talk
came nothing but that men should think he had some things to do; for
nothing else followed of his talk. So it was to be suspected, that
Philips was in doubt to move this matter for his purpose, to any of
the rulers or officers of the town of Antwerp, for doubt it should
come to the knowledge of some Englishmen, and by the means thereof
Master Tyndale should have had warning.

     So Philips went from Antwerp to the court of Brussels, which is
from thence twenty-four English miles, the king having there no
ambassador; for at that time the king of England and the emperor were
at a controversy for the question betwixt the king and the Lady
Katharine, which was aunt to the emperor; and the discord grew so
much, that it was doubted lest there should have been war between the
emperor and the king; so that Philips, as a traitor both against God
and the king, was there the better retained, as also other traitors
more besides him; who, after he had betrayed Master Tyndale into
their bands, showed himself likewise against the king's own person,
and there set forth things against the king. To make short, the said
Philips did so much there, that he procured to bring from thence with
him to Antwerp, that procurer-general, which is the emperor's
attorney, with certain other officers, as after followeth; which was
not done with small charges and expenses, from whomsoever it came.

     Within a while after, Pointz sitting at his door, Philips's man
came unto him, and asked whether Master Tyndale were there, and said,
his master would come to him; and so departed:  but whether his
master, Philips, were in the town or not, it was not known; but at
that time Pointz heard no more, either of the master or of the man.
Within three or four days after, Pointz went forth to the town of
Barrois, being eighteen English miles from Antwerp, where he had
business to do for the space of a month or six weeks; and in the time
of his absence Henry Philips came again to Antwerp, to the house of
Pointz, and coming in, spake with his wife, asking her for Master
Tyndale, and whether he would dine there with him; saying, "What good
meat shall we have?" She answered, "Such as the market will give."
Then went he forth again (as it is thought) to provide, and set the
officers which he brought with him from Brussels, in the street, and
about the door. Then about noon he came again, and went to Master
Tyndale, and desired him to lend him forty shillings; "for," said he,
"I lost my purse this morning, coming over at the passage between
this and Mechlin." So Master Tyndale took him forty shillings, the
which was easy to be had of him, if he had it; for in the wily
subtleties of this world he was simple and inexpert.

     Then said Philips, "Master Tyndale! you shall be my guest here
this day." "No," said Master Tyndale, "I go forth this day to dinner,
and you shall go with me, and be my guest, where you shall be
welcome." So when it was dinner-time, Master Tyndale went forth with
Philips, and at the going forth of Pointz's house, was a long narrow
entry, so that two could not go in a front. Master Tyndale would have
put Philips before him but, Philips would in no wise, but put Master
Tyndale before, for that he pretended to show great humanity. So
Master Tyndale, being a man of no great stature, went before, and
Philips, a tall, comely person, followed behind him; who had set
officers on either side of the door upon two seats, which, being
there, might see who came in the entry; and coming through the same
entry, Philips pointed with his finger over Master Tyndale's head
down to him, that the officers who sat at the door might see that it
was he whom they should take, as the officers that took Master
Tyndale afterwards told Pointz, and said to Pointz, when they had
laid him in prison, that they pitied to see his simplicity when they
took him. Then they took him, and brought him to the emperor's
attorney, or procuror-general, where he dined. Then came the
procuror-general to the house of Pointz, and sent away all that was
there of Master Tyndale's, as well his books as other things; and
from thence Tyndale was had to the castle of Filford, eighteen
English miles from Antwerp, and there he remained until he was put to
death.

     Then incontinent, by the help of English merchants, were
letters sent, in favour of Tyndale, to the court of Brussels. Also,
not long after, letters were directed out of England to the council
at Brussels, and sent to the merchant-adventurers, to Antwerp,
commanding them to see that with speed they should be delivered. Then
such of the chief of the merchants as were there at that time, being
called together, required the said Pointz to take in hand the
delivery of those letters, with letters also from them, in favour of
Master Tyndale, to the lord of Barrois and others; which lord of
Barrois (as it was told Pointz by the way) at that time was departed
from Brussels, as the chief conductor of the eldest daughter of the
king of Denmark, to be married to the palsgrave, whose mother was
sister to the emperor, she being chief princess of Denmark. Pointz,
after he heard of his departure, did ride after the next way, and
overtook him at Achon, where he delivered to him his letters; the
which when he had received and read, he made no direct answer, but
somewhat objecting, said, There were of their countrymen that were
burned in England not long before (as indeed there were Anabaptists
burned in Smithfield); and so Pointz said to him, "Howbeit," said he,
"whatsoever the crime was, if his Lordship or any other nobleman had
written, requiring to have had them, he thought they should not have
been denied." "Well," said he, "I have no leisure to write, for the
princess is ready to ride." Then said Pointz, "If it shall please
your Lordship, I will attend upon you unto the next baiting-place;"
which was at Maestricht. "If you so do," said the lord, "I will
advise myself by the way what to write." So Pointz followed him from
Achon to Maestricht, the which are fifteen English miles asunder; and
there he received letters of him, one to the council there, another
to the company of the merchant-adventurers, and another also to the
Lord Cromwell in England.

     So Pointz rode from thence to Brussels, and then and there
delivered to the council the letters out of England, with the lord of
Barrois's letters also, and received eftsoons answer into England of
the same by letters which he brought to Antwerp to the English
merchants, who required him to go with them into England. And he,
very desirous to have Master Tyndale out of prison, let not to take
pains, with loss of time in his own business and occupying,
anddiligently followed with the said letters, which he there
delivered to the council, and was commanded by them to tarry until he
had other letters, with which he was not despatched thence in a month
after. At length, the letters being delivered him, he returned again,
and delivered them to the emperor's council at Brussels, and there
tarried for answer of the same.

     When the said Pointz had tarried three or four days, it was
told him by one that belonged to the Chancery, that Master Tyndale
should have been delivered to him according to the tenor of the
letters; but Philips, being there, followed the suit against Master
Tyndale, and hearing that he should be delivered to Pointz, and
doubting lest he should be put from his purpose, he knew no other
remedy but to accuse Pointz, saying, that he was a dweller in the
town of Antwerp, and there had been a succourer of Tyndale, and was
one of the same opinion; and that all this was only his own labour
and suit, to have Master Tyndale at liberty, and no man's else.

     Thus, upon his information and accusation, Pointz was attached
by the procuror-general, the emperor's attorney, and delivered to the
keeping of two serjeants-at-arms; and the same evening was sent to
him one of the chancery, with the procuror-general, who ministered
unto him an oath, that he should truly make answer to all such things
as should be inquired of him, thinking they would have had no other
examinations of him but of his message. The next day likewise they
came again, and had him in examination, and so five or six days one
after another, upon not so few as a hundred articles, as well of the
king's affairs, as of the message concerning Tyndale, of his aiders,
and of his, religion; out of which examinations, the procuror-general
drew twenty-three or twenty-four articles, and declared the same
against the said Pointz, the copy whereof he delivered to him to make
answer thereunto, and permitted him to have an advocate and proctor,
that is, a doctor and proctor in the law; and order was taken, that
eight days after he should deliver unto them his answer, and from
eight days to eight days, to proceed till the process were ended.
Also that he should send no messenger to Antwerp where his house was,
being twenty-four English miles from Brussels, where he was prisoner,
nor to any other place, but by the post of the town of Brussels; nor
to send any letters, nor any to be delivered to him, but written in
Dutch; and the procuror-general, who was party against him, to read
them, to peruse and examine them thoroughly, (contrary to all right
and equity,) before they were sent or delivered:  neither might any be
suffered to speak or talk with Pointz in any other tongue or
language, except only in the Dutch tongue; so that his keepers, who
were Dutchmen, might understand what the contents of the letters or
talk should be:  saving that at one time the provincial of the White
Friars came to dinner where Pointz was prisoner, and brought with him
a young novice, being an Englishman, whom the provincial, after
dinner, of his own accord, did bid to talk with the said Pointz; and
so with him he was licensed to talk. The purpose and great policy
therein was easy to be perceived. Between Pointz and the novice was
much pretty talk, as of Sir Thomas More, and of the bishop of
Rochester, and of their putting to death; whose death he seemed
greatly to lament, especially dying in such a quarrel, worthy (as he
said) to be accounted for martyrs; with other noble doctrine, and
deep learning in divinity, meet to feed swine withal:  such blindness
then in those days reigned amongst them.

     The eighth day, the commissioners that were appointed came to
the house where Pointz was kept, to have had his answer in writing: 
he, making no great haste in proceeding, answereth them with a
dilatory manner, saying, he was there a prisoner, and might not go
abroad, so that, although he had appointed and named who were to be a
council with him, they came not to him, nor could he go to them; nor
could any come to give counsel in this matter, but such as were
licensed and named by them. Then they gave him a day, to make answer
against the nexth eighth day. And Pointz drew out his own mind,
answering to the whole declaration generally; which, at the next
coming, he delivered them:  but that answer they would not take,
saying, he must answer to every article particularly; and so they
took order, that he should make it ready against the next coming.
Thus he trifled them off, from Allhallow-tide until Christmas even,
with dilatory matters, from one eighth day to another eighth day. And
upon Christmas even, in the morning, they came to him to have had an
answer, which was not made, nor had any counsel come to him in all
that time:  howbeit, they would delay the time no longer, but said
they, "Bring in your answer this day, or else ye shall be put from
it;" so he perceived, that if it were not brought in that night, he
should have been condemned without answer. So then, with much ado, he
got the advocate to help him in ordering of his answer; but it was
long ere he came, so that it was past eight o'clock of Christmas even
before his answers were delivered to the procurer-general. And then
afterwards, as the time served, at the days appointed, it went forth
with replication duplic, with other answers each to other, in writing
what they could, in answering to the emperor's ordinances. And at
such times as the commissioners came to Pointz, that traitor Philips
accompanied them to the door, in following the process against him,
as he also did against Master Tyndale, as they who had Pointz in
keeping showed him.

     The process being ended, as the order is there, either party
delivered up to the commissioners a bag, with his process in writing,
and took an inventory of every parcel of writing that was within the
bag. So it rested in their hands; but, upon sentence, Pointz
required, in the time of process, that he might put in surety, and so
to be at liberty. This they granted him at the first time, but,
afterwards, they denied to take surety for his body. Then he sent a
post from the town of Brussels to Antwerp to the English merchants,
thinking they would not let him have stuck for lack of their help, in
putting in sureties for him, considering the cause, with the
circumstance, especially since they brought him into this trouble
themselves; although it does not appear that they made him any
promise for his charges and pains taken, as Pointz reported of them
they really did.

     But, to pass over this, and to make the matter short:  if the
aforesaid merchants, such as were of the town of Antwerp, had, at the
time, been surety for him, then the matter had been altered from a
criminal to a civil case:  but when Pointz had delivered to them his
answer, they demanded of him, for his charges, money, or sureties.
The charges were much, to reckon for the two officers' meat, and
drink, and wages, beside his own charges; so that it was about five
shillings every day. For all the while he was prisoner, he was not in
a common prison, but in the keeping of two officers in one of their
houses. So they demanded sureties to be brought within eight days for
the charges, but then they denied him to take surety for his body, to
make answer at liberty. Pointz, considering that they altered in
their purposes, as well in other things as in that; and perceiving,
by other things, (as also it was told in secret,) that it would have
cost him his life if he had tarried, yet Pointz granted them to put
in sureties, requiring of them to have a messenger to send; not
because he reckoned to have any, but to make a delay, otherwise they
would have sent him to a stronger prison. But Pointz delayed them,
thinking, if he could, to make escape; yet he did make a good face,
as though he reckoned to have been in no danger; which if he had not
done, it was very unlikely he should have escaped with his life out
of their hands. And at the eighth day the commissioners came again to
Pointz, and there received both their bags with the process, one from
the procuror-general, and one from Pointz, delivering either of them
an inventory of such pieces of writing as were delivered in the bags,
and demanded sureties of Pointz, according to the order they took
when they were last with him. Pointz alleged that he had divers times
required those who had him in keeping to get him a messenger, as he
also had done, but made no great haste to have any; for he reckoned
it should be a sufficient delay, whereby he might have another day.
And with much alleging the impossibility of his being able to get a
messenger to send forth, at the last, they put him apart, and agreed
to give him a day eight days after, and called him in again, and
commanded the officer to get him a messenger, as they did. And so
Pointz sent him with letters to the English merchants, who at that
time were at Barrois. Howbeit, he reckoned to get away before the
return again of the messenger, for he perceived his tarrying there
should have been his death. And therefore, to put in a venture to get
away, that so he might save himself, (for, if he had been taken, it
would have been but death, for he had been prisoner there in their
hands at that time about twelve or thirteen weeks,) he tarried not
the coming again of the messenger, but, in a night, by some means he
conveyed himself off, and so, by God's help, at the opening of the
town gate in the morning, he got away. And when it was perceived that
he was gone, there was horse sent out after him, but, because he well
knew the country, he escaped and came into England. But what more
trouble followeth to Pointz after the same, it serveth not for this
place to rehearse. Master Tyndale, still remaining in prison, was
proffered an advocate and a procuror; for in any crime there, it
shall be permitted to counsel to make answer in the law; but he
refused to have any, saying, he would make answer for himself, and
did:  but, it is to be thought, his answer will not be put forth.
Notwithstanding, he had so preached to them there who had him in
charge, and such as were there conversant with him in the castle,
that they reported of him, that if he were not a good Christian man,
they knew not whom they might take to be one.

     At last, after much reasoning, when no reason would serve,
although he deserved no death, he was condemned by virtue of the
emperor's decree, made in the assembly at Augsburgh, (as is before
signified,) and, upon the same, brought forth to the place of
execution, was there tied to the stake, and then strangled first by
the hangman, and afterwards with fire consumed in the morning, at the
town of Filford, A.D. 1536; crying thus at the stake with a fervent
zeal and a loud voice, "Lord! open the king of England's eyes."

     Such was the power of his doctrine, and the sincerity of his
life, that during the time of his imprisonment, (which endured a year
and a half,) it is said, he converted his keeper, the keeper's
daughter, and others of his household. Also the rest that were with
Tyndale conversant in the castle, reported of him that if he were not
a good Christian man, they could not tell whom to trust.

     The procurator-general, the emperor's attorney, being there,
left this testimony of him, that he was "a learned, a good, and a
godly man."

     The same morning in which he was had to the fire, he delivered
a letter to the keeper of the castle, which the keeper himself
brought to the house of the aforesaid Pointz in Antwerp, shortly
after; which letter, with his examinations and other his
disputations, I would might have come to our hands; all which I
understand did remain, and yet perhaps do, in the hands of the
keeper's daughter. For so it is of him reported, that as he was in
the castle prisoner, there was much writing, and great disputation to
and fro, between him and them of the university of Louvain, (which
was not past nine or ten miles from the place where he was prisoner,)
in such sort, that they all had enough to do, and more than they
could well wield, to answer the authorities and testimonies of the
Scripture, whereupon he most pithily grounded his doctrine.

     That traitor, worse than Judas to man's judgment, (only not
comparing this to the case of Christ, and that the Scripture hath
already judged Judas,) was otherwise in the act -- doing not so good;
for Judas, after he had betrayed his Master and Friend, was sorry,
acknowledged and confessed his fact openly, declared his Master to be
the very Truth, and despising the money that he had received for
doing the act, brought it again and cast it before them. This traitor
Philips, contrariwise, not lamenting, but rejoicing in what he had
done, not declaring the honest goodness and truth of his friend, but
applying, in all that he could devise, to declare him to be false and
seditious, and not despising the money that he had received, not
bringing it again, but procuring and receiving more, wherewith to
follow the suit against that innocent blood to the death; which case
of things endured about one whole year and a half, in which he lost
no time, but all that time followed Pointz with most diligent
attendance to and fro, and from Louvain to Brussels, and to Filford,
with process to have sentence against him. And having there no other
thing to do, he applied himself to nothing else; which was not done
with small expenses and charges, from whomsoever it came. And, as I
hare heard say there in that country, Master Tyndale found them in
the university of Louvain with enough to do.
Illustration:  Tyndale at the stake

     And yet, in all that while, if they had not taken to help them
an ordinance of the emperor's making, (which ordinance was made by
the advice and counsel of the pope's soldiers, for the upholding of
his kingdom, and also joined with his own laws,) they knew not else
how to have brought him to his death by their disputing with him in
the Scriptures; for he was permitted to dispute, in answering to
them, by writing. And that traitor Philips was not satisfied with
that, but he knew that he should have money enough, as himself before
had said to Pointz. But, as when Judas did run away with the bag when
he went to betray Christ, with which he went his way, the other
apostles thought he had gone to have bought things necessary,
(although he went to appoint with the Jews for the taking of his
Master, Christ,) so, in like manner, this traitor Philips, the same
morning that he brought his treachery to purpose, with bringing
Master Tyndale into the hands of God's enemies, took money of him
under a colour of borrowing, and put it into his bag, and then
incontinent went his ways therewith, and came with his company of
soldiers, who laid hands upon him as before, and led him away. And
about one whole year and a half after, he was put to death at
Filford, with fire; and, albeit this Philips rejoiced awhile, after
that he had done it, yet the saying so goeth, that he not long time
after enjoyed the price of innocent blood, but was consumed at last
with lice.

     The worthy virtues and doings of this blessed martyr, who, for
his painful travails and singular zeal to his country, may be called,
in these our days, an apostle of England, it were long to recite.
Among many others, this, because it seemeth to me worthy of
remembrance, I thought not in silence to overpass, which hath unto me
credibly been testified by certain grave merchants, and some of them
also such as were present the same time at the fact, and men yet 
alive the story whereof is this:  There was at Antwerp on a time,
amongst a company of merchants as they were at supper, a certain
juggler, which through his diabolical enchantments of art magical,
would fetch all kind of viands and wine from any place they would,
and set them upon the table incontinent before them, with many other
suchlike things. The fame of this juggler being much talked of, it
chanced that as Master Tyndale heard of it, he desired certain of the
merchants, that he might also be present at supper, to see him play
his parts. To be brief, the supper was appointed, and the merchants,
with Tyndale, were there present. Then the juggler, being required to
play his feats, and to show his cunning, after his wonted boldness
began to utter all that he could do, but all was in vain. At last,
with his labour, sweating, and toiling, when he- saw that nothing
would go forward, but that all his enchantments were void, he was
compelled openly to confess, that there was some man present at
supper, which disturbed and letted all his doings. So that a man,
even in the martyrs of these our days, cannot lack the miracles of
true faith, if miracles were now to be desired.

     As concerning the works and books of Tyndale, which extend to a
great number, thou vast told before, loving reader! how the printer
hereof mindeth, by the Lord's leave, to collect them all in onevolume
together, and put them out in print. Wherefore it shall not greatly
at this time be needful to make any several rehearsal of them. And as
touching his translation of the New Testament, because his enemies
did so much carp at it, pretending it to be so full of heresies; to
answer therefore to their slanderous tongues and lying lips, thou
shalt hear and understand what faithful dealing and sincere
conscience he used in the same, by the testimony and allegation of
his own words, written in his epistle to John Frith, as followeth:  "I
call God to record against the day we shall appear before our Lord
Jesus, to give our reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one
syllable of God's word against my conscience, nor would do this day,
if all that is in earth, whether it be honour, pleasure, or riches,
might be given me," &c.

     And as ye have heard Tyndale's own words, thus protesting for
himself, now let us hear likewise the faithful testimony of John
Frith, for Tyndale his dear companion and brother, thus declaring in
his answer to Master More, as followeth: 

The testimony of John Frith, in his book of the sacrament, concerning
William Tyndale.

     "And Tyndale I trust liveth, well content with such a poor
apostle's life as God gave his Son Christ, and his faithful ministers
in this world, who is not sure of so many mites, as ye be yearly of
pounds, although I am sure that for his learning and judgment in
Scripture, he were more worthy to be promoted than all the bishops in
England. I received a letter from him, which was written since
Christmas, wherein, among other matters, he writeth this:  I call God
to record against the day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus, to
give a reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one syllable of
God's word against my conscience, no would do this day, if all that
is in earth, whether it be honour, pleasure, or riches, might be
given me. Moreover, I take God to witness to my conscience, that I
desire of God to myself in this world, no more than that, without
which I cannot keep his laws,' &c. Judge, Christian reader, whether
these words be not spoken of a faithful, clear, innocent heart. And
as for his behaviour, it is such that I am sure no man can reprove
him of any sin, howbeit no man is innocent before God, who beholdeth
the heart."

     Thus much out of Frith. And thus, being about to conclude and
finish with the life and story of William Tyndale, it shall be
requisite now that the reader do hear something likewise of his
supplications made to the king and nobles of the realm, as they are
yet extant in his works to be seen, and worthy in all ages to be
marked, the tenor whereof tendeth to this effect as followeth.

Tyndale's supplication to the king, nobles, and subjects of England.

     "I beseech the king's most noble Grace, well to consider all
the ways by which the cardinal, and our holy bishops, have led him
since he was first king; and to see whereunto all the pride, pomp,
and vain boast of the cardinal is come, and how God hath resisted him
and our prelates in all their wiles. We, having nothing to do at all,
have meddled yet with all matters, and have spent for our prelates
causes more than all Christendom, even unto the utter beggaring of
ourselves; and have gotten nothing but rebuke and hate among all
nations, and a mock and a scorn of them whom we have most holpen. For
the Frenchmen (as the saying is) of late days made a play, or a
disguising, at Paris, in which the emperor danced with the pope and
the French king, and wearied them; the king of England sitting on a
high bench, and looking on. And when it was asked why he danced not,
it was answered, that he sat there but to pay the minstrels their
wages:  as one who should say, we paid for all men's dancing. We
monied the emperor openly, and gave the French king double and treble
secretly, and to the pope also. Yea, and though Ferdinand had money
sent openly to blind the world withal, yet the saying is, through all
Dutch-land, that we sent money to the king of Poland, &c.

     "Furthermore, I beseech his Grace also to have mercy on his own
soul, and not to suffer Christ and his holy Testament to be
persecuted under his name any longer, that the sword of the wrath of
God may be put up again, which, for that cause, no doubt, is most
chiefly drawn.

     "Thirdly, my petition is to his Grace, to have compassion on
his poor subjects, that the realm utterly perish not with the wicked
counsel of our pestilent prelates. For if his Grace, who is but a
man, should die, the lords and commons not knowing who hath most 
right to enjoy the crown, the realm could not but stand in great
danger.

     "My fourth suit and exhortation is to all the lords temporal of
the realm, that they come and fall before the king's Grace, and
humbly desire his Majesty to suffer it to be tried, who of right
ought to succeed:  and if he or she fail, who next, and who third. And
let it be proclaimed openly; and let all the lords temporal be sworn
thereto, and all the knights, and squires, and gentlemen, and the
commons above eighteen years old, that there be no strife for the
succession. If they try it by the sword, I promise them, I see no
other likelihood, but it will cost the realm of England, &c.

     "Further, of all the subjects of England this I crave -- that
they repent; for the cause of evil rulers is the sin of the subjects,
as testifieth the Scripture. And the cause of false preachers is,
that the people have no love unto the truth, saith Paul, in 1 Thess.
ii. We be all sinners a hundred times greater than all that we
suffer. Let us, therefore, each forgive others, remembering, the
greater sinners the more welcome, if we repent; according to the
similitude of the riotous son. For Christ died for sinners, and is
their Saviour, and his blood is their treasure, to pay for their
sins. He is that fatted calf which is slain to make them good cheer
withal, if they will repent and come to their Father again; and his
merits are the goodly raiment to cover the naked deformities of their
sins.

     "Finally, if the persecution of the king's Grace, and other
temporal persons, conspiring with the spiritually, be of ignorance, I
doubt not but that their eyes shall be opened shortly, and they shall
see and repent, and God shall show them mercy. But if it be of a set
malice against the truth, and of a grounded hate against the law of
God, by the reason of a full consent they have to sin, and to walk in
their old ways of ignorance, whereunto, being now past all
repentance, they have utterly yielded themselves, to follow with full
lust, without bridle or snaffle, (which is the sin against the Holy
Ghost,) then ye shall see, even shortly, that God shall turn the
point of the sword wherewith they now shed Christ's blood, homeward,
to shed their own again, after all the examples of the Bible."

     These things thus discoursed, pertaining to the story and
doings of Tyndale, finally it remaineth to infer certain of his
private letters and epistles, whereof, among divers others which have
not come to our hands, two special he wrote to John Frith, one
properly, under his own name, another under the name of Jacob; but,
in very deed, it was written and delivered to John Frith, being
prisoner then in the Tower, as ye shall further understand by the
sequel hereafter. The copy and tenor of the epistles here followeth.

A letter sent from William Tyndale unto Master Frith, being in the
Tower.

     "The grace and peace of God our Father, and of Jesus Christ our
Lord, be with you, Amen. Dearly beloved brother John! I have heard
say, how the hypocrites, now that they have overcome that great
business which letted them, or at the least way have brought it to a
stay, they return to their old nature again. The will of God be
fulfilled, and that which he hath ordained to be, ere the world was
made, that come, and his glory reign over all!

     "Dearly beloved! however the matter be, commit yourself wholly
and only unto your most loving Father, and most kind Lord. Fear not
men that threat, nor trust men that speak fair; but trust him that is
true of promise, and able to make his word good. Your cause is
Christ's gospel, a light that must be fed with the blood of faith.
The lamp must be dressed and snuffed daily, and that oil poured in
every evening and morning, that the light go not out. Though we be
sinners, yet is the cause right. If when we be buffeted for well
doing, we suffer patiently and endure, that is acceptable to God; for
to that end we are called. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example, that we should follow his steps, who did no sin.
Hereby have we perceived love, that he had lain down his life for us;
therefore we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For we
suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him; who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body; according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all
things unto him.

     "Dearly beloved! be of good courage, and comfort your soul with
the hope of this high reward, and bear the image of Christ in your
mortal body, that it may, at his coming, be made like to his,
immortal; and follow the example of all your other dear brethren,
which choose to suffer in hope of a better resurrection. Keep your
conscience pure and undefiled, and say against that, nothing. Stick
at necessary things, and remember the blasphemies of the enemies of
Christ, saying, they find none but that will abjure, rather than
suffer the extremity. Moreover, the death of them that come again
after they have once denied, though it be accepted with God, and all
that believe, yet it is not glorious:  for the hypocrites say, 'He
must needs die; denying helpeth not. But, might it have holpen, they
would have denied five hundred times; but seeing it would not help
them, therefore, of pure pride and mere malice together, they spake
with their mouths what their conscience knoweth false.' If you give
yourself, cast yourself, yield yourself, commit yourself, wholly and
only to your loving Father; then shall his power be in you, and make
you strong; and that so strong that you shall feel no pain, which
should be to another present death:  and his Spirit shall speak in
you, and teach you what to answer, according to his promise. He shall
set out his truth by you wonderfully, and work for you above all that
your heart can imagine:  yea, and you are not yet dead, though the
hypocrites all, with all that they can make, have sworn your death.
Una salus victis nullam sperare salutem; to look for no man's help,
bringeth the help of God to them that seem to be overcome in the eyes
of the hypocrites:  yea, it shall make God to carry you through thick
and thin for his truth's sake, in spite of all the enemies of his
truth. There falleth not a hair, till his hour be come; and when his
hour is come, necessity carrieth us hence, though we be not willing.
But if we be willing, then have we a reward and thank.

     "Fear not the threatening therefore, neither be overcome of
sweet words, with which twain the hypocrites shall assail you;
neither let the persuasions of worldly wisdom bear rule in your
heart; no, though they be your friends that counsel you. Let Bilney
be a warning to you; let not their visor beguile your eyes. Let not
your body faint. He that endureth to the end shall be saved. If the
pain be above your strength, remember, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, I will give it you. And pray to your Father in that name, and
he shall ease your pain, or shorten it. The Lord of peace, of hope,
and of faith, be with you, Amen.

     WILLIAM TYNDALE.

     "Two have suffered in Antwerp, In die sanctæ crucis, unto the
great glory of the gospel; four at Risele in Flanders, and at Lucca
hath there one at the least suffered; and all the same day. At Rouen
in France they persecute, and at Paris are five doctors taken for the
gospel. See, you are not alone; be cheerful, and remember that among
the hard-hearted in England, there is a number reserved by grace; for
whose sakes, if need be, you must be ready to suffer. Sir, if you may
write, how short soever it be, forget it not, that we may know how it
goeth with you, for our heart's ease. The Lord be yet again with you
with all his plenteousness, and fill you that you flow over, Amen.

     "If, when you have read this, you may send it to Adrian, do, I
pray you, that he may know how that our heart is with you.

     "George Joy at Candlemas, being at Barrois, printed two leaves
of Genesis in a great form, and sent one copy to the king, and
another to the new queen, with a letter to N., to deliver them; and
to purchase licence, that he might so go through all the Bible. Out
of this is sprung the noise of the new Bible; and out of that is the
great seeking for English books at all printers and bookbinders in
Antwerp, and for an English priest, that should print.

     "This chanced the ninth day of May.

     "Sir, your wife is well content with the will of God, and would
not, for her sake, have the glory of God hindered.

     WILLIAM TYNDALE."

Another notable and worthy letter of Master William Tyndale, sent to
the said John Frith, under the name of Jacob.

     "The grace of our Saviour Jesus, his patience, meekness,
humbleness, circumspection, and wisdom, be with your heart, Amen.

     "Dearly beloved brother Jacob, mine heart's desire in our
Saviour Jesus, is, that you arm yourself with patience, and be cold,
sober, wise, and circumspect, and that you keep you alow by the
ground, avoiding high questions, that pass the common capacity. But
expound the law truly, and open the veil of Moses to condemn all
flesh; and prove all men sinners, and all deeds under the law, before
mercy have taken away the condemnation thereof, to be sin and
damnable; and then, as a faithful minister, set abroach the mercy of
our Lord Jesus, and let the wounded consciences drink of the water of
him. And then shall your preaching be with power, and not as the
doctrine of the hypocrites; and the Spirit of God shall work with
you, and all consciences shall bear record unto you, and feel that it
is so. And all the doctrine that casteth a mist on those two, to
shadow and hide them, (I mean the law of God, and mercy of Christ,)
that resist you with all your power. Sacraments without signification
refuse. If they put significations to them, receive them, if you see
it may help, though it be not necessary.

     "Of the presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, meddle as
little as you can, that there appear no division among us. Barnes
will be hot against you. The Saxons be sore on the affirmative: 
whether constant or obstinate, I commit it to God. Philip Melancthon
is said to be with the French king. There be in Antwerp that say,
they saw him come into Paris with a hundred and fifty horses, and
that they spake with him. If the Frenchmen receive the word of God,
he will plant the affirmative in them. George Joy would have put
forth a treatise of the matter, but I have stopped him as yet:  what
he will do if he get money, I wot not. I believe he would make many
reasons little serving to the purpose. My mind is that nothing be put
forth till we hear how you shall have sped. I would have the right
use preached, and the presence to be an indifferent thing, till the
matter might be reasoned in peace, at leisure, of both parties. If
you be required, show the phrases of the Scripture, andlet them talk
what they will:  for as to believe that God is every where, hurteth no
man that worshippeth him no where but within in the heart, in spirit,
and verity; even so, to believe that the body of Christ is every
where, (though it cannot be proved,) hurteth no man that worshippeth
him no where save in the faith of his gospel. You perceive my mind: 
howbeit if God show you otherwise, it is free for you to do as he
moveth you.

     "I guessed long ago, that God would send a dazing into the head
of the spiritualty, to catch themselves in their own subtlety, and I
trust it is come to pass. And now methinketh I smell a counsel to be
taken, little for their profits in time to come. But you must
understand, that it is not of a pure heart, and for love of the
truth, but to avenge themselves, and to eat the whore's flesh, and to
suck the marrow of her bones. Wherefore cleave fast to the rock of
the help of God, and commit the end of all things to him:  and if God
shall call you, that you may then use the wisdom of the worldly, as
far as you perceive the glory of God may come thereof, refuse it not;
and ever among thrust in, that the Scripture may be in the mother
tongue, and learning set up in the universities. But if aught be
required contrary to the glory of God, and his Christ, then stand
fast, and commit yourself to God, and be not overcome of men's
persuasions; which haply shall say, We see no other way to bring in
the truth. "Brother Jacob, beloved in my heart! there liveth not in
whom I have so good hope and trust, and in whom my heart rejoiceth,
and my soul comforteth herself, as in you; not the thousandth part so
much for your learning, and what other gifts else you have, as
because you will creep alow by the ground, and walk in those things
that the conscience may feel, and not in the imaginations of the
brain; in fear, and not in boldness; in open necessary things, and
not to pronounce or define of hid secrets, or things that neither
help nor hinder, whether it be so or no; in unity, and not in
seditious opinions:  insomuch that if you be sure you know, yet in
things that may abide leisure, you will defer, or say, (till others
agree with you,) 'Methinks the text requireth this sense or
understanding.' Yea, and if you be sure that your part be good, and
another hold the contrary, yet if it be a thing that maketh no
matter, you will laugh and let it pass, and refer the thing to other
men, and stick you stiffly and stubbornly in earnest and necessary
things. And I trust you be persuaded even so of me:  for I call God to
record against the day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus, to give
a reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one syllable of God's
word against my conscience, nor would this day, if all that is in the
earth, whether it be pleasure, honour, or riches, might be given me.
Moreover, I take God to record to my conscience, that I desire of
God, to myself in this world, no more than that, without which I
cannot keep his laws.

     "Finally, if there were in me any gift that could help at hand,
and aid you if need required, I promise you I would not be far off,
and commit the end to God. My soul is not faint, though my body be
weary. But God hath made me evil-favoured in this world, and without
grace in the sight of men, speechless and rude, dull and slow-witted: 
your part shall be to supply what lacketh in me; remembering that as
lowliness of heart shall make you high with God, even so meekness of
words shall make you sink into the hearts of men. Nature giveth age
authority, but meekness is the glory of youth, and giveth them
honour. Abundance of love maketh me exceed in babbling.

     "Sir, as concerning purgatory and many other things, if you be
demanded, you may say, if you err, the spiritualty hath so led you,
and that they have taught you to believe as you do. For they preached
you all such things out of God's word, and alleged a thousand texts,
by reason of which texts you believed as they taught you; but now you
find them liars, and that the texts mean no such things, and
therefore you can believe them no longer; but are as you were before
they taught you, and believe no such thing:  howbeit you are ready to
believe, if they have any other way to prove it; for without proof
you cannot believe them, when you have found them with so many lies,
&c. If you perceive wherein we may help, either in being still, or
doing somewhat, let us have word, and I will do mine uttermost.

     "My lord of London hath a servant called John Tisen, with a red
beard, and a black-reddish head, and who was once my scholar:  he was
seen in Antwerp, but came not among the Englishmen. Whether he is
gone an ambassador secret, I wot not.

     "The mighty God of Jacob be with you, to supplant his enemies,
and give you the favour of Joseph:  and the wisdom and the spirit of
Stephen be with your heart, and with your mouth, and teach your lips
what they shall say, and how to answer to all things. He is our God,
if we despair in ourselves, and trust in him:  and his is the glory.
Amen.

     "I hope our redemption is nigh.

     WILLIAM TYNDALE."

     This letter was written A.D. 1533, in the month of January: 
which letter, although it do pretend the name of Jacob, yet
understand, good reader, that it was written in very deed to John
Frith, as is above told thee. For the more proof and evidence hereof,
read Frith's book of the sacrament, and there thou shalt find a
certain place of this epistle repeated word for word, beginning thus;
"I call God to record, against the day we shall appear before our
Lord Jesus to give a reckoning of our doing, that I never altered one
syllable of God's word against my conscience," &c.; which epistle
John Frith himself witnesseth that he received from Tyndale, as in
his testimony appeareth.



185. THE DEATH OF THE LADY KATHARINE, PRINCESS DOWAGER, AND THAT OF
QUEEN ANNE.
 THE same year in which William Tyndale was burned,
which was A.D. 1536, in the beginning of the year, first died Lady
Katharine, princess dowager, in the month of January.

     After whom, the same year also, in the month of May next
following, followeth the death also of Queen Anne, who had now been
married to the king the space of three years. In certain records thus
we find, that the king, being in his jousts at Greenwich, suddenly
with a few persons departed to Westminster, and, the next day after,
Queen Anne, his wife, was had to the Tower, with the Lord Rochford
her brother, and certain other, and, the nineteenth day after, was
beheaded. The words of this worthy and Christian lady at her death
were these: 

     "Good Christian people! I am come hither to die, for according
to the law, and by the law, I am judged to death; and therefore I
will speak nothing against it. I am come hither to accuse no man, nor
to speak any thing of that whereof I am accused and condemned to die;
but I pray God save the king, and send him long to reign over you,
for a gentler or a more merciful prince was there never; and to me he
was ever a good, a gentle, and a sovereign lord. And if any person
will meddle of my cause, I require them to judge the best. And thus I
take my leave of the world, and of you all, and I heartily desire you
all to pray for me. 0 Lord, have mercy on me! To God I commend my
soul."

     And so she kneeled down, saying, "To Christ I commend my soul: "
"Jesu, receive my soul." Repeating the same divers times, till at
length the stroke was given, and her head was stricken off. And this
was the end of that godly lady and queen. Godly I call her, for
sundry respects, whatsoever the cause was, or quarrel objected
against her. First, her last words spoken at her death declared no
less her sincere faith and trust in Christ, than did her quiet
modesty utter forth the goodness of the cause and matter, whatsoever
it was. Besides that to such as wisely can judge upon cases
occurrent, this also may seem to give a great clearing unto her, that
the king, the third day after, was married in his whites unto
another. Certain this was, that for the rare and singular gifts of
her mind, so well instructed, and given toward God, with such a
fervent desire unto the truth and setting forth of sincere religion,
joined with like gentleness, modesty, and pity toward all men, there
have not many such queens before her borne the crown of England.
Principally this one commendation she left behind her, that during
her life, the religion of Christ most happily flourished, and had a
right prosperous course.

     Many things might be written more of the manifold virtues, and
the quiet moderation of her mild nature, how lowly she would bear,
not only to be admonished, but also of her own accord would require
her chaplains plainly and freely to tell whatsoever they saw in her
amiss. Also, how bountiful she was to the poor, passing not only the
common example of other queens, but also the revenues almost of her
estate; insomuch that the alms which she gave in three quarters of a
year, in distribution, is summed to the number of fourteen or fifteen
thousand pounds; besides the great piece of money which her grace
intended to impart into four sundry quarters of the realm, as for a
stock there to be employed to the behoof of poor artificers and
occupiers. Again, what a zealous defender she was of Christ's gospel
all the world doth know, and her acts do and will declare to the
world's end. Amongst which other her acts this is one, that she
placed Master Hugh Latimer in the bishopric of Worcester, and also
preferred Dr. Shaxton to his bishopric, being then accounted a good
man. Furthermore, what a true faith she bare unto the Lord, this one
example may stand for many:  for that when King Henry was with her at
Woodstock, and there, being afraid of an old blind prophecy, for the
which neither he nor other kings before him durst hunt in the said
park of Woodstock, nor enter into the town of Oxford, at last,
through the Christian and faithful counsel of that queen, he was so
armed against all infidelity, that both, he hunted in the aforesaid
park, and also entered into the town of Oxford, and had no harm. But
because, touching the memorable virtue of this worthy queen, partly
we have said something before, partly because more also is promised
to be declared of her virtuous life (the Lord so permitting) by other
who then were about her, I will cease in this matter further to
proceed.

     This I cannot but marvel at, why the parliament holden this
year, that is, the twenty-eighth year of the king, (which parliament
three years before had established and confirmed this marriage as
most lawful,) should now so suddenly, and contrary to their own
doings, repeal and disable the said marriage again as unlawful, being
so lawfully before contracted. But more I marvel, why the said
parliament, after the illegitimation of the marriage enacted, not
contented with that, should further proceed, and charge her with such
carnal desires of her body as to misuse herself with her own natural
brother, the Lord Rochford, and other; being so contrary to all
nature, that no natural man will believe it.

     But in this act of parliament did lie, no doubt, some great
mystery, which here I will not stand to discuss, but only that it may
be suspected some secret practising of the papists here not to be
lacking, considering what a mighty stop she was to their purposes and
proceedings, and on the contrary side, what a strong bulwark she was
for the maintenance of Christ's gospel, and sincere religion, which
they then in no case could abide. By reason whereof it may be easily
considered, that this Christian and devout Deborah could lack no
enemies amongst such a number of Philistines, both within the realm,
and without.

     Again, neither is it unlike, but that Stephen Winchester, being
then abroad in embassy, was not altogether asleep; the suspicion
whereof may be the more conjectural, for that Edmund Bonner,
archdeacon of Leicester, and then ambassador in France, succeeding
after Stephen Winchester, did manifestly detect him of plain
papistry, as in the sequel of their stories, when we come to the
time, more amply (the Lord granting) shall be expressed.

     And as touching the king's mind and assent, although at that
time, through crafty setters-on, he seemed to be sore bent both
against that queen, and to the disheriting of his own daughter; yet
unto that former will of the king so set against her then, I will
oppose again the last will of the king, wherein, expressly and by
name, he did accept, and by plain ratification did allow, the
succession of his marriage to stand good and lawful.

     Furthermore, to all other sinister judgments and opinions,
whatsoever can be conceived of man against that virtuous queen, I
object and oppose again (as instead of answer) the evident
demonstration of God's favour, in maintaining, preserving, and
advancing the offspring of her body, the Lady ELIZABETH, now queen,
whom the Lord hath so marvellously conserved from so manifold
dangers, so royally hath exalted, so happily hath blessed with such
virtuous patience, and with such a quiet reign hitherto, that neither
the reign of her brother Edward, nor of her sister Mary, to hers is
to be compared; whether we consider the number of years of their
reigns, or the peaceableness of their state. In whose royal and
flourishing regiment we have to behold, not so much the natural
disposition of her mother's qualities, as the secret judgment of God
in preserving and magnifying the fruit and offspring of that godly
queen.

     And finally, as for the blasphemous mouth both of Cardinal
Pole, and of Paulus Jovius, that popish cardinal, who, measuring
belike other women by his courtesans of Rome, so impudently abuseth
his pen in lying and railing against this noble queen:  to answer
again in defence of her cause to that Italian, I object and oppose
the consent and judgment of so many noble protestants and princes of
Germany, who, being in league before with King Henry, and minding no
less but to have made him the head of their confederation,
afterwards, hearing of the death of this queen, utterly brake from
him, and refused him only for the same cause.

     But all this seemeth (as is said) to be the drift of the wily
papists, who, seeing the pope to be repulsed out of England, by the
means chiefly of this queen, and fearing always the succession of
this marriage in time to come, thought by sinister practice to
prevent that peril before, whispering in the king's ears what
possibly they could, to make that matrimony unlawful; and all for the
disheriting of that succession.

     Again, Stephen Gardiner, (who was a secret worker against that
marriage, and a perpetual enemy against Lady Elizabeth,) being then
abroad with the French king, and the great master of France, ceased
not, in his letters, still to put the king in fear, that the foreign
princes and powers of the world, with the pope, would never be
reconciled to the king, neither should he be ever in any perfect
security, unless he undid again such acts before passed, for the
ratification of that succession:  which thing when they had now
brought to pass after their own desire, (that both now the queen was
beheaded, and Elizabeth the king's daughter disherited,) they thought
all things to be sure for ever. But yet God's providence still went
beyond them, and deceived them; for incontinently after the suffering
of Queen Anne, the king, within three days after, married, Lady Jane
Seymour, of whom came King Edward, as great an enemy to God's enemy
the pope, as ever his father was, and greater too.



186. KING HENRY REFUSES THE POPE'S SUMMONS TO MANTUA

     In the mean time, as these troublous tumults were in doing in
England, Paul the Third, bishop of Rome, for his part was not behind,
to help forward for his own advantage; who, seeing his usurped
kingdom and seat to be darkened in the countries of Germany, and also
in England, thought it high time to bestir him; and therefore, to
provide some remedy against further dangers, appointed a general
council at Mantua in Italy, requiring all kings and princes either
personally to be there, or else to send their ambassadors under fair
pretences, as to suppress heresies, and to restore the church, and to
war against the Turk, &c. This bull was subscribed with the hands of
twenty-six cardinals, and set up in divers great cities, that it
might be known and published to the whole world; unto the which bull
first the protestants of Germany do answer, declaring sufficient
causes why they refused to resort to that council, being indicted at
Mantua, in the pope's own country. Whose declaration, with their
causes grave and effectual, being set forth in print, and in the
English tongue, although they were worthy here to he inserted, yet
for brevity, and more speed in our story, I will pretermit the same,
and only take the oration or answer of our king here; wherein he
likewise rendereth reasons and causes most reasonable, why he
refuseth to come or to send, at the pope's call, to this council
indicted at Mantua:  whose oration or protestation, because it
containeth matter of some weight and great experience, I thought good
here to express as followeth: 

     "Seeing that the bishop of Rome calleth learned men from all
parts, conducting them by great rewards, making as many of them
cardinals as he thinketh most meet, and most ready to defend frauds
and untruths; we could not but with much anxiety cast with ourselves,
what so great a preparance of wits should mean. As chance was, we
guessed even as it followed. We have been so long acquainted with
Romanish subtleties and popish deceits, that we well and easily
judged the bishop of Rome to intend an assembly of his adherents, and
men sworn to think all his lusts to be laws:  we were not deceived.
Paul, the bishop of Rome, hath called a council, to which he knew
well either few or none of the Christian princes could come. Both the 
time that he indicted it, and also the place where he appointed it to
be, might assure him of this. But whither wander not these popish
bulls? whither go they not astray? What king is not cited and
summoned by a proud minister and servant of kings, to come to bolster
up errors, frauds, deceits, and untruths, and to set forth this
feigned general council? For who will not think that Paul, the bishop
of Rome, goeth sooner about to make men believe that he pretendeth a
general council, than that he desire one indeed? No! who can less
desire it, than they that do despair of their cause, except they be
judges, and give sentence themselves against their adversaries? We,
which very sore against our will at any time leave off the
procurement of the realm and common weal, need neither to come
ourselves, nor yet to send our procurators thither; no, nor yet to
make our excuse for either of both. For who can accuse us, that we
come not at his call, who hath no authority to call us?

     "But for a season let us (as a sort of blindlings do) grant
that he may call us, and that he hath authority so to do, yet, we
pray you, may not all men see, what availeth it to come to this
council, where ye shall have no place, except ye be known both
willing to oppress truth, and also ready to confirm and stablish
errors? Do not all men perceive, as well as we, with what integrity,
fidelity, and religion, these men go about to discuss matters in
controversy, that take them in hand in so troublesome a time as this
is? Is it not plain what fruit the common weal of Christendom may
look for there, whereas Mantua is chosen the place to keep this
council at? Is there any prince not being of Italy, yea, is there of
Italy any prince, or other dissenting from the pope, that dareth come
to this assembly, and to this place? If there come none that dare
speak for trodden truth, none that will venture his life, is it
marvel if (the bishop of Rome being judge, no man repining, no man
gainsaying) the defenders of the papacy obtain that popish authority,
now quailing and almost fallen, be set up again?

     "Is this the way to help things inflicted? to redress troubled
religion? to lift up oppressed truth? Shall men this way know,
whether the Roman bishops (which, in very deed, are, if ye look upon
either their doctrine or life, far under other bishops) ought to be
made their fellows, that is, to be pastors in their own diocese, and
so to use no further power; or else, whether they may make laws, not
only unto other bishops, but also to kings and emperors? Oh boldness!
meet to be beaten down with force, and not to be convinced with
arguments! Can either Paul that now lordeth, or any of his, earnestly
go about (if they alone, or at least without any adversary, be thus
in a corner assembled together) to heal the sicknesses, to take away
the errors, to pluck down the abuses that now are crept into the
church, and there to be bolstered up by such councils as now is like
to be at Mantua?

     "It is very like that these, which prowl for nothing but
profit, will right gladly pull down all such things as their
forefathers made, only for the increase of money. Whereas their
forefathers, when their honour, power, and primacy were called into
question, would either in despite of God's law maintain their
dignity, or, to say better, their intolerable pride, is it like that
these will not tread in their steps, and make naughty new canons,
whereby they may. defend old evil decrees? Howbeit, what need we to
care either what they have done, or what they intend to do hereafter,
forasmuch as England hath taken her leave of popish crafts for ever,
never to be deluded with them hereafter? Roman bishops have nothing
to do with English people. The one doth not traffic with the other;
at least, though they will have to do with us, yet we will none of
their merchandise, none of their stuff. We will receive them of our
council no more. We have sought our hurt, and bought our loss, a 
great while too long. Surely their decrees, either touching things
set up or put down, shall have none other place with us than all
bishops' decrees have; that is, if we like them, we admit them; if we
do not, we 'refuse them. But lest, peradventure, men shall think us
to follow our senses too much, and that we, moved by small or no just
causes, forsake the authority, censures, decrees, and popish
councils, we thought it best here to show our mind to the whole
world.

     "Wherefore we protest, before God and all men, that we embrace,
profess, and will ever so do, the right and holy doctrine of Christ.
All the articles of his faith, no jot omitted, be all so dear unto
us, that we would much sooner stand in jeopardy of our realm, than to
see any point of Christ's religion in jeopardy with us. We protest
that we never went from the unity of this faith, neither that we will
depart an inch from it. No, we will much sooner lose our lives, than
any article of our belief shall decay in England. We, which in all
this cause seek nothing but the glory of God, the profit and
quietness of the world, protest that we can suffer deceivers no
longer. We never refused to come to a general council; no, we promise
all our labour, study, and fidelity, to the setting up of trodden
truth, and troubled religion, in their place again, and to do all
that shall lie in us, to finish such controversies as have a great
while too long vexed Christendom. Only we will all Christian men to
be admonished, that we can suffer no longer that they be esteemed
willing to take away errors, which indeed, by all the ways their wits
will serve them, go about this alone, that no man, under pain of
death, may speak against any error or abuse.

     "We would have a council; we desire it, yea, and crave nothing
so oft of God, as that we may have one. But yet we will that it be
such as Christian men ought to have; that is, frank and free, where
every man without fear may say his mind. We desire that it be a holy
council, where every man may go about to set up godliness, and not
apply all their study to the oppressing of truth. We will it be
general, that is to say, kept at such time, and in such place, that
every man who seeketh the glory of God may be present, and there
frankly utter his mind:  for then it shall seem general, either when
no man that dissenteth from the bishop of Rome is compelled to be
from it; or when they that be present are not letted by any just
terror, to say boldly what they truly think:  for who would not gladly
come to such a council, except it be the pope, his cardinals, and
popish bishops? On the other side, who is so foolish, where the chief
point that is to be handled in this council is the pope's own cause,
power, and primacy, to grant that the pope should reign, should be
judge, should be president of this council? If he, which indeed can
never think himself able to defend his cause before any other judge,
be evermore made his own judge, and so controversies not decided, but
errors set up, what can be devised in the commonwealth of Christendom
more hurtful to the truth, than general councils?

     "And here to touch somewhat their impudent arrogancy:  By what
law, power, or honest title take they upon them to call kings, to
summon princes to appear, where their bulls command them? In time
past all councils were appointed by the authority, consent, and
commandment of the emperor, kings, and princes:  why now taketh the
bishop of Rome this upon him? Some will say, 'It is more likely that
bishops will more tender the cause of religion, gladlier have errors
taken away, than emperors, kings, or princes.' The world hath good
experience of them, and every man seeth how faithfully they have
handled religious matters. Is there any man that doth not see how
virtuously Paul now goeth about by this occasion to set up his
tyranny again? Is it not like that he that chooseth such a time as
this is to keep a council, much intendeth the redress of things that
now are amiss? that he seeketh the restoring of religion, who now
calleth to a council the emperor and the French king, two princes of
great power, so bent to wars, that neither they, nor any other
Christian prince, can, in a manner, do any thing but look for the end
of this long war? Go to, go to, bishop of Rome I Occasion long wished
for offereth herself unto you:  take her! she openeth a window for
your frauds to creep in at. Call your cardinals, your own creatures,
show them that this is a jolly time to deceive princes in.

     "O fools! O wicked men! May we not justly so call you? Are ye
not fools, who, being long suspected, not only by princes, but by all
Christian people, in a manner, that in no case you could be brought
to a general council, plainly show the whole world, that by these
your conciliables, your butter-mutter in corners, you take away all
hope of a lawful, catholic, and general council? Are you not wicked,
which so hate truth, that except she be utterly banished, ye will
never cease to vex her? The living God is alive, neither can truth,
his darling, be being alive, be called to so great shame, contumely,
and injury; or, if it may be called to all these, yet can it come to
none of them. Who is he that grievously lamenteth not men to be of
such shameful boldness, to show apertly that they be enemies unto
Christ himself? on the other side, who will not be glad to see such
men as foolish as they be wicked? The world is not now in a light
suspicion, as it hath been hitherto, that you will no reformation of
errors; but every man seeth before his eyes your deceits, your wicked
minds, your immortal hatred that ye bear against the truth. Every man
seeth how many miserable tragedies your pretence of a unity and
concord hath brought into Christendom. They see your fair face of
peace hath served sedition, and troubled almost all Christian realms.
They see ye never oppugn religion more than when ye will seem most to
defend it. They be sorry to see that great wits a long season have
spent their whole strength in defence of deceits:  reason, to put his
whole power to the promoting of pride and ungodliness; virtue to
serve vice; holiness to be slave to hypocrisy; prudence to subtlety;
justice to tyranny. They be glad that Scripture now fighteth for
itself, and not against itself. They be glad that God is not
compelled to be against God; Christ against Christ. They be glad that
subtlety hath done no more hurt to religion in time past, than now
constancy doth good to truth. They see the marks that ye have shot
at, in all your councils past, to be lucre, money, gains. They see
you sought your profit, yea, though it were joined with the slaughter
of truth. They see ye would ever that sooner injury should be done to
the gospel, than that your authority, that is to say, arrogant
impudency, should in any point be diminished.

     "And, we pray you, what may Paul the bishop of Rome seem now to
go about, who, seeing all princes occupied in great affairs, would
steal (as he calleth it) a general council? what other thing, than
hereby to have some excuse to refuse a general council hereafter,
when time and place much better for the handling of matters of
religion shall be given unto the princes of Christendom? He will
think he may then do as princes now do. He will think it lawful not
to come then, because princes now come not. We pray God that we ever
brawl not one with another for religion:  and whereas dissension is
amongst us, we yet for our parts do say, that we, as much as men may,
defend the better part, and be in the right way. We pray God that the
world may enjoy peace and tranquillity, and that then we may have
both time and place to settle religion:  for except princes first
agree, and so (war laid aside) seek peace, he loseth his labour that
seeketh a general council If the bishop of Rome may keep his council
while they thus be together, will not there be made many pretty
decrees? If they, which would come if they had leisure, be absent,
and we, which though we safely might come, will not lose any part of
our right; trow you, in all our absence, that the bishop of Rome will
not handle his profit and primacy well?

     "Paul! how can any of ours not refuse to come to Mantua,
through so many perils, a city so far set from England, so nigh your
friends, kinsmen, and adherents? Is he not unworthy of life, who,
when he may tarry at home, will pass through so many jeopardies of
life? Can he who cometh to Cremona, a city not far from Mantua, be
safe if he be taken not to be the bishop of Rome's friend, that is,
(as the common sort of deceived people do interpret,) a heretic? And
if there come to Mantua such a number as would furnish a general
council, may not Mantua seem too little to receive so many guests?
Put these two together:  all the way from England to Mantua is full of
just perils, and yet if ye escape all those, the very plate where the
council is kept is more to be suspected than all the way. Do ye not
know all civil laws to compel no man to come to any place, where he
shall be in jeopardy of his life all the way? We have no safe-conduct
to pass and return by the dominions of other princes. And if we had a
safe-conduct, yet should not we be charged with rashness, that where
just terror might have dissuaded us from such a journey, we committed
ourselves to such perils? Surely he, who, the time being as it is,
things standing as they do, will go from England to Mantua, may be
careless, if he lack wit:  sure of his arrival, or return from thence,
he cannot be; for who doth not know how oft the bishops of Rome have
played false parts with them that in such matters have trusted to
their safe-conducts? How oft have they caused, by their perfidy, such
men to be slain, as they have promised by their faith before, that
they should both come safe, and go safe? These be no news, that popes
are false, that popes keep no promise either with God or man; that
popes, contrary to their oaths, do defile their cruel hands with
honest men's blood. But we tarry too long in things that as well
touch all men as us.

     "We will, these now laid apart, turn our oration unto such
things, as privately touch both us, King Henry the Eighth, and all
Englishmen. Is it unknown to any man, what mind Paul the bishop of
Rome beareth to us King Henry the Eighth, to us his nobility, to us
his Grace's bishops, and to us all his Grace's subjects, for the
pulling down of his usurped power, and proud primacy? for expelling
of his usurped jurisdiction, and for delivering of our realm from his
grievous bondage and pollage? Who seeth not him even inflamed with
hatred against us, and the flames to be much greater than he can now
keep them in? He is an open enemy, he dissembleth no longer,
provoking all men, by all the means that he can, to endamage us and
our country. These three years he hath been occupied in no one thing
so much, as how he might stir up the commons of England, now
corrupting some with money, some with dignities. We let pass what
letters he hath written to Christian princes:  with how great fervent
study he hath exhorted them to set upon us. The good vicar of Christ,
by his doing, showeth how he understandeth the words of Christ. He
thinketh he playeth Christ's part well, when he may say, as Christ
did, I come not to make peace in earth, but to send swords about; and
not such swords as Christ would his to be armed withal, but such as
cruel man-quellers abuse in the slaughter of their neighbours. We
marvel little though they vex other princes oft, seeing they
recompense our favour showed to them with contumelies, our benefits
with injuries.

     "We will not rehearse here how many our benefits bestowed upon
Roman bishops be lost. God be with such ingrate carles, unworthy to
be numbered amongst men:  certes such, that a man may well doubt
whether God or man hath better cause to hate them. But that we have
learned to owe good will even to them that immortally hate us, what
could we wish them so evil, but they have deserved much worse? We
wish them this hurt alone, that God send them a better mind. God be
thanked, we have made all their seditious intents sooner to show
their great malice towards us, then to do us much hurt; yea, they
have well taught us, ever. more to take good heed to our enemies.
Undoubtedly it were good going to Mantua, and to leave their whelps
amongst the lambs of our flock. When we be weary of our wealth, we
will even do then, as they would have us now do. No, no! as long as
we shall see his heart so good towards us, we trust upon his warning
we shall well provide to withstand his cruel malice. No, let him now
spend his deceits, when they can hurt none but such as would deceive,
and are deceived.

     "They have, by sundry ways, made us privy, how much we be bound
to them. It went nigh their hearts, to see the judgment of Julius, of
Clement the Seventh, of Paul the Third, nothing to be regarded with
us. They be afraid, if we should sustain no hurt because we justly
rejected their primacy, that other princes would begin to do
likewise, and to shake off their shoulders the heavy burdens that
they so long have borne against Scriptures, all right, and reason.
They be sorry to see the way stopped, that now their tyranny,
avarice, and pride, can have no passage unto England, which was wont
to walk, to triumph, to toss, to trouble all men. They can scarce
suffer privileges, that is to say, licence to spoil our citizens,
given them by our forefathers, and brought in by errorful custom, to
be taken from them. They think it unlawful that we require things
lawful of them that will be under no laws. They think we do them
wrong, because we will not suffer them to do us wrong any longer.
They see their merchandise to be banished, to be forbidden. They see
that we will buy no longer chalk for cheese. They see they have lost
a fair fleece, vengeably sorry that they can despatch no more
pardons, dispensations, totquots, with the rest of their baggage and
trumpery. England is no more a babe. There is no man here, but now he
knoweth that they do foolishly, who give gold for lead, more weight
of that than they receive of this. They pass not, though Peter and
Paul's faces be graven in the lead, to make fools fain. No, we be
sorry that they should abuse holy saints' visages, to the beguiling
of the world.

     "Surely, except God take away our right wits, not only his
authority shall be driven out for ever, but his name also shortly
shall be forgotten in England. We will from henceforth ask counsel of
him and his, when we lust to be deceived, when we covet to be in
error; when we desire to offend God, truth, and honesty. If a man may
guess the whole work by the foundation, where deceits begin the work,
can any other than deceits be builded upon this foundation? What can
you look for in this Mantuan council, other than the oppression of
truth and true religion? If there be any thing well done, think, as
every man doth, bishops of Rome to be accustomed to do a few things
well, that many evils may the better be taken at their hands. They,
when they lust, can yield some part of their right. They are content
that some of their decrees, some of their errors and abuses, be
reprehended:  but they are never more to be feared, than when they
show themselves most gentle; for if they grant a few, they ask many;
if they leave a little, they will be sure of a great deal. Scarce a
man may know how to handle himself, that he take no hurt at their
hands, yea, when they bless him; which seldom do good, but for an
intent to do evil. Certainly, come whoso will to these shops of
deceits, to these fairs of frauds, we will lose no part of our right
in coming at his call, who ought to be called, and not to call. We
will neither come at Mantua, nor send thither for this matter," &c.

     And so the king, proceeding in the said his protestation,
declareth moreover, how the pope, after he had summoned his council
first to be kept at Mantua, the twenty-third day of May, A.D. 1537,
shortly after directed out another bull, to prorogate the same
council to the month of November; pretending, for his excuse, that
the duke of Mantua would not suffer him to keep any council there,
unless he maintained a number of warriors for defence of the town.
And therefore, in his latter bull, he prorogueth this assembly,
commanding patriarchs, archbishops, abbots, and others of the
spiritualty, by virtue of obedience, and under pain of cursing, to be
present; but showeth no place at all where he would be, nor whither
they should come. And in very deed no great matter though no place
were named; for as good a council no where to be called, as where it
could not be; and as well no place served him that intended no
council, as all places. And to say truth, much better no place to be
named, than to name such as he purposed not to come to; for so should
he break no promise, which maketh none.



187. REBELLIONS IN LINCOLNSHIRE AND YORKSHIRE

     A little before the death of Queen Anne, there was a parliament
at Westminster, wherein were given to the king, by consent of the
abbots, all such houses of religion as were under three hundred
marks; which was a shrewd prognosticate of the ruin of greater
houses, which indeed followed shortly after, as was and might easily
be perceived before of many, who then said, that the low bushes and
brambles were cut down before, but great oaks would follow after.

     Although the proceeding of these things did not well like the
minds of the pope's friends in England, yet, notwithstanding, they
began again to take some breath of comfort, when they saw the
aforesaid Queen Anne despatched. Nevertheless they were frustrated of
their purpose (as is afore showed) and that double wise. For first,
after they had their wills of Queen Anne, the Lord raised up another
queen, not greatly for their purpose, with her son King Edward; and
also for that the Lord Cromwell, the same time, began to grow in
authority, who, like a mighty pillar set up in the church of Christ,
was enough, alone, to confound and overthrow all the malignant
devices of the adversaries, so long as God gave him in life here to
continue; whose story hereafter followeth more at large.

     Shortly after this aforesaid marriage of the king with this
queen Jane Seymour above mentioned, in the month of June, during the
continuation of the parliament, by the consent of the clergy holding
then a solemn convocation in the church of St. Paul, a book was set
forth containing certain articles of religion necessary to be taught
to the people; wherein they treated specially but of three
sacraments, baptism, penance, and the Lord's supper; where also
divers other things were published concerning the alteration of
certain points of religion, as that certain holidays were forbidden,
and many abbeys began to be suppressed. For this cause the rude
multitude of Lincolnshire, fearing the utter subversion of their old
religion, wherein they had been so long nursled, did rise up in a
great commotion, to the number well near of twenty thousand, having
for their captain a monk, called Doctor Makerel, calling himself then
Captain Cobler; but these rebels, being repressed by the king's
power, and desiring pardon, soon brake up their assembly. For they,
hearing of the royal army of the king coming against them, with his
own person there present, and fearing what would follow of this,
first the noblemen and gentlemen, which before favoured them, began
to withdraw themselves, so that they were destitute of captains; and
at last they, in writing, made certain petitions to the king,
protesting that they never intended hurt towards his royal person.
These petitions the king received, and made this answer again to them
as followeth

The king's answer to the rebels in Lincolnshire.

     "First, we begin to make answer to the fourth and sixth
articles, because upon them dependeth much of the rest. Concerning
choosing of councillors, I never have read, heard, or known, that
princes, councillors, and prelates, should be appointed by rude and
ignorant common people, nor that they were persons meet, or of
ability, to discern and choose meet and sufficient councillors for a
prince. How presumptuous then are ye, the rude commons of one shire,
and that one the most base of the whole realm, and of the least
experience, to find fault with your prince, for the electing of his
councillors and prelates, and to take upon you, contrary to God's law
and man's laws, to rule your princes, whom you are bound, by all law,
to obey and serve with both your lives, lands, and goods, and for no
worldly cause to withstand.

     "As for the suppression of religious houses and monasteries, we
will that ye and all our subjects should well know, that this is
granted us by all the nobles spiritual and temporal of this realm,
and by all the commons in the same, by act of parliament; and not set
forth by any councillor or councillors upon their mere will and
fantasy, as you full falsely would persuade our realm to believe.

     "And where ye allege that the service of God is much
diminished, the truth thereof is contrary; for there be no houses
suppressed where God was well served, but where most vice, mischief,
and abomination of living was used; and that doth well appear by
their own confessions, subscribed with their own hands, in the time
of their visitations, and yet we suffered a great many of them (more
than we needed by the act) to stand; wherein if they amend not their
living, we fear we have more to answer for, than the suppression of
all the rest. And as for the hospitality for the relief of the poor,
we wonder ye be not ashamed to affirm that they have been a great
relief of poor people, when a great many, or the most part, have not
past four or five religious persons in them, and divers but one,
which spent the substance of the goods of their houses in nourishing
of vice, and abominable living. Now what unkindness and unnaturality
may we impute to you, and all our subjects that be of that mind,
which had rather that such an unthrift sort of vicious persons should
enjoy the possessions, profits, and emoluments, which grow of the
said houses, to the maintenance of their unthrifty life, than we,
your natural prince, sovereign lord, and king, which do and have
spent more of our own in your defences, than six times they be worth?

     "As touching the Act of Uses, we marvel what madness is in your
brain, or upon what ground ye would take authority upon you, to cause
us to break those laws and statutes, which, by all the noble knights
and gentlemen of this realm, (whom the same chiefly toucheth,) have
been granted and assented to, seeing in no manner of things it
toucheth you, the base commons of our realm.

     "Also, the grounds of all those uses were false, and never
admitted by law, but usurped upon the prince, contrary to all equity
and justice, as it hath been openly both disputed and declared by all
the well learned men in the realm of England, in Westminster Hall: 
whereby ye may well perceive how mad and unreasonable your demands
be, both in that, and in the rest; and how unmeet it is for us, and
dishonourable, to grant or assent unto, and less meet and decent for
you, in such a rebellious sort, to demand the same of your prince.

     "As touching the Fifteenth which you demand of us to be
released, think ye that we be so faint-hearted, that perforce ye of
one shire (were ye a great many more) could compel us with your
insurrections, and such rebellious demeanour, to remit the same? or
think you that any man will or may take you to be true subjects, that 
first make and show a loving grant, and then perforce would compel
your sovereign lord and king to release the same, the time of payment
whereof is not yet come? Yea, and seeing the same will not
countervail the tenth penny of the charges which we have, and daily
do sustain, for your tuition and safeguard, make you sure that by
your occasions of these ingratitudes, unnaturalness, and unkindness
to us now administered, ye give us cause (which have always been as
much dedicated to your wealth, as ever was king) not so much to set
our study for the setting forward of the same, seeing how unkindly
and untruly ye deal now with us, without any cause or occasion:  and
doubt ye not, though you have no grace nor naturalness in you to
consider your duty of allegiance to your king and sovereign lord, the
rest of our realm, we doubt not, hath; and we and they shall so look
on this cause, that we trust it shall be to your confusion, if,
according to your former letters, you submit not yourselves.

     "As touching the first-fruits, we let you to wit, it is a thing
granted us by act of parliament also, for the supportation of part of
the great and excessive charges, which we support and bear for the
maintenance of your wealths and other our subjects:  and we have known
also that ye our commons have much complained also in times past,
that the most part of our goods, lands, and possessions of the realm,
were in the spiritual men's hands; and yet, bearing us in hand that
ye be as loving subjects to us as' may be, ye cannot find in your
hearts that your prince and sovereign lord should have any part
thereof, (and yet it is nothing prejudicial unto you our commons,)
but do rebel and unlawfully rise against your prince, contrary to the 
duty of allegiance and God's commandment. Sirs! remember your follies
and traitorous demeanours, and shame not your native country of
England, nor offend any more so grievously your undoubted king and
natural prince, which always hath showed himself most loving unto
you; and remember your duty of allegiance, and that ye are bound to
obey us your king, both by God's commandment and the law of nature.

     "Wherefore we charge you eftsoons, upon the aforesaid bonds and
pains, that you withdraw yourselves to your own houses every man, and
no more to assemble contrary to our laws and your allegiances, and to
cause the provokers of you to this mischief, to be delivered to our
lieutenant's hands or ours,and you yourselves to submit you to such
condign punishment as we and our nobles shall think you worthy of: 
for doubt you not else, that we and our nobles neither can nor will
suffer this injury at your hands unrevenged, if ye give not to us
place of sovereignty, and show yourselves as bounden and obedient
subjects, and no more to intermeddle yourselves from henceforth with
the weighty affairs of the realm, the direction whereof only
appertaineth to us your king, and such noblemen and councillors as we
list to elect and choose to have the ordering of the same.

     "And thus we pray unto Almighty God, to give you grace to do
your duties, to use yourselves towards us like true and faithful
subjects, so as we may have cause to order you thereafter; and rather
obediently to consent amongst you to deliver into the hands of our
lieutenant a hundred persons, to be ordered according to their
demerits, at our will and pleasure, than, by your obstinacy and
wilfulness, to put yourselves, your wives, children, lands, goods,
and chattels, besides the indignation of God, in the utter adventure
of total destruction, and utter ruin, by force and violence of the
sword."

     After the Lincolnshire men had received this the king's answer
aforesaid, made to their petitions, each mistrusting the other, who
should be noted to be the greatest meddler, even very suddenly they
began to shrink, and out of hand they were all divided, and every man
at home in his own house in peace:  but the captains of these rebels
escaped not all clear, but were afterwards apprehended, and had as
they deserved.

     After this, immediately, within six days upon the same,
followed a new insurrection. in Yorkshire for the same causes,
through the instigation and lying tales of seditious persons,
especially monks and priests; making them believe, that their silver
chalices, crosses, jewels, and other ornaments, should be taken out
of their churches; and that no man should be married, or eat any good
meat in his house, but should give tribute there-for to the king:  but
their especial malice was against Cromwell and certain other
counsellors.

     The number of these rebels was nearly forty thousand, having
for their badges the five wounds, with the sign of the sacrament, and
"Jesus" written in the midst.

     This their devilish rebellion they termed by the name of a Holy
Pilgrimage; but they served a wrong and a naughty saint. They had
also in the field their streamers and banners, whereupon was painted
Christ hanging upon the cross on the one side, and a chalice, with a
painted cake in it, on the other side, with other such ensigns of
like hypocrisy and feigned sanctity, pretending thereby to fight for
the faith and the right of holy church.

     As soon as the king was certified of this new seditious
insurrection, he sent with all speed against them, the duke of
Norfolk, the duke of Suffolk, the marquis of Exeter, the earl of
Shrewsbury, and others, with a great army, forthwith to encounter
with the rebels.

     These noble captains and councillors, thus well furnished with
habiliment of war, approaching towards the rebels, and understanding
both their number, and how they were full bent to battle, first with
policy went about to essay and practise how to appease all without
bloodshedding; but the northern men, stoutly and sturdily standing to
their wicked cause and wretched enterprise, would in no case relent
from their attempts:  which when the nobles perceived, and saw no
other way to pacify their furious minds, utterly set on mischief,
they determined upon a battle. The place was appointed, the day
assigned, and the hour set; but see the wondrous work of God's
gracious providence! The night before the day of battle came, (as
testifieth Edward Hall,) fell a small rain, nothing to speak of, but
yet, as it were by a great miracle of God, the water which was but a
very small ford, and that men in a manner, the day before, might have
gone dry-shod over, suddenly rose of such a height, deepness, and
breadth, that the like no man that there did inhabit could tell they
ever saw before; so that that day, even when the hour of battle
should come, it was impossible for the one army to come at the other.

     After this, that the appointment made between both of the
armies (being thus disappointed, as it is to be thought, only by God,
who extended his great mercy, and had compassion on the great number
of innocent persons that in that deadly slaughter had like to have
been murdered) could take no place; then, by the great wisdom and
policy of the said captains, a communication was had, and a pardon of
the king's Majesty obtained for all the captains and chief doers of
this insurrection; and they were promised that, for such things as
they found them aggrieved withal, they should gently be heard, and
their reasonable petitions granted; and that their articles should be
presented to the king, that by his Highness's authority, and the
wisdom of his council, all things should be brought to good order and
conclusion:  and with this order every man quietly departed, and those
who before were bent as hot as fire to fight, being Jetted thereof by
God, went now peaceably to their houses, and were as cold as water.

     In the time of this ruffle in Yorkshire, and the king lying the
same time at Windsor, there was a butcher dwelling within five miles
of the said town of Windsor, who caused a priest to preach that all
they that took part with the Yorkshire men, whom he called God's
people, did fight in God's quarrel; for which both he and the priest
were apprehended and executed.

     Divers other priests also, with others about the same time,
committing, in like sort, treason against the king, suffered the like
execution. Such a business had the king then to rid the realm from
the servitude of the Romish yokes.

     But God's hand did still work withal, in upholding his gospel
and trodden truth against all seditious stirs, commotions,
rebellions, and whatsoever was to the contrary; as both by the
stories before pass ed, and by such also as hereafter follow, may
notoriously appear.

     The next year after this, which was A.D. 1537, after the great
execution had been done upon certain rebellious priests, and a few
other laymen, with certain noble persons also and gentlemen, amongst
whom were the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussy, Sir Robert Constable, Sir
Thomas Percy, Sir Francis Bygot, Sir Stephen Hamilton, Sir John
Bulmer and his wife, William Lomeley, Nicholas Tempest, with the
abbots of Jervaux and of Rivaulx, &c.



188.EDMUND BONNER

     In the month of October, the same year following, was born
Prince Edward; shortly after whose birth, Queen Jane, his mother, the
second day after, died in childbed, and left the king again a
widower, who so continued the space of two years together.

     Here, by the way, is to be understood, that during all this
season, since the time that the king of England had rejected the pope
out of the realm, both the emperor, the French king, and the king of
Scots, with other foreign potentates, (which were yet in subjection
under the pope,) bare him no great good favour inwardly, whatsoever
outwardly they pretended. Neither was here lacking privy setters-on,
nor secret working among themselves how to compass ungracious
mischiefs, if God, by contrary occasions, had not stopped their
intended devices. For first the pope had sent Cardinal Pole to the
French king, to stir him to war against the realm of England.

     Secondly, whereas the French king, by treaty of perpetual
peace, was bound yearly to pay to the king of England, at the first
days of May and November, about ninety-five thousand crowns of the
sun, and odd money, and over that ten thousand crowns at the said two
terms, for recompence of salt-due, as the treaties thereof did
purport, that pension remained now unpaid four years and more.

     Furthermore, the emperor and the French king, both, retained
Grancetor, a traitorous rebel against the king, and condemned by act
of parliament, with certain other traitors more, and yet would not
deliver him unto the king at his earnest suit and request.

     The French king also, digressing from his promise and treaty,
made alliance with Clement, the bishop of Rome, in marrying the
dauphin to his niece, called Katharine de Medicis.

     The said French king .moreover, contrary to his contract made,
married his daughter to the king of Scots:  all which events were
prejudicial; and put the king, no doubt, in some fear and perplexity
(though otherwise a stout and valiant prince) to see the pope, the
emperor; the French king, and the king of Scots, so bent against him.

     And yet, all this notwithstanding, the Lord still defended the
justness of his cause against them all. For although the French king
was so set on by the pope, and;so linked in marriage with the Scots,
and lacked nothing now but only occasion to invade the realm of
England, yet notwithstanding he, hearing now of the birth of Prince
Edward, the king's son by Queen Jane, and understanding also, by the
death of the said Queen Jane, that the king was a widower, and
perceiving, moreover, talk to be that the king would join in marriage
with the Germans, began to wax more calm and cold, and to give much
more gentle words, and to demean himself more courteously, labouring
to marry the Queen of Navarre, his sister, to the king.

     The ambassadors resident then in France for the king, were
Stephen Gardiner, with Dr. Thirleby, &c.; which Stephen Gardiner,
what he wrought secretly for the pope's devotion, I have not
expressly to charge him. Whether he so did, or what he did, the Lord
knoweth all! But this is certain, that when Dr. Bonner, archdeacon
then of Leicester, was sent into France by the king, (through the
means of the Lord Cromwell;) to succeed Stephen Gardiner in embassy,
which was about A.D. 1538, he found such dealing in the said bishop
of Winchester as was not greatly to be trusted:  besides the unkind
parts of the said bishop against the aforesaid Bonner, coming then
from the king and Lord Cromwell, as were not to be liked.

     Long it is to recite from the beginning, and few men
peradventure would believe, the brawling matters, the privy
complaints, the contentious quarrels and bitter dissensions, between
these two; and especially what despiteful contumelies Dr. Bonner
received at the hands of Winchester. For understand, good reader!
that this Dr. Bonner all this while renamed yet, as he seemed, a good
man, and was a great furtherer of the king's proceedings, and a
favourer of Luther's doctrine, and was advanced only by the Lord
Cromwell, whose promotions are here to rehearse:  first, he was
archdeacon of Leicester, parson of Blaydon, of Dereham, Chiswick, and
Cheryburton; then he was made bishop of Hereford, and, at last,
preferred to be bishop of London:  the chief of which preferments and
dignities were conferred unto him only by the means and favour of the
Lord Cromwell, who was then his chief and only patron and setter-up;
as the said Bonner himself, in all his letters, doth manifestly
protest and declare; the copies of which his letters I could here
produce and exhibit, but for prolonging my story with superfluous
matter. Yet that the world and all posterity may see how the coming
up of Dr. Bonner was only by the gospel, (howsoever he was afterwards
unkind unto the gospel,) this one letter of his, which I will here
infer, written to the Lord Cromwell out of France, may stand for a
perpetual testimony, the tenor whereof here ensueth: 

     "My very singular especial good Lord, as one most bounden, I
most humbly commend me unto your honourable good Lordship. And
whereas in times past it hath liked the same, without any my deserts
or merits, even only of your singular exceeding goodness, to bestow a
great deal of love, benevolence, and good affection, upon me so poor
a man, and of so small qualities, expressing indeed sundry ways the
good effects thereof to my great preferment, I was very much bound
thereby unto your honourable good Lordship, and thought it always my
duty, (as indeed it was,) both to bear my true heart again unto your
Lordship, and also, remembering such kindness, to do unto the same
all such service and pleasure as might, then lie in my small power to
do.

     "But where, of your infinite and inestimable goodness, it hath
further liked you of late, first to advance me unto the office of
legation from such a prince as my sovereign lord is, unto the emperor
and French king; and next after, to procure and obtain mine
advancement to so honourable a promotion as the bishopric of
Hereford, I must here acknowledge the exceeding greatness of your
Lordship's benefit, with mine own imbecility to recompense it.

     "Surely, my good Lord, I neither am, neither shall be able to
requite this your Lordship's most special kindness and bountiful
goodness at any time, unless I should use that civil remedy called in
law 'acceptilation,' which great debtors especially are accustomed to
procure at the hands of their creditors; whereby yet nevertheless
your goodness, the only doer thereof, should rather be increased,
than my duty towards the same thereby diminished. And cessio bonorum
(the only extreme refuge and help of poor debtors, devised also in
civil) might somewhat help herein, saying that it is not possible
that I should come ad tam pinguem fortunam, (whereupon that remedy is
grounded,) whereby I may recompense and requite this debt worthily.

     "So that in conclusion there resteth this; that unless your
Lordship's self do loose me, as you have bound me, I shall (and that
full gladly) remain continually your most bounded beadsman. And, sir,
I most humbly beseech your good Lordship, in the honour of God,
seeing this thing is begun and advanced only by your goodness and
means, you will, to the intent the act may be wholly your own,
stretch out your goodness, not suffering the rest to be perfected
otherwise than by your own hands; wherein, as I must and shall
acknowledge myself to be exceedingly beholden unto your good
Lordship, so shall I the same more esteem and set by, during my life,
having so attained it by your only goodness:  and verily, if your good
Lordship be not better to me herein than I can (unless it be of your
own goodness) desire you, I know not how I shall be able to overcome
the great charges annexed to this promotion. For though my promotions
afore were right, honest, and good, yea, and such as one of far
better qualities than I was, or am of, ought therewith to have been
contented; yet, considering that divers of them, that is to wit,
Leicester, Blaydon, Dereham, Chiswick, and Cheryburton, the first-
fruits, tenths, and charges borne, I have not received clearly one
penny, I am now never a whit the more able to bear the great charges
of this.

     "I shall therefore herein, and in all things else pertaining
hereunto, seeing your Lordship is so great a patron, and will needs
bind me for ever to be your own, (as indeed I will,) refer altogether
unto your goodness, beseeching you to take the order and disposition
of all into your hands. I cannot tell whether the late bishop
standeth bounden for the first-fruits, tenths, or other duties which
by statute may be demanded of his successor; but I fear it greatly,
and beseech your Lordship that I may be holpen therein. My charges
now here enforce me the more to speak and trouble your good Lordship,
which at the beginning are not a few, and yet not ended. Of my
fidelity to your good, I have, of five hundred crowns, remaining
forty, bestowed upon horses, mules, mulets, raiment, and other
necessaries, standing debtor to Master Thirleby nevertheless, and
also to Master Dr. Heynes, for one hundred marks, or fast upon, to
them both. And besides this, such is my chance now at the beginning,
divers of my servants have fallen sick, being in great peril and
danger, putting me to no little charges.

     "Over and besides these displeasures coming unto me by not
having their service, and others to keep them, and also wanting mine
other servants in England, which, though I have sent for them, yet
neither they, neither my horses or stuff, are come, I must and do
take patience, trusting it will mend.

     "Upon the closing up of this letter, and depeach of this
bearer, God willing, I will pack up my gear, and to-morrow betimes
follow the French king, who yesterday departed from Shambour, and
maketh haste toward Paris. And thus our blessed Lord long and well
preserve your good lordship in health.

     "At Blois, the second of September, in the evening.

     "Scribbled by the weary hand of him that is bounden to be, and
is indeed, your Lordship's beadsman, and at commandment,

     EDMUND BONNER."

     Divers other letters besides this, of Dr. Bonner, remain in
writing, unto the like effect and purport, which here also I might
add for a further demonstration hereof; but this one, instead of
many, may suffice. Now to our purpose again, which is to declare how
this Dr. Bonner, in the time of his first springing up, showed
himself a good man, and a fast friend to the gospel of Christ and to
the king's proceedings; and contrariwise, how Stephen Gardiner did
halt then both with God and with the king:  also what unkindness and
contumelies the said Bonner received at Gardiner's hands; what
rancour and heart-burning was between them; and what complaints the
one moved against the other, remain, consequently, by their writings
and records, to be opened. For the more evident demonstration
whereof, they that have the letters of the said Dr. Bonner, written
from France to the king and the Lord Cromwell, may right well
perceive. And first, to note what a gospeller he was:  in his letter
from Rouen, he, speaking of his trusty companion, and bearer of his
letters, (who was belike Dr. Heynes,) he giveth this report both of
him and of himself; saying, "If this bearer had been so much desirous
to please the emperor, and follow his religion, as he was studious to
serve truly your Grace, and to advance the truth, he had not wanted,"
&c. And again:  "And besides that, he hath not wanted the evil report
of naughty fellows, naming him a Lutheran, wherein, for company, I
was joined, such was their goodness," &c. Again, in another letter
written to the Lord Cromwell, these words he hath, speaking of his
companion Dr. Heynes:  "Especially for that the said Dr. Heynes, by
his upright dealing herein, and professing the truth, neither got
thanks nor reward, but was blazed abroad by honest folks to be a
Lutheran. The less he pleaseth in Spain, the better argument it is,
that his intent was to serve none but the king's Highness and the
truth," &c.

     And furthermore, in another minute, writing to the Lord
Cromwell of Stephen Winchester, and of his churlishness toward him,
thus he saith:  "And there found I, in Master Dr. Thirleby, much
kindness, and in the bishop of Winchester as little," &c. And in the
same letter it followeth:  "And if I had received any entertainment of
the bishop of Winchester, I would likewise have sent you word. I
thank God I need not, for I had nothing of him," &c.

     Also in another letter, the said Bonner, writing to the Lord
Cromwell concerning one Barnaby and himself, what cold welcome they
both had at the hands of Winchester, used these words following: 
"And, my good Lord, I beseech you to continue your good favour to
this honest poor man Barnaby, who is body and soul assuredly your
own, and as well beloved of the bishop of Winchester as I am:  and of
my troth I suppose and believe verily, one of the chief grudges the
bishop hath against him, is because your Lordship, of your charitable
goodness, doth love and favour him.

Another letter of Dr. Bonner to the Lord Cromwell, complaining of
Winchester, and also declaring how he was promoted by the said Lord
Cromwell, to the bishopric of Hereford.

     "My very singular especial good Lord, according to my most
bounden duty, I recommend me right humbly unto your good Lordship,
advertising the same, that the twenty-ninth of the last month, about
four of the clock at afternoon, there arrived here Barnaby with your
Lordship's letters, dated at Eutrecht the twenty-fourth of the same: 
and thinking that, at his said arrival, the bishop of Winchester,
Master Thirleby, and I, had been all lodged together, whereas in very
deed we had several lodgings, he went straight to the bishop of
Winchester's lodging,. (Master Thirleby and I being then walking in
the fields,) and the bishop incontinently inquired of him, not how
the king's Grace did, as was his duty, but, (as Barnaby told me,)
inquired of him where he left the king's Grace at his coming away: 
whether he had brought any letters for him:  whether Master Brian and
Master Wallop were in the court at his departing:  and finally, what
news were in England. To the which questions, when Barnaby had made
answer, saying that he left the king's Grace at Berlin, and that
Master Brian and Master Wallop were in the court at his departing;
and withal, that he had no letters from them, nor any other to him;
and finally, for the news that the king's Highness had given me the
bishopric of Hereford; the bishop (as Barnaby reporteth, and I doubt
not but he saith truly) cast down his head, making a plaice-mouth
with his lip, and afterwards lifting up his eyes and hands, (as
cursing the day and hour it chanced,) seemed so evil contented
therewith, that he would neither bid Barnaby drink, or tarry supper,
nor yet further commune with him, but turning from him, called one
Master Medow, and showed him of the same tidings, taking it (as it
appeared) very heavily; semblably as he doeth every thing that is or
may be for my preferment. And when Barnaby perceived that I was not
there, and that also this comfortable countenance and good cheer were
made unto him, he went thence and searched for me, who then was
walking with Master Thirleby, as is before; and was by chance
communing with him of the bishop of Winchester, giving him
advertisement that he should not be abused by the said bishop, whom,
I said, made him, not for any hearty love, I thought, he bare unto
him, but either in despite of me, to whom he thought it should be
greatly displeasant; either else under colour thereof, and by
familiarity, for to grope him, and to serve his own crafty purposes
by him.

     "And soon after the departure of Master Thirleby from me, who
then went to the bishop to supper, I returned towards my lodging, and
by the way met with Barnaby, whose salutation was after that sort,
that it caused me to wonder at it, especially I having no expectation
or hope of such thing as he rehearsed unto me. And surely, my good
Lord, I would not believe him in the thing he told, till I perceived
the same by the superscription of your Lordship's letter, which he
afterwards delivered unto me:  declaring withal (to my great comfort)
the prosperous estate of the king's Highness, and of your good
Lordship. Which known, I besought Almighty God to grant the long
continuance thereof, and also, as was my duty, did give most humble
thanks to the king's Highness, and to your said good Lordship. And
hereupon, keeping your Lordship's letters still in my hands unbroken,
I went incontinently to the lodging of Master Thirleby, which was in
my way, to communicate these my news and great good fortune with him;
and not finding him there, I read over your Lordship's letters,
sending the same afterwards to Master Thirleby; and perceiving, by
Barnaby, that he had other letters for me, which he told me he must
deliver unto me secretly, I went to mine own lodging with him, and
there receiving them accordingly, did read them over, both that, your
Lordship's second letter sent to me, and also the other sent to
Master Wyat, &c.

     Your Lordship's most bounden beadsman, And always at
commandment,

     EDMUND BONNER."

     When the king, by the advice of the Lord Cromwell, and others
of his council, had appointed Dr. Edmund Bonner to return from the
emperor, and to be resident in France, in the place of Winchester and
of Dr. Thirleby, he sent his letters to the said bishop of
Winchester, and to Master Thirleby, showing his pleasure unto them in
that behalf, with this clause in the same letters contained in
express words as followeth: 

     "And whereas the said Master Bonner wanteth furniture of stuff
and plate meet for that office, our pleasure is that you, Master
Thirleby, shall deliver unto him by indenture, all the plate you have
of ours in your custody, and that you, my Lord of Winchester, shall
furnish him with all such other stuff, as shall be necessary for him;
wherein as you shall do unto us pleasure, so we shall be content at
your return, to satisfy you for the same," &c.

     The bishop of Winchester receiving these letters of the king,
and being loth to come into England, (whatsoever the matter was,)
also hearing that Dr. Bonner should succeed him, his disdainful
nature did stomach him exceedingly. But because there was no other
remedy but that the king's commandment must be done, first he sendeth
the king's letter, with his also, to the emperor's court, unto Master
Bonner, and to Dr. Heynes, willing them in all haste to repair to
Lyons within two days. Beside these letters of Winchester, Dr.
Thirleby adjoined his letters also, with like quickness, to the said
Dr. Heynes and to Bonner, the contents whereof here follow: 

     "With my hearty commendations, and the desire of your company,
and now so much rather that I shall thereby have a great benefit,
viz. the deliverance from trouble to ease, from a strange country to
mine own, from the waiting upon him that forceth as little for me, as
I am acquainted with him, to the service of him whose prosperity and
love I account as my life; these shall be to pray you to make no less
speed hither, than you would make to a good feast when that you be
hungry. Master Bonner shall know many things, but when you come I
shall tell you more, so that you haste you. Come, I pray you; I would
fain be at home. I saw not my master these four months. When you,
Master Bonner, shall come to Lyons, it shall be good to go to
Bonvise; he is a good money-maker:  in faith Ican write no more, but
bid you come heartily, hastily,' I would have written, and the sooner
the better welcome to Lyons, where this was given the last of July.
By him that hath loved you well,
And now will love you better,
If you haste you hither,

     THOMAS THIRLEBY."

     At the receipt of these letters, Dr. Bonner and Dr. Heynes did
put themselves in a readiness to repair incontinent unto Lyons,
thinking there to have found Winchester and Thirleby, according to
the purport of their letters. But Winchester and Thirleby, not
abiding their coming, made haste away from Lyons to La Barella, where
Bonner, riding in post after Winchester, overtook him. With whom what
entertainment and talk he had, and what accusations he laid to his
charge, and what brawling words passed between them, and what great
misliking Bonner had of him for special causes here in this brabling
matter or brawling dialogue, under following, may appear; which, for
thy recreation, and the further understanding of Winchester's
qualities, I wish thee, loving reader! to peruse and consider.

     But first, here is to be noted, that the king and the Lord
Cromwell, at what time they had appointed Dr. Edmund Bonner to be
resident ambassador in France, required in their letters, that he
should advertise them by writing, what he did mislike in the doings
and behaviour of certain persons whom they did note then unto him.
Whereupon the said Dr. Bonner sendeth this declaration of Stephen
Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, as followeth: 

     "First, I mislike in the bishop of Winchester, that when any
man is sent in the king's affairs, and by his Highness's commandment,
the bishop, unless he be the only and chief inventor of the matter
and setter-forth of the person, he will not only use many
cavillations, but also use great strangeness in countenance and cheer
to the person that is sent:  over and besides, as small comfort and
counsel as may be in the matter; rather dissuading and discouraging
the person earnestly to set forward his message, than imboldening and
comforting him, as is his duty, with help and counsel to adventure
and do his best therein. The experience whereof I have had myself
with him, as well at Rouen, the first time I was sent to Rome,
commanded by the king's Highness to come by him, and at Marseilles,
the time of the intimation of the king's protestation, provocation,
and appeal; as also lately, going to Nice, touching the general
council, and the authority of the bishop of Rome; and finally, now
last of all, at my return from Spain, where neither my diligence in
coming to him, and using him in the beginning with all the reverence
I could, neither the king's letters written unto him in my favour,
nor yet other thing could mollify his hard heart and cankered
malicious stomach, but that he would spitefully speak, and unkindly
do; as indeed he did, to his great shame and my dishonesty, as
followeth: 

     "When riding in post I came to La Barella, a post on this side
Lyons, the seventh day of August, he being in bed there, I tarried
till he, rising up and making himself ready, came at last out to me,
standing and tarrying for him in a second chamber; and at his coming
thither, he said, 'What, Master Bonner! good morrow! Ah sir, ye be
welcome;' and herewithal he put out his hand, and I, kissing mine,
took him by it, and incontinently after he said, 'Come on, let us go
and walk awhile into the fields;' and withal drew towards the door,
preparing him to walk. To whom I said, I would wait upon him. His
going to the fields, (as appeared afterwards,) was not so much to
walk, as to have a place where he might speak loud, and triumph alone
against me, calling in his words again, if he spake any amiss; or
utterly deny them, if that made for his purpose. And by chance,
rather than by good wisdom, afore I went forth, I asked for Master
Thirleby, and desired I might see him and speak with him. The bishop
that perceiving, and, withal, that I stuck upon it, he commanded one
of his servants to call Master Thirleby; but yet, afore his coming,
the bishop could not be idle, but said this to me:  'Master Bonner!
your servant was yesterday with me, and as I told him, I will tell
you:  In good faith you can have nothing of me.' 'Nothing, my Lord!'
quoth I, merrily speaking, marry, God forbid! that is a heavy word,
and much uncomfortable to him that wanteth all things, and trusteth
much upon your goodness that hath a great deal.' 'In faith,' quoth
he, 'ye shall have nothing of me:  marry, ye shall have of Master
Thirleby, his carriage, mules, his bed, and divers other things, that
he may spare; and which he hath kept for you.' 'Well, my Lord!' quoth
I, 'if I shall have nothing of you, I must make as good shift as I
can for myself otherwise, and provide it where I may get it.'

     "And here the bishop, because I would not give him thanks for
that thing which was not worthy thanks, and that also I would not
show myself greatly contented and pleased, though I received nothing
at his hands, he began somewhat to kindle, and asked what I wanted. I
told him again, that I wanted all things saving money and good will
to serve the king's Highness. 'Tell me one thing,' quoth he, 'that
you want.' 'One thing,' quoth I, 'marry, amongst many things that I
want, I want napery.' 'That shall ye not need,' quoth he, 'here in
this country: ' and here he began to tell a long tale, that none used
that, but Master Wallop and he, in the beginning:  which is not true
generally. And from this he began to go, descending by his negatives: 
'My mulets,' said he, 'ye cannot have, for if ye should, I must needs
provide others for them again:  my mulet-cloths ye cannot have,
because mine arms are on them, not meet for you to bear:  my raiment,
(I being bishop,) that is not meet for you.' And so proceeding forth
in the rest, nothing had he for me, and nothing should I have.

     "And here came Master Thirleby, who welcomed me very gently,
and after an honest sort:  to whom the bishop rehearseth again his
negatives, and maketh a long discourse, bringing in conclusion, for
all that he could do, that nothing I should have of him and this
rehearsed he still on end I am sure above a dozen times, and that
with a pilot's voice; so that all his company, standing more than
three or four pair of butt lengths off, heard him.

     "When I saw that he would make no end, but ever rehearsed one
thing still, I said to him, 'My Lord! I beseech you, seeing I shall
have nothing of you, but of Master doctor here, let me give him
thanks that deserveth it, and trouble you therein no more:  but
leaving communication therein, let me desire and pray you, that we
may commune of the king's matters; and that I may have therein
knowledge, as well of the state thereof, as also of your counsel in
that behalf.'

     "The bishop was so hot and warm in his own matters, that he
would not hear, but needs would return again, and show why that I
could have nothing of him. 'My Lord!' quoth I, 'here is still on end
one tale, which methinketh, seeing that I understand it, ye need not
so oft repeat it, especially seeing that it cometh always to this
conclusion, that I shall have nothing of you.' 'Ye lie,' quoth he, 'I
said not so.' 'I report me,' quoth I, 'to Master Thirleby here
present, whom I shall desire to bear record of your sad and discreet
honest behaviour with me.' 'I say you lie,' quoth he. 'My Lord!'
quoth I, 'I thank you.' 'I do not say,' quoth he, 'that ye shall have
nothing of me; but I say you can have nothing of me. And though the
one here comprehendeth the other, yet there is a great diversity
between these two manners of speaking:  I can spare nothing unto you,
and therefore ye shall have nothing; and though I can spare you, yet
you shall have nothing; -- for in the one is an honesty in the
speaker, which would, if he could, do pleasure; and in the other
there lacketh that honesty.

     "'My Lord!' quoth I, 'to examine whether I shall have nothing,
because ye can spare nothing:  or shall have nothing, though ye have
plenty, because ye will I shall have nothing, it shall not much help
me in my journey. Wherefore, seeing ye bide upon this, that I shall
have nothing, I will thank you for nothing, and provide otherwise for
myself.' 'Dirt in your teeth!' quoth he, 'and provide as ye will.'
'Bishop-like spoken, by my faith,' quoth I, 'and well it becometh you
to speak thus to me.' 'Yea marry! doth it become me,' quoth he:  and
repeating, the words again, said with a sharp accent, 'Have nothing
of me? Dirt in your teeth!' 'Well, my Lord!' quoth I, this needeth
not, saving that ye have a full stomach, and your wit abroad,
willingly hereby to ease your stomach against me.' 'Yes, marry,'
quoth he, 'it needeth for me, though it needeth not for you; for I
intend,' quoth he, 'I would ye should know it, to justify myself to
the king in all things.' 'If ye do so,' quoth I, 'ye shall do the
better.' 'Nay,' quoth he, 'I do it, and will do it.' 'Well,' quoth I,
'ye are the more to be commended, if ye so can do.' 'Yes,' quoth he,
'I can do it.'

     "'Now, by my troth,' quoth I, 'seeing the king's Highness hath
written so tenderly for me unto you, as appeareth by his Highness's
letters that his Grace hath done, me thinketh, ye having so great
plenty of all things, and I so great need thereof, coming post, as I
do, ye go about as evil to justify yourself to the king, as any one
that I have seen. And I wish, my Lord,' quoth I, 'I would have
reckoned, that coming as I do come, I should have been both better
welcome, and better treated of you, than now I am, even and it had
been for no other respect, than because I am an Englishman.'

     "'I shall tell you,' quoth he, 'for the king's sake, ye may
look to have:  but for your own sake, ye get nothing.' 'Well,' quoth
I, 'then having nothing, I will give no thanks at all; and having any
thing, I shall give thanks to the king, and none to you.' 'I tell
you,' quoth he, 'ye get nothing: ' 'and I tell you again,' quoth I,
'that I will thank you for nothing.' And here the flesh of his cheek
began to swell and tremble, and he looked upon me as he would have
run me through; and I came and stood even by him, and said, 'Trow
you, my Lord!' quoth I, 'that I fear your great looks? Nay, faith! do
I not. Ye had need to get another stomach to whet upon than mine, and
a better whetstone than any ye have; for, I assure you, you shall not
whet me to your purpose:  and if ye knew how little I do set by this
unloving and indiscreet behaviour of yours, ye wouldnot use it upon
me. And I shall tell you,' quoth I, 'if I were not bridled, and had
not other respects both to the king's Highness, my sovereign lord,
and also unto others that may command me, I would have told you, ere
this time, my mind after another sort.' 'Tell me?' quoth he, 'dirt in
your teeth!' 'Well, my Lord!' quoth I, 'ye would, I perceive by you,
and by your words, provoke me to speak as indiscreetly and bedlamly,
as ye do:  but surely ye shall not, howsoever ye shall speak. But this
will I tell you, I shall show you how I am handled of you.' 'Marry,
spare not,' quoth he. 'Well, my Lord!' quoth I, 'you have here full
well played the part of a bishop, and it is great joy of you, that
with this your furious anger and choler, ye can make all the company
here about you to be ashamed of you, as I am sure they are. And for
my part, if ye yourself be not ashamed, or, coming to yourself, (for
now your anger is such that you hear not yourself,) be not
displeased, I shall be ashamed, and pity this your doing without
wisdom; and the oftener you use this manner, the more shall it be to
your dishonesty.'

     "'Lo!' quoth he, 'how fondly he speaketh, as who saith, I were
all in the blame. Will you not hear,' quoth he, 'this wise man?' 'My
Lord!' quoth I, 'I would you could hear with indifferent ears, and
see with indifferent eyes, yourself. Ye have made a brabling here for
nothing, and would that I should give you thanks for that thing which
Master Thirleby hath done for me.' 'I look for no thanks of you,'
quoth he; and said withal, looking spitefully, that he knew me well
enough; and that he was not deceived in me. 'Well!' quoth I, 'and
methinks I know you well enough too; wherefore, as ye say you are not
deceived in me, so I trust I will not be deceived by you. But I pray
you, sir,' quoth I, 'because ye say ye know me well enough, and that
ye be not deceived in me, How do you know me? for honest and true, or
otherwise? If you do, say it, and I shall make answer.'

     "I could not drive him to answer hereunto; so that I suppose,
either of his own naughty nature he hath made me an image after his
own fantasy, or else believed the report of such in conditions as he
is himself, who, in malice, I suppose, and disdain, may be compared
to the devil in hell, not giving place to him in pride at all. In
communication he repeated oft the provision of the thousand crowns. I
told him they went in my diets, and that it would be a good while
afore they were come out. And further I said, that seeing they had
been simpliciter given to me, I would never thank him for them, but
the king's Highness; and I said, that if they were twenty thousand,
he should break so many sleeps, afore he should have any part
thereof, entreating me as he did. 'Well,' quoth he, you have them.'
'That is truth,' quoth I, 'and nothing thankful to you.' 'Why then,'
quoth he, 'seeing you have here divers things of Master Thirleby's,
and all other things are parabilia pecunia, which you have, ye may
make thereby good provision for yourself.' 'That is truth,' quoth I;
'and that can I and will do, though ye tell me not, seeing I have
nothing of you, and afore this had provided at Lyons for all things
necessary, if ye without necessity had not made that great haste to
depart thence, enforcing me thereby to follow you. And yet,' quoth I,
'one thing may I tell you:  ye are very desirous I should be provided
well for, as appeareth in that you have taken away at Lyons one horse
that Francis had provided for me, and also your servant Mace, having
a horse to sell, and knowing my need, by your consent hath sold his
horse to a stranger, rather than he would sell him to me. So that
nothing suffering me to have of you, and taking away that provision
which I make, and go about to make, you well declare how heartily you
desire I should be provided for.' 'In faith,' quoth he, 'choose you,
ye may provide and you will; and seeing your journey hither from
Lyons is vain, you may thither return again, and make there provision
for yourself.' 'I thought,' quoth he, 'departing from Lyons, to have
made easy journeys, and to have followed the court till you had come,
and now come you, squirting in post, and trouble all.' 'I came forth
in post,' quoth I, 'by the commandment of the king my master, and had
liberty to return at pleasure by his Grace's letters; and seeing that
I had no horses for the journey, methought better to ride in post
than go afoot.' 'Well,' quoth he, 'I will not depart hence this
twelvemonth, except ye be otherwise provided.' 'Provided?' quoth I,
'I must tarry till I may be provided for horses, if ye speak of that
provision:  and seeing that this riding in post grieveth you, it
causeth me to think you are loth to depart, and angry that I shall
succeed you. I have here already two gowns and a velvet jacket, so
that you shall not be letted an hour by me.'

     "'I tell you,' quoth he, 'ye shall otherwise provide, or else I
will not depart. For I tell you,' quoth he, 'though you care not for
the king's honour, but wretchedly do live with ten shillings a-day,
as ye did in yonder parts, you and your companion, I must and will
consider the king's honour.' 'And I tell you again,' quoth I, 'I will
and do consider the king's honour as much as ye at any time will do,
and as sorry will be, that it should be touched by any negligence or
default in me:  yea, and I say more to you,' quoth I, 'though ye may
spend far above me, I shall not stick, if any thing be to bespent for
the king's honour, to spend as liberally as you, so long as either I
have it, or can get it to spend. And whosoever informed you of the
wretchedness and spending scarcely of my companion and me in the
parts where we have been, made a false lie, and ye show your wisdom
full well in so lightly believing and rehearsing such a tale.' 'I
cannot tell,' quoth he, 'but this was openly rehearsed by Master
Brian's servants at my table.' 'Yea, was it?' quoth I. 'Yea, marry
was it,' quoth he. 'Now, by my troth,' quoth I, 'then was the fare
that was bestowed upon them very well cast away:  for, of my fidelity,
that week that Master Brian and his servants were with us at Villa
Franca, it cost my companion and me five and twenty pounds in the
charges of the housel' 'This, they say,' quoth he. 'Yea,' quoth I,
'and therein they lie.'

     "And here I showed him, that being well settled at Nice, and
having made there good and honest provision, to our no little
charges, Master Wyat would not rest till he had gotten us to Villa
Franca, where, even upon the first words of Master Heynes, he was
right well content to take of us twenty shillings by the day; which
was not during ten days:  whereas, at his coming to us to Nice,
himself and all his servants, and then tarrying with us two days, we
took not one penny of him. And moreover, at the departing of Master
Wyat from Villa Franca, in post, into England, we found ourselves,
our servants, all Master Wyat's servants, to the number of sixteen,
all his acquaintance, which, dinner and supper, continually came to
us; sometimes twelve, sometimes ten, and, when they were least, six
or eight; and for this we had not one penny of Master Wyat. And yet
at our coming from Barcelona, where we tarried about eight days, we
gave to Master Wyat twenty-eight livres, and to his servants five
livres, besides forty shillings that privately I gave to some, being
of gentle fashion, out of mine own purse:  so that I told him, it was
neither Master Wyat, nor Mason, that found us and our servants, but
we paid for the finding of them:  and here it chanced to us to have
all the charge, and other men to have all the thanks.

     "The bishop when he heard this was amazed, and stood still,
finally saying, 'By my troth,' quoth he, 'I tell you as it was told
me, and Master doctor here can tell whether it was so or no. Yea, and
I will tell you more,' quoth he, 'they said that Master Heynes would
have been more liberal a great deal, if you had not been.' '.Now, by
my troth,' quoth I, 'I shall therein make Master Heynes himself judge
thereof, who can best tell what communication hath been between him
and me therein.'

     "Thinking that this communication had driven the other matters
out of the bishop's wild head, I held my peace and by and by was he
in hand again with them, as hot as ever he was. 'My Lord!' quoth I,
'I desired ere while your Lordship to make an end of this
communication, wherein the longer ye talk, the more ye make me
believe that you would, (where ye have spoken undiscreetly, yea, and
unkindly, not regarding the king's letters,) with multitude of words,
and great countenance, I should think ye had not done amiss. But
surely you lose your labour, for ye shall never make me think that ye
are desirous to do me pleasure, neither for mine own sake, nor for
the king's:  for if your words be well weighed, I have as much of you
indeed for mine own sake, as I have for the king's sake; that is,
nothing at all.'

     "Here both of us were talking together; but I held on still,
and ever enforced him to this:  'My Lord!' quoth I, 'this is the thing
that I shall only desire of you; that whereas the king's Grace hath
here, in the French court, divers affairs, (as I take it,) ye would
therein instruct me in the state thereof, and give me your best
counsel and advice:  and this I protest unto you, that if ye this will
do, I will attentively hear you and if ye will not, I shall with pain
hear you in your other things, but I will make no answer at all.'

     "For all this the bishop ended not; but in conclusion, when he
saw that he could by no means induce me to answer, he returned
homewards, and I brought him unto his lodging and chamber.

     "It being dinner time, and all things provided, and standing
afore him, and he turning his back from me into a window -- I, at his
turning towards me again, put off my bonnet, and said, 'God be with
you, my Lord!' He gave no answer to me at all, nor countenance, but
suffered me to go. Whereupon, returning to my lodging, which was in
Master Thirleby's chamber, I caused my dinner to be provided; and
when it was almost ready, the bishop's steward, called Myrrel, came
for me, (whether sent from the bishop or not, I cannot tell,) and I
told him my dinner was provided for, and withal, that my Lord, his
master, had given me such a breakfast, that I needed no dinner nor
supper; and so the steward, drinking with me, returned again, and I
went to dinner at Master Thirleby's lodging, and after dinner I went
to the bishop's lodging, who, at my coming, very gently put off his
bonnet, and so we walked together quietly awhile; and shortly after,
the bishop began after this manner:  'Master Bonner! to-day we
communed of provision for you, and because ye shall lay no blame upon
me, I will tell you what I will do for you:  I will provideand make
ready for you mules, mulets, horses, servants, money; yea, and all
things that shall be necessary.'

     "'My Lord!' quoth I, 'here is a large offer, and a great
kindness come upon you; I marvel,' quoth I, 'that I could hear
nothing of this to-day in the morning.' 'I tell you,' quoth he, 'this
will I do; for know you, that I will consider the king's honour and
pleasure, and doubt not but the king will pay me again.' 'My Lord!'
quoth I, 'I have sent my servant already to Lyons, to make provision
for me, and I have sent others abroad here into the town and country,
to do the same:  ye shall never need to trouble yourself herewith.' 'I
will,' quoth he, 'you shall not say, another day, that ye could not
be provided for.' 'My Lord!' quoth I, 'let me have instructions in
the king's matters, and as for other things, I shall not ask of you,
because this day ye made me so plain answer.'

     "After much communication I departed from him lovingly, telling
him that I would be at Ferrara that night, where he intended to be
lodged. And so the bishop, bidding me farewell, took soon after his
horse, riding to Ferrara to bed; and by the way I overtook him, and
passing by, doing my duty to him and his company, I came to Ferrara,
lodging at the post-house, and even as the bishop came into the town,
stood at the post-house door; to whom the bishop said, 'We shall see
you soon, Master Bonner!' 'Yea, my Lord!' quoth I, thinking that
thereby he had desired me to supper, and at supper-time I went to his
lodging, having others to eat my supper at home; and glad he appeared
to be that I was come, making merry communication all supper while,
but nothing at all yet speaking to me, or giving any thing to me,
saving, at the doming of the fruit, he gave me a pear, I trow,
because I should remember mine own country. After supper, he walked,
taking Master Thirleby with him, and I walked with an Italian, being
ambassador for the Count Mirandula; and after a good space we
returned, and bade the bishop good night.

     "I did not after that night dine or sup with the bishop, till
he came to Bourges in Berry, where, upon the depeach of Francis, and
closing up of our letters sent to the king's Highness, the supper was
so provided, and set upon the board; and the bishop in washing,
standing so between me and the door that I could not get out; and
there would he needs that I should wash with him and sup. And I
suppose, all the way from Barella to Blois, he talked not above four
times with me, and at every time, saving at Moulines, (where he by
mouth told me somewhat of the king's affairs here in France,) and at
Varron, (when he, answering to my request in writing, delivered me
his book of his own hand for mine instructions, the copy whereof is
now sent herewithal,) there was quick communication between us. His
talking by the way was with Master Thirleby, who, I think, knoweth a
great deal of his doing, and will, if he be the man I take him for,
tell it plainly to your Lordship. I myself was out of credence with
the bishop, not being appliable to his manners and desires.

     "And surely, as Master Thirleby told me at his first coming to
Lyons, and then speaking with the bishop, the bishop seemed to be so
well content to return, and so glad of his coming to succeed him,
that his flesh in his face began all to tremble, and yet would the
bishop make men believe, that he would gladly come home:  which thing,
believe it who will, I will never believe; for ever he was looking
for letters out of England, from Master Wallop and Master Brian, whom
he taketh for his great friends. And Master Wyat himself reckoned,
that the bishop should have come into Spain, or else my lord of
Durham; so that the bishop of Winchester ever coveted to protract the
time, desiring yet withal to have some shadow to excuse and hide
himself; as tarrying at Barella, he made excuse by my not coming to
Lyons:  and coming to Varennes, and there, hearing by the ambassadors
of the Venetians a flying tale of the going of the French king
towards Bayonne, to meet the emperor, by and by he said, 'Lo! where
is Master Diligence now? If he were now here, (as then I was that
night,) we would to the court and present him, and take our leave.'
But when I in the morning was up afore him, and ready to horse, he
was nothing hasty. No; coming to Moulines afore him, and there
tarrying for him, the French king lying at Schavenna, three small
leagues off, he made not half the speed and haste that he pretended.

     "I mislike in the bishop of Winchester, that he cannot be
content that any, joined in commission with him, should keep house,
but to be at his table. Wherein either he searcheth thereby a vain
glory and pride to himself, with some dishonour to the king, as who
saith, there was among all the king's ambassadors but one able to
maintain a table, and that were he; or else he doth the same for an
evil intent and purpose, to bring them thereby into his danger, that
they shall say and do as liketh him alone; which, I suppose verily,
hath been his intent.

     "I mislike in the said bishop, that where he, for his own pomp
and glory, hath a great number of servants in their velvets and
silks, with their chains about their necks, and keepeth a costly
table withexcessive fare, and exceeding expenses many other ways, he
doth say, and is not ashamed to report, that he is so commanded to do
by the king's Grace; and that is his answer commonly, when his
friends tell him of his great charges; and so, under colour of the
king's commandment and honour, he hideth his pride, which is here
disdained.

     "I mislike in the said bishop, that he, having private hatred
against a man, will rather satisfy his own stomach and affection,
hindering and neglecting the king's affairs, than, relenting in any
part of his sturdy and stubborn will, give familiar and hearty
counsel (whereby the king's Highness's matters and business may be
advanced and set forth) to him that he taketh for his adversary.

     "I mislike in the said bishop, that he ever continually, here
in this court of France, made incomparably more of the emperor's,
king of Portugal's, Venetians', and duke of Ferrara's ambassadors,
than of any Frenchmen in the court, which, with his pride, caused
them to disdain him, and to think that he favoured not the French
king, but was imperial.

     "I mislike in the bishop, that there is so great familiarity
and acquaintance, yea, and much mutual confidence, between the said
bishop and M., as naughty a fellow, and as very a papist, as any that
I know, where he dare express it. The bishop, in his letters to
Master Wyat, ever sendeth special commendations to Mason, and yet
refuseth to send any to Master Heynes and me, being with Master Wyat,
as we perceived by the said letters. And Mason maketh such foundation
of the bishop, that he thinketh there is none such; and he told me at
Villa Franca, that the bishop, upon a time, when he had fallen out
with Germain, so trusted him, that weeping and sobbing he came unto
him, desiring and praying him that he would speak with Germain, and
reconcile him, so that no words were spoken of it:  and what the
matter was, he would not tell me; that young fellow Germain knoweth
all. And Preston, who is servant to the bishop of Winchester, showed
me one night in my chamber at Blois, after supper, that Germain is
ever busy in showing the king's letters to strangers, and that he
himself hath given him warning thereof. This thing Preston told me
the night before that the bishop departed hence, and when I would
have had more of him therein, be, considering how the bishop and I
stood, kept him more close, and would say no further."

     In this declaration of Dr. Edmund Bonner, above prefixed, sent
to the Lord Cromwell, divers things we have to note:  First, as
touching Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester; here we have a plain
demonstration of his vile nature and pestilent pride, joined with
malice and disdain intolerable:  whereof worthily complaineth Dr.
Bonner aforesaid, showing six special causes, why and wherefore he
misliketh that person, according as he was willed before, by the
king's commandment, so to do.

     Secondly, In the said Stephen Winchester, this we have also to
note and understand, that as he here declareth a secret inclination
from the truth (which he defended before in his book De Obedientia)
to papistry, joining part and side with such as were known papists;
so he seemeth likewise to bear a like secret grudge against the Lord
Cromwell, and all such whomsoever he favoured.

     Thirdly, As concerning the before-named Dr. Edmund Bonner, the
author of this declaration, here is to be seen and noted, that he,
all this while, appeared a good man, and a diligent friend to the
truth; and that he was favoured of the Lord Cromwell for the same.

     Fourthly, That the said Dr. Bonner was not only favoured of the
Lord Cromwell, but also by him was advanced first to the office of
legation, then to the bishopric of Hereford, and lastly to the
bishopric of London; whom the said Dr. Bonner, in his letters,
agnizeth, and confesseth to be his only patron, and singular Mecænas.

     Which being so, we have in this said Dr. Bonner greatly to
marvel, what should be the cause that he, seeing all his setting-up,
making, and preferring, came only by the gospel, and by them of the
gospel's side, he, being then so hated of Stephen Gardiner, and such
as he was; being also at that time such a furtherer and defender of
the gospel, (as appeareth both by his preface before Gardiner's book
De Obedientia. and by his writings to the Lord Cromwell; also by
helping forward the printed bibles at Paris,) could ever be a man so
ungrateful and unkind afterwards, to join part with the said Stephen
Gardiner against the gospel, (without the which gospel he had never
come to be bishop, either of Hereford, or yet of London,) and now to
abuse the same bishopric of London, to persecute that so vehemently
which before so openly he defended? Wherein the same may well be said
to him in this case, that he himself was reported once to say to the
French king in the cause of Grancetor; to wit, that he had done
therein against God, against his honour, against justice, against
honesty, against friendship, against his own promise and his oath so
often made, against his own doctrine and judgment which then he
professed, against all truth, against the treaties and leagues
between him and his setters-up, and against all together; and, to
conclude, against the salvation of his own soul, which would God he
would have mercy upon, although he had showed want of mercy unto
others!

     But to refer this to the book of His accounts, who shall judge
one day all things uprightly, let us proceed further in the
continuation of this Dr. Bonner's legation; who, being now ambassador
in the court of France, as ye have heard, had given him in commission
from the king to treat with the French king for sundry points, as for
the printing of the New Testament in English, and the Bible at Paris;
also for slanderous preachers, and malicious speakers against the
king; for goods of merchants taken and spoiled; for the king's
pension to be paid; for the matters of the duke of Suffolk; for
certain prisoners in France. Item, For Grancetor the traitor, and
certain other rebels, to be sent into England, &c. Touching all which
affairs, the said Dr. Bonner did employ his diligence and travail to
the good satisfaction and contentment of the king's mind, and
discharge of his duty in such sort as no default could be found in
him; save only that the French king, one time, took displeasure with
him, for that the said Bonner, being now made bishop of Hereford, and
bearing himself somewhat more seriously and boldly before the king,
in the cause of Grancetor the traitor, (wherein he was willed, by the
advertisement of the king's pleasure, to wade more deeply and
instantly,) used these words to the French king, (as the French king
himself did afterwards report them,) saying, that he had done, in
deliverance of that aforesaid Grancetor, being an Englishman, against
God, against his honour, against justice, against reason, against
honesty, against friendship, against all law, against the treaties
and leagues between him and his brother the king of England; yea, and
against all together, &c. These words of Bishop Bonner, although he
denieth to have spoken them in that form and quality, yet; howsoever
they were spoken, did stir up the stomach of the French king to
conceive high displeasure against him, insomuch that he, answering
the lord ambassador again, bade him write these three things unto his
master: 

     First, Among other things, that his ambassador was a great
fool.

     Secondarily, That he caused to be done better justice there in
his realm in one hour, than they did in England in a whole year.

     Thirdly, That if it were not for the love of his master, he
should have a hundred strokes with a halbert, &c.

     And furthermore, the said French king beside this, sending a
special messenger with his letters to the king of England, willed him
to revoke and call this ambassador home, and to send him another. The
cause why the French king took these words of Bishop Bonner so to
stomach, (as the lord chancellor said,) was this:  For that the kings
of France, standing chiefly, and in manner only, upon their honour,
can suffer that in no case to be touched. Otherwise, in those words
(if they had been well taken) was not so much blame, perchance, as
boldness, being spoken somewhat vehemently in his master's behalf.
But this one thing seemeth to me much blameworthy, both in this
bishop, and many others, that they, in earthly matters, and to please
terrene kings, will put forth themselves to such a boldness and
forwardness; and in Christ's cause, the King of all kings, whose
cause they should only attend upon and tender, they are so remiss,
cold, and cowardly.

     To these letters of the French king, the king of England sent
answer again by other letters, in which he revoked and called home
again Bishop Bonner, giving unto him, about the same time, the
bishopric of London; and sent in supply of his place Sir John Wallop,
a great friend to Stephen Gardiner:  which was in February, about the
beginning of the year of our Lord 1540. Here now followeth the oath
of Bonner to the king, when he was made bishop of London.

The oath of Dr. Edmund Bonner, when he was made bishop of London,
against the pope of Rome.

     "Ye shall never consent nor agree that the bishop of Rome shall
practise, exercise, or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction, or
power within this realm, or any other the king's dominion; but that
you shalt resist the same at all times, to the uttermost of your
power:  and that from henceforth ye shall accept, repute, and take the
king's Majesty to be the only supreme head in earth of the Church of
England; and that to your cunning, wit, and uttermost of your power,
without guile, fraud, or other undue mean, ye shall observe, keep,
maintain, and defend, the whole effects and contents of all and
singular acts and statutes made, and to be made, within this realm,
in derogation, extirpation, and extinguishment of the bishop of Rome,
and his authority; and all other acts and statutes made, and to be
made, in reformation and corroboration of the king's power of supreme
head in the earth of the Church of England. And this ye shall do
against all manner of persons, of what estate, dignity, degree, or
condition they be; and in no wise do, or attempt, or to your power
suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or
things, privily or apertly, to the let, hinderance, damage,or
derogation thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of means,
or for any manner of pretence. And in case any oath be made, or hath
been made, by you to any person or persons in maintenance or favour
of the bishop of Rome, or his authority, jurisdiction, or power, ye
repute the same as vain and annihilated. So help you God, &c.

     "In fidem præmissorum ego Edmundus Bonner, electus et
confirmatus Londinensis episcopus, huic præsenti chartæ subscripsi."



189. ECCLESIASTICAL MATTERS, A.D. 1538.

     It will be judged, that I have lingered, peradventure, too much
in these outward affairs of princes and ambassadors:  wherefore,
leaving these by-matters pertaining to the civil state awhile, I mind
(the Lord willing) to put my story in order again, of such occurrents
as belong unto the church, first showing such injunctions and
articles as were devised and set forth by the king, for the behoof of
his subjects. Wherein, first, is to be understood, that the king,
when he had taken the title of supremacy from the bishop of Rome, and
had translated the same to himself, and was now a full prince in his
own realm, although he well perceived, by the wisdom and advice of
the Lord Cromwell and other of his council, that the corrupt state of
the church had need of reformation in many things; yet because he saw
how stubborn and untoward the hearts of many papists were, to be
brought from their old persuasions and customs, and what business he
had with them only about the matter of the pope's title, he durst not
by and by reform all at once, (which notwithstanding had been to be
wished,) but leading them fairly and softly, as he might, proceeded
by little and little, to bring greater purposes to perfection (which
he no doubt would have done, if the Lord Cromwell had lived); and
therefore first he began with a little book of articles, (partly
above touched;) bearing this title:  "Articles devised by the king's
Highness, to stable Christian quietness and unity among the people,"
&c.

Articles devised by the king.

     In the contents of which book, first he set forth the articles
of our Christian creed, which are necessarily and expressly to be
believed by all men. Then, with the king's preface going before,
followeth the declaration of three sacraments; to wit, of baptism, of
penance, and of the sacrament of the altar; in the tractation
whereof, he altereth nothing from the old trade received heretofore
from the Church of Rome.

     "Further then, proceeding to the order and cause of our
justification, he declareth, that the only mercy and grace of the
Father, promised freely unto us for his Son's sake Jesus Christ, and
the merits of his passion and blood, be the only sufficient and
worthy causes of our justification; yet good works, with inward
contrition, hope, and charity, and all other spiritual graces and
motions, be necessarily required, and must needs concur also in
remission of our sins; that is, our justification:  and afterwards,
we, being justified, must also have good works of charity, and
obedience towards God, in the observing and fulfilling outwardly of
his laws and commandments, &c.

     "As touching images, he willeth all bishops and preachers to
teach the people in such sort as they may know how they may use them
safely in churches, and not abuse them to idolatry, as thus:  that
they be representers of virtue and good example, and also, by
occasion, may be stirrers of men's minds, and make them to remember
themselves, and to lament their sins; and so far he permitteth them
to stand in churches. But otherwise, for avoiding of idolatry, he
chargeth all bishops and preachers diligently to instruct the people,
that they commit no idolatry unto them, in censing of them, in
kneeling and offering to them, with other like worshippings, which
ought not to be done, but only to God.

     "And likewise for honouring of saints, the bishops and
preachers be commanded to inform the people, how saints, hence
departed, ought to be reverenced and honoured, and how not:  that is,
that they are to be praised and honoured as the elect servants of
Christ, or rather Christ to be praised in them for their excellent
virtues planted in them, and for their good example left us, teaching
us to live in virtue and in goodness, and not to fear to die for
Christ, as they did. And also as advancers of our prayers in that
they may; but yet no confidence, nor any such honour to be given unto
them, which is only due to God; and so forth:  charging the said
spiritual persons to teach their flock, that all grace, and remission
of sins, and salvation, can no otherwise be obtained but of God only,
by the mediation of our Saviour Christ, who only is a sufficient
Mediator for our sins:  that all grace and remission of sin must
proceed only by the mediation of Christ and no other.

     "From that he cometh further to speak of rites and ceremonies
in Christ's church; as in having vestments used in God's service,
sprinkling of holy water, giving of holy bread, bearing of candles on
Candlemas-day, taking of ashes, bearing of palms, creeping to the
cross, setting up the sepulchre, hallowing of the font, with other
like customs, rites,and ceremonies; all which old rites and customs
the aforesaid book doth not by and by repeal, but so far admitteth
them for good and laudable, as they put men in remembrance of
spiritual things:  but so that the people withal must be instructed,
how the said ceremonies contain in them no such power to remit sin,
but that to be referred unto God only, by whom only our sins be
forgiven us.

     "And so, concluding with purgatory, he maketh an end of those
articles, thus saying thereof, that because the book of Maccabees
alloweth praying for souls departed, he therefore disproveth not that
so laudable a custom, so long continued in the church. But because
there is no certain place named, nor kind of pains expressed in
Scripture, he therefore thinketh necessary such abuses clearly to be
put away, which under the name of purgatory have been advanced; as to
make men believe, that by the bishop of Rome's pardons, or by masses
said at Scala Cœli, or other where, in any place, or before any
image, souls might clearly be delivered out of purgatory, and from
the pains thereof, to be sent straight to heaven; and such other like
abuses," &c.

     And these were the contents of that book of articles, devised
and passed, by the king's authority, a little before the stir of
Lincolnshire and Yorkshire; wherein, although there were many and
great imperfections and untruths not to be permitted in any true
reformed church, yet notwithstanding, the king and his council, to
bear with the weaklings which were newly weaned from their mother's
milk of Rome, thought it might serve somewhat for the time, instead
of a little beginning, till better come.

     And so consequently, not long after these articles thus set
forward, certain other injunctions were also given out about the same
year 1536, whereby a number of holy-days were abrogated; and
especially such as fell in the harvest time, the keeping of which
redounded greatly to the hinderance of gathering in their corn, hay,
fruit, and other such-like necessary commodities; the copy and tenor
of which injunctions I have also hereunto annexed, as under
followeth: 

     "Forasmuch as the number of holy-days is so excessively grown,
and yet daily more and more, by men's devotion, yea, rather
superstition, was like further to increase, that the same was, and
should be, not only prejudicial to the common weal, by reason that it
is occasion as well of much sloth and idleness, the very nurse of
thieves, vagabonds, and of divers other unthriftiness and
inconvenience, as of decay of good mysteries and arts profitable and
necessary for the commonwealth, and loss of man's food, (many times
being clean destroyed through the superstitious observance of the
said holy-days, in not taking the opportunity of good and serene
weather offered upon the same in time of harvest,) but also
pernicious to the souls of many men, which being enticed by the
licentious vacation and liberty of those holy-days, do upon the same
commonly use and practise more excess, riot, and superfluity, than
upon any other days. And since the sabbath day was used and ordained
but for man's use, and therefore ought to give place to the necessity
and behoof of the same, whensoever that shall occur, much rather than
any other holy-day instituted by man; it is therefore by the king's
Highness's authority, as supreme head in earth of the Church of
England, with the common assent and consent of the prelates and
clergy of this his realm, in convocation lawfully assembled and
congregated, amongst other things, decreed, ordained, and
established: 

     "First, That the feast of dedication of churches shall, in all
places throughout this realm, be celebrated and kept on the first
Sunday of the month of October, for ever, and upon none other day.

     "Item, That the feast of the patron of every church within this
realm, called commonly the Church Holy-day, shall not from henceforth
be kept and observed as a holy-day, as heretofore hath been used; but
that it shall be lawful to all and singular persons . resident or
dwelling within this realm, to go to their work, occupation, or
mystery; and the same truly to exercise and occupy upon the said
feast, as upon any other work-day, except the said feast of Church
Holy-day be such as must be else universally observed and kept as a
holy-day by this ordinance following.

     "Also, that all those feasts or holy-days which shall happen to
fall or occur either in the harvest-time, which is to be counted from
the first day of July unto the twenty-ninth .day of September, or
else in the term time at Westminster, shall not be kept or observed
from henceforth as holy-days; but that it may be lawful for every man
to go to his work or occupation upon the same, as upon any other
work-day, except always the feasts of the Apostles, or of the Blessed
Virgin, and of St. George, and also such feasts as wherein the king's
Highness's judges at Westminster do not use to sit in judgment; all
which shall be kept holy and solemnly of every man, as in time past
hath been accustomed. Provided always, that it may be lawful unto all
priests and clerks, as well secular as regular, in the aforesaid
holy-days now abrogated, to sing or say their accustomed service for
those holy-days, in their churches;:  so as they do not the same
solemnly, nor do ring to the same, after the manner used in highholy-
days, nor do command or indict the same to be kept or observed as
holy-days.

     "Finally, That the feasts of the Nativity of our Lord, of
Easter-day, of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, and of St.
Michael the Archangel, shall be from henceforth counted, accepted,
and taken for the four general offering days.

     "And for further declaration of the premises, be it known that
Easter term beginneth always the eighteenth day after Easter-day,
reckoning Easter-day for one, and endeth the Monday next following
the Ascension-day.

     "Trinity term beginneth always the Wednesday next after the
Octaves of Trinity Sunday, and endeth the eleventh or twelfth day of
July.

     "Michaelmas term beginneth the ninth or tenth day of October,
and endeth the twenty-eighth or twenty-ninth day of November.

     "Hilary term beginneth the twenty-third or twenty-fourth day of
January, and endeth the twelfth or thirteenth day of February.

     "In Easter term, upon the Ascension-day; in Trinity term, upon
the Nativity of St. John Baptist; in Michaelmas term, upon
Allhallows-day; in Hilary term, upon Candlemas-day, the king's judges
at Westminster do not use to sit in judgment, nor upon any Sunday."

     After these articles and injunctions thus given out by the king
and his council, then followed moreover, as time served, other
injunctions besides, concerning images, relics, and blind miracles,
and for abrogating of pilgrimages, devised by superstition, and
maintained for lucre's sake; also for the Pater-noster, Creed, and
God's commandments, and the Bible to be had in English, with divers
other points more, necessary for religion.

     By these articles and injunctions coming forth one after
another, for the necessary instruction of the people, it may appear
how well the king deserved then the title of his supreme government,
given to him over the Church of England; by which title, and
authority he did more good for the redressing and advancing of
Christ's church and religion here in England in these three years,
than the pope, the great vicar of Christ, with all his bishops and
prelates, had done the space of three hundred years before. Such a
vigilant care was then in the king and in his council, how by all
ways and means to redress religion, to reform errors, to correct
corrupt customs, to help ignorance, and to reduce the misleading of
Christ's flock, drowned in blind popery, superstition, customs, and
idolatry, to some better form of more perfect reformation:  whereunto
he provided not only these articles, precepts, and injunctions above
specified, to inform the rude people, but also procured the bishops
to help forward, in the same cause of decayed doctrine, with their
diligent preaching and teaching of the people; according as ye heard
before, how that in the year 1534, during the whole time of
parliament, there was appointed every Sunday a bishop to preach at
Paul's Cross, against the supremacy of the bishop of Rome.

     Amongst which bishops, John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, the
king's confessor, and a great persecutor of the poor flock of Christ,
(as is before sufficiently recorded,) made a sermon before the king,
upon Good Friday, this present year 1538, at Greenwich, seriously and
effectuously preaching, on the king's behalf, against the usurped
supremacy of the bishop of Rome; the contents of whose sermon wholly
to express, were here too long and tedious.

     You heard before, by the king's injunctions above expressed,
and directed out, A.D. 1538, how all such images and pictures which
were abused with pilgrimage or offerings of any idolatry, were
abolished; by virtue of which injunctions, divers idols, and
especially the most notable stocks of idolatry, were taken down the
same year, 1538, as the images of Walsingham, Ipswich, Worcester, the
Lady of Wilsdon, Thomas Becket, with many more; having engines to
make their eyes to open and roll about, and other parts of their body
to stir, and many other false jugglings, as the blood of Hayles, and
such like, wherewith the simple people a long time had been deceived: 
all which were espied out, and destroyed.

     Among divers other of these foul idols, there went also, in the
same reckoning, a certain old idolatrous image in Wales, named
Darvell Gatheren; which, in the month of May, in the year above
mentioned, was brought up to London, and burned in Smithfield; with
which idol also was burned at the same time, and hanged for treason,
Friar Forrest, of whom some mention was partly touched before, in the
story of Cardinal Wolsey.



190. FRIAR FORREST.

     Forasmuch as the number of years doth lead us thereunto, we
will somewhat touch and speak of Friar Forrest; although he be
unworthy of a place, and not to be numbered in this catalogue. .

     This Forrest was an Observant Friar, and had secretly, in
confessions, declared to many of the king's subjects, that the king
was not supreme head; and being thereof accused and apprehended, he
was examined how he could say that the king was not supreme head of
the church, when he himself had sworn to the contrary? He answered,
"that he took his oath with his outward man, but his inward man never
consented thereunto." And being further accused of divers damnable
articles, and thereupon convicted, he gladly submitted himself to
abide the punishment of the church. Upon this his submission having
more liberty than before he had, to talk with whom he would, he
became as far from his submission as ever he was; and when his
abjuration was sent him to read, he utterly refused it, and
obstinately persevered in his errors:  wherefore he was justly
condemned, and after hanged in Smithfield in chains, upon a gallows
quick, by the middle and arm-holes, and fire was made under him, and
so was he consumed and burned to death.

     In the place of execution, there was a scaffold prepared for
the king's .most honourable council, and the nobles of the realm, to
sit upon, to grant him pardon, if he had any spark of repentance in
him. There was also a pulpit prepared, where the right reverend
father, Hugh Latimer, bishop of Worcester, declared his errors, and
manifestly confuted them by the Scriptures, with many godly
exhortations to move him to repentance; but he was so froward, that
he neither would hear, nor speak. A little before, the aforesaid
image, called Darvell Gatheren, coming out of Wales, was brought to
the gallows, and there also with the aforesaid friar, as is said, was
set on fire; which the Welchmen much worshipped, and had a prophecy
amongst them, that this image should set a whole forest on fire: 
which prophecy took effect; for he set this Friar Forrest on fire,
and consumed him to nothing. The friar, when he saw the fire come,
and that present death was at hand, caught hold upon the ladder, and
would not let it go, but so impatiently took his death, as never any
man that put his trust in God, at any time so ungodly or unquietly
ended his life.

     In the months of October and November the same year, shortly
after the overthrow of these images and pilgrimages, followed also
the ruin of the abbeys and religious houses, which, by the special
motion of the Lord Cromwell, (or rather and principally, by the
singular blessing of Almighty God,) were suppressed, being given a
little before by act of parliament into the king's hand; whereupon
not only the houses were razed, but their possessions also disparkled
among the nobility, in such sort as all friars, monks, canons, nuns,
and other sects of religion, were then so rooted out of this realm
from the very foundation, that there seemeth, by God's grace, no
possibility hereafter left, for the generation of those strange weeds
to grow here any more, according to the true verdict of our Lord and
Saviour Christ in his gospel, saying, Every plantation, being not
planted of my Father, shall be plucked up by the roots, &c.



191. JOHN LAMBERT

The history of the worthy martyr of God, John Lambert, otherwise
named Nicholson, with his troubles, examinations, and answers, as
well before Warham, archbishop of Canterbury, and other bishops, as
also before King Henry the Eighth, by whom at length he was condemned
to death, and burned in Smithfield, in A.D. 1538.
 IMMEDIATELY upon the ruin and destruction of the
monasteries, the same year, and in the month of November, followed
the trouble and condemnation of John Lambert, the faithful servant of
Jesus Christ, and martyr of blessed memory. This Lambert, being born
and brought up in Norfolk, was first converted by Bilney, and studied
in the university of Cambridge; where after that he had sufficiently
profited both in Latin and Greek, and had translated out of both
tongues sundry things into the English tongue, being forced at last
by violence of the time, he departed from thence to the parts beyond
the seas, to Tyndale and Frith, and there remained the space of a
year and more, being preacher and chaplain to the English House at
Antwerp, till he was disturbed by Sir Thomas More, and, by the
accusation of one Barlow, was carried from Antwerp to London; where
he was brought to examination first at Lambeth, then at the bishop's
house at Otford, before Warham, the archbishop of Canterbury, and
other adversaries; having five and forty articles ministered against
him, whereunto he rendered answer again by writing:  the which
answers, forasmuch as they contain great learning, and may give some
light to the better understanding of the common causes of religion
now in controversy, I thought here to exemplify the same, as they
came right happily to our hands. The copy both of the articles, and
also of his answers, here in order followeth.

     "Imprimis, Whether thou wast suspected or infamed of heresy?

     "II. Whether ever thou hadst any of Luther's books, and namely,
since they were condemned? and how long thou didst keep them, and
whether thou hast spent any study on them?

     "III. Whether thou wast constituted priest, and in what
diocese, and of what bishop?

     "IV. Whether it be lawful for a priest to marry a wife, and
whether a priest in some case be bound by the law of God to marry a
wife?

     "V. Whether thou believest that whatsoever is done of man,
whether it be good or ill, cometh of necessity?

     "VI. Whether the sacrament of the altar be a sacrament
necessary unto salvation? and whether after the consecration of the
bread and wine done by the priest, as by the minister of God, there
is the very body and blood of Christ, in likeness of bread and wine?

     "VII. Item, What opinion thou holdest touching the sacrament of
baptism? whether thou dost believe that it is a sacrament of the
church, and a necessary sacrament unto salvation, and that a priest
may baptize; and that the order of baptizing ordained by the church,
is necessary and wholesome?

     "VIII. Item, Whether thou believest that matrimony be a
sacrament of the church necessary to be observed in the church, and
that the order appointed by the church for the solemnizing thereof is
allowable and to be holden?

     "IX. Item, Whether thou dost believe orders to be a sacrament
of the church, and that saying of mass, ordained by the church, is to
be observed of priests? whether it be deadly sin or not, if it be
omitted or contemned; and whether the order of priesthood were
invented by man's imagination, or ordained by God?

     "X. Item, Whether penance be a sacrament of the church, and
necessary unto salvation; and whether auricular confession is to be
made unto the priest, or is necessary unto salvation? and whether
thou believest that a Christian is bound, besides contrition of
heart, having the free use of an apt or free priest, under necessity
of salvation, to be confessed unto a priest, and not unto any layman,
be he ever so good and devout; and whether thou believest that a
priest, in cases permitted to him, may absolve a sinner (being
contrite and confessed) from his sins, and enjoin him wholesome
penance?"

     "XI. Item, Whether thou dost believe and hold, that the 
sacrament of confirmation and extreme unction be sacraments of the
church, and whether that they do profit the souls of them that
receive them? and whether thou believest the aforesaid seven
sacraments to give grace unto them that do duly receive them?

     "XII. Whether all things necessary unto salvation are put in
Holy Scripture, and whether things only there put be sufficient? and
whether some things upon necessity of salvation are to be believed
and observed, which are not expressed in Scripture?

     "XIII. Whether thou believest that purgatory is, and whether
that souls departed be therein tormented and purged?

     "XIV. Whether holy martyrs, apostles, and confessors departed
from this world, ought to be honoured and called upon, and prayed 
unto?

     "XV. Whether the saints in heaven, as mediators, pray for us?

     "XVI. Whether thou believest that oblations and pilgrimages may
be devoutly and meritoriously done to the sepulchres and relics of
saints?

     "XVII. Whether the fast in Lent, and others appointed by the
canon law, and received in common usage of Christian people, (unless
necessity otherwise requireth,) are to be observed?

     "XVIII. Whether it be laudable and profitable, that worshipful
images be set in churches for the remembrance of Christ and his
saints?

     "XIX. Whether thou believest that prayers of men living, do
profit souls departed, and being in purgatory?

     "XX. Whether men may merit and deserve, both by their fastings
and also by their other deeds of devotion?

     "XXI. Whether thou dost believe that men, prohibited of bishops
to preach, as suspected of heresy, ought to cease from preaching and
teaching, until they have purged themselves of suspicion before a
higher judge?

     "XXII. Whether thou believest that it is lawful for all priests
freely to preach the word of God, or no?

     "XXIII. Whether thou believest that it is lawful for laymen of
both kinds, that is to wit, both men and women, to sacrifice and
preach the word of God?

     "XXIV. Whether excommunication, denounced by the pope against
all heretics, doth oblige and bind them before God?

     "XXV. Whether every priest is bound to say daily his matins and
even-song, according as it is ordained by the church; or whether he
may leave them unsaid without offence or deadly sin?

     "XXVI. Whether thou believest that the heads or rulers, by
necessity of salvation, are bound to give unto the people Holy
Scripture in their mother-language?

     "XXVII. Whether is it lawful for the rulers, for some cause,
upon their reasonable advisement, to ordain that the Scripture should
not be delivered unto the people in the vulgar language?

     "XXVIII. Whether thou believest that consecrations, hallowings,
and blessings used in the church, are to be praised?

     "XXIX. Whether thou believest that the pope may make laws and
statutes, to hind all Christian men to the observance of the same,
under pain of deadly sin, so that such laws and statutes be not
contrary to the law of God?

     "XXX. Whether thou believest that the pope and other prelates,
and their deputies in spiritual things, have power to excommunicate
priests and lay-people, that are inobedient and sturdy, from entering
into the church, and so suspend or let them from administration of
the sacraments of the same?

     "XXXI. Whether faith only, without good works, may suffice unto
a man fallen into sin after his baptism, for his salvation and
justifying?

     "XXXII. Whether a priest, marrying a wife, and that without the
dispensation of the pope, and begetting also children of her without
slander-giving, do sin deadly?

     "XXXIII. Item, Whether a Latin priest, after he hath taken the
order of priesthood, being sore troubled and stirred with pricking of
lust and lechery, and therefore marrying a wife for remedy of the
same, do sin deadly?

     "XXXIV. Item, Whether thou dost ever pray for John Wickliff,
John Huss, or Jerome of Prague, condemned of heresy in the council of
Constance, or for any of them, since they died? or whether thou hast
done openly or secretly any deeds of charity for them, affirming them
to be in bliss, and saved?

     "XXXV. Item, Whether thou hast accounted them, or any of them,
to be saints, and worshipped them as saints?

     "XXXVI. Item, Whether thou dost believe, hold, and affirm, that
every general council, and the council of Constance also, doth
represent the universal congregation or church?

     "XXXVII. Item, Whether thou dost believe the same things which
the council of Constance, representing the universal church, hath
approved and doth approve, for the maintenance of faith, and soul's
health, and that the same is to be approved and holden of all
Christians?

     "XXXVIII. Whether the condemnations of John Wickliff, John
Huss, and Jerome of Prague, done upon their persons, books, and
documents, by the whole general council of Constance, were duly and
rightly done, and so, for such, by every catholic person they are to
be holden?

     "XXXIX. Whether thou believest that John Wickliff of England,
John Huss of Bohemia, and Jerome of Prague, were heretics, and for
heretics to be named, and their books and doctrines to have been, and
now be, perverse; for the which books, and pertinacy of their
persons, they are condemned by the holy council of Constance for
heretics?

     "XL. Item, Whether thou believest or affirmest, that it is not
lawful in any case to swear?

     "XLI. Whether thou believest that it is lawful, at the
commandment of a judge, to make an oath to say the truth, or any
other oath in case convenient, and that also for purgation of infamy?

     "XLII. Item, Whether a Christian person, despising the receipt
of the sacraments of confirmation, extreme unction, or solemnizing of
matrimony, doth sin deadly?

     "XLIII. Item, Whether thou believest that St. Peter, as
Christ's vicar, hath power upon earth to bind and loose?

     "XLIV. Item, Whether the pope, ordinarily chosen for a time,
his proper name being expressed, be the successor of St. Peter?

     "XLV. Item, Whether thou hast ever promised at any time, by an
oath, or made any confederacy or league with any person or persons,
that you would always hold and defend certain conclusions or
articles, seeming to you and your accomplices right and consonant
unto the faith; and that you certify us touching the order and tenor
of the said opinions and conclusions, and of the names and surnames
of them that were your adherents, and promised to be adherent unto
you in this behalf?"

The answers of John Lambert to the forty-five articles.

     "Unto your first demand, wherein you do ask whether I was
suspected of or infamed of heresy, I answer, that I am not certain
what all persons at all seasons have deemed or suspected of me;
peradventure some better, some worse; like as the opinion of the
people was never one, but thought diversely of all the famous
prophets, and of the apostles, yea, and of Christ himself:  as
appeareth in St. John, how, when he came into Jerusalem in the feast
called Scenopegia, anon there arose upon him a great noise, some
saying that he was a very good man; others said nay, and called him a
seducer, because he led the people from the right ways of Moses's law
into error. Seeing therefore that all men could not say well by
Christ, which is the author of verity and truth, yea, the very truth
itself, and likewise of his best servants; what should I need to
regard if at some time some person, for a like cause, should suspect
of me amiss, and evil report of me? seeing moreover, it is said in
the Gospel, Woe be to you, when all men speak well of you; for so did
their fathers to the false prophets. If therefore at any season such
infamy was put upon me, I am glad that I have so little regarded the
same, that now I have forgotten it. And though I did remember any
such, yet were I more than twice a fool to show you thereof; for it
is written in your own law, No man is bound to bewray himself. But
this I insure you:  I was never so charged with suspicion or infamy of
crime, that I was therefore at any time convented and reproved before
any judge before that I was troubled for these causes, for which I
was at the first put into your hands:  and of them, seeing you could
not prove me faulty, I wonder why you would never yet pronounce me
quit and innocent, according as I have even lowly desired of you, and
required full instantly the same. But letting those things pass, you
have imagined new matters to charge me with, wherein I think
certainly, that you could no more have proved me culpable, than you
did in the first; that is to wit, no whit culpable in either, had it
not been that by long imprisonment you forced me to tell what I
thought in them, which I have and will freely do; and that,
indifferently considered, I suppose shall not deserve any sore
punishment, unless you will beard the truth, whereunto I hope it
shall not disagree.

     "To your second demand, where you do inquire whether I had ever
any of Luther's books, and namely, since they were condemned, and how
long I kept them, and whether ever I have spent any study in them; I
say that indeed I have had of them, and that both before they were
condemned and also since; but I neither will nor can tell you how
long I kept them. But truth it is, that I have studied upon them, and
I thank God that ever I so did; for by them hath God showed unto me,
and also to a huge multitude of others, such light as the deceivable
darkness of them (I beseech God to amend it) that name themselves,
but amiss, to be the holy church, cannot abide. And that appeareth
evidently, for they dare not stand to any trial. He coveteth above
all things, as all his adversaries do well know, that all his
writings, and the writings of all his adversaries, might be
translated into all languages, to the intent that all people might
see and know what is said of every part; whereby men should the
better judge what the truth is. And in this methinketh he requireth
nothing but equity; for the law would have no man condemned, nor
justified, until his cause were beard and known.

     "But the contrary part, I mean our over-rich prelacy, who are
so drowned in voluptuous living that they cannot attend to study
God's Scripture, nor preach the same, which should be the principal
part of their office, abhor this fashion (albeit it is right
indifferent and full of equity) no less than they do abhor death. And
no marvel, for doubtless, if it so could be obtained that the
writings of all parties might be openly seen and conferred, we should
soon see their sleightly dealing, and facing doctrine, with all other
cloaked abusion, lightly overthrown, as appeareth well in Almain:  for
there be the books of every party seen openly, and translated into
the vulgar language, that all people may see and read upon them; and
so, upon the sight of the books, they lightly follow the true light
of God's.word, refusing the horror of darkness and false doctrine,
whereby, before, they have been seduced from the right teaching and
way showed in the Bible. And this is done, not by a hundred, nor by a
thousand; but generally by whole cities and countries, both high and
low; few or none excepted.

     "But our prelates, seeing this, and that their dealing should,
if this light were set up, soon be detected and discovered, have sent
out commandments, that if any person should adventure to keep any
such books, they shall, for so doing, be excommunicated from God, and
all his saints, and cursed as black as pitch, whether the books be in
Latin, English, French, Dutch, or any other tongue; as indeed men,
seeing the fruit contained in them, have set them forth in all
languages. But this ought not Christian men to think any novelty; for
so did their forefathers, the prelates in Christ's time and
afterwards, to the apostles; yea, and if it were well tried, I think
it should soon be found out, that they have so dealt ever since unto
this day. For when Christ went about preaching, the scribes and
Pharisees, who were bishops then and prelates, gave a general
commandment, that whosoever confessed him to be Christ should be
accursed, and put out of the synagogue, that we call the church; and
so they were.

     "Look in the Acts of the Apostles, and you shall find how they
were in like manner served; yea, look in the Old Testament, and you
shall find (as I remember) how they procured of one that was a
temporal ruler at that season, to have the prophecy of Jeremy (for he
of all others is most vehement against the dissimulation of priests)
to be burned. Why then should we eschew them, or their works, (unless
we knew a better cause why,) whom our prelates reject and cast away,
seeing they render no reasonable cause of their enterprise? but,
presuming of their power, without any due authority, that I can find,
granted unto them so to do, will, because they so command, so have
all done? according to the tyrannical saying, as I trow, of
Sardanapalus, Sic solo, sic jubeo; stat pro ratione voluntas; that is
to say, So will I, so do I command; and let my will for reason stand.

     But I would to God that such knew what spirit they have in
them; for if they had indeed the spirit which they claim and pretend
to have, I mean the Spirit of Christ, I dare say it should soon alter
them from such haughty language and doting, and cause them to turn a
new leaf; for that Spirit is full of softness and lenity, lowliness
and humility, patience and temperancy; void of all wilfulness and
tyranny:  yea, it should cause them not to prevent, but easily to
follow, the counsel and doctrine of Christ's apostles and holy
saints, that be their interpreters. As St. Paul, which writing unto
the Thessalonians, would have them all to prove all things, and to
retain or bold that only which is good; refraining from all that hath
semblance of evil. And St. John would have Christian people to try
the spirit of them that should speak; whether they were of God or no.
Also, writing in another Epistle unto a noble woman, and unto her
children, he saith, If any person shall come unto you, bringing .with
them the doctrine that is not of Christ, receive him not into your
house, nor make him any cheer. So that in this he would have women to
know the doctrine of Christ, and to love that, refusing to give
credence unto foreign teaching; not favouring the same.

     "In the First Epistle also to the Corinthians, St. Paul,
writing in general to all the inhabitants of that city, saith,
Brethren, be ye not children in wit and understanding; but as
concerning maliciousness, be you children. In wit I would have you
perfect. And why? Verily for no other cause, but that we should (as
he writeth unto the Hebrews) have discretion to judge the good from
ill, and the ill from the good, and so to be like men differing from
beasts, according unto the saying of the prophet, See that ye be not
like unto a horse or a mule, which lack understanding. And we should
pray with him in another Psalm, O Lord! teach me the way that I
should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee.

     "St. Chrysostom, according unto this, in a certain book of his
Commentaries upon Matthew, (the book is called, Opus Imperfectum,)
writeth after this fashion, as near as my remembrance doth serve, and
certain I am that I shall not misreport him, and in that I will be
tried whensoever it shall please you to bring the book. 'The priests
that were Pharisees in the time,' saith he, 'of Christ, made an
ordinance, that whosoever should acknowledge Jesus to be Christ,
should be accursed and excommunicated. If then the Pharisees or
priests that now do occupy their rooms should make a like ordinance,
because they would not have Christ's doctrine to be professed for
hindering of their lucre, should we therefore give in all points
credence unto them, and leave off to seek after the knowledge of
Christ's doctrine? Nay truly. Why,' quoth he, 'shall we not be
excused herein by ignorance, seeing we be forefended by the rulers to
have knowledge?' He answereth, 'No verily; for if,' saith he, 'when
thou desirest to buy cloth, thou wilt not be content to see one
merchant's ware, but go from the first to the second, from the second
to the third, and so further, to know where is the best cloth, and
best cheap, thou, using such careful diligence for a temporal profit,
art well worthy great reproach, that wilt be more remiss and
negligent for thy soul's health. Seek therefore about from one doctor
or teacher unto another, that thou mayst know who doth most duly and
truly teach Christ, and him follow according to the saying of the
apostle, Prove all, and hold the good; and as it is said in the
Gospel, that thou mayst know who be true or lawful changers or
coiners, and who be not.

     "He also addeth another similitude or parable. 'When thou
goest,' quoth he, 'a journey, not knowing perfectly the way, thou
wilt, lest thou shouldst fail of the right way, inquire of one man,
and after of another; and if thou shouldst chance to go somewhat
wide, yet thou wilt not so leave off thy journey undone, but make
inquisition again to come where thou wouldst rest. So likewise,'
saith he, 'ought we to seek about intentively for the wealth of our
soul, who are the right key-bearers, and who not;' meaning there by
the key-bearers, Christ's apostles, and the bearers of his testimony
or message. Which saving, although it were written of no authentical
author, (howbeit it is written even of him whom I showed you in the
said work,) but uttered of one that were in little estimation, every
indifferent person having wit and reason would answer, I doubt not,
that it is full true.

     "The same author also, in an epistle which you shall find in a
work called Psegmata Chrysostomi, showeth, as I remember, how certain
men deemed ill of him, because he did study Origen's works, who
before was condemned for a heretic:  but he maketh an apology to the
same, showing, that Christian men ought not to be reprehended for so
doing; in which apology he bringeth for his defence the saying of
Paul above rehearsed, Prove all things, &c. Likewise did St. Jerome,
I wot not well in what place of his works, but you shall find it in a
Treatise called Unio Dissidentium, where he treateth De mandatis
Hominum. When it was objected against him that he retained by him the
works of Eusebius and of Origen, studying upon them, he bringeth for
him, that it was so lawful, the said place of the apostle,, making
therewith an assent, worthy to be greatly noted.

     "The same is also reported in the book called Ecclesiastica
Historia, or else Historia Tripartita, I wot not now precisely
whether. So that these and other authorities of the Scripture, and
semblable ensamples of holy interpreters, shall prove, that I and
other may safely (no good law inhibiting, unless constitutions
pharisaical) read and search the works not only of Luther, but also
of all others, be they ever so ill or good; namely, seeing I am a
priest:  whom the bishop of Norwich ought not to have admitted into
orders, unless he had seen me to have had judgment to discern good
from ill; neither ought any of you to give orders to any such, in
whom ye do not find like ability to judge the light from darkness,
and the truth from falsehood:  and therefore, if for this you would
punish me, I cannot see but you shall condemn yourselves, judging
rather of sensual pleasure than of equity, which, in men of your
order, were a great shame, and much uncomely.

     "Unto your third demand, wherein you do ask whether I was
constituted a priest, and in what diocese, and by what bishop; I say
that I was made a priest in Norwich, and by the bishop's suffragan of
the same diocese.

     "Unto the fourth, wherein you do demand whether it be lawful
for a priest to marry a wife, and whether a priest in some case be
bound by the law of God to marry a wife I say that it is lawful, yea
and necessary, for all men that have not given to them of God the
gift of chastity, to marry a wife; and that show both Christ and St.
Paul. In Matthew xix., Christ, speaking unto the Pharisees that came
to tempt him, in the conclusion, saith in this wise, 'Whosoever shall
forsake his wife, except it be for fornication, and marrieth another,
committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth her so forsaken,
committeth adultery.'

     "With that say his disciples, 'If thus the case stand betwixt a
man and his wife, it shall be hurtful, and not expedient to contract
matrimony.' He made answer, 'Every man cannot away with that saying,
but they unto whom it is given of God;' meaning, that every man could
not abide single or unmarried, but such unto whom was given of God a
special grace so to continue. And if, with your better advice, I
might herein be somewhat bold, I would suppose that whereas he doth
say, Non omnes sunt capaces hujus dicti, (Every man cannot away with
that saying,) this word non omnes ought to be here taken as it is in
many other places of Scripture; as where, in the Psalm, it is said, 
Non justificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis vivens, it is meant that no
person living shall be justified before God. And in the Epistle to
the Galatians, and to the Romans, where it is said, By the works of
the law no flesh shall be justified in his sight, it is meant thereby
nulla caro:  so that, non omnis, after the rule of equipollence,
should be taken for as much as nullus, and then the sense should be
thus, Nulli sunt capaces hujus dicti nisi hi quibus datum sit. No man
can be capax of this saying, or can so pass his life without
marriage, except those who have it given them, by a singular grace of
God, to live chaste.

     Then he proceeded further, saying, There be eunuchs that so
were born from the mother's womb; and there be some eunuchs that have
been so made by men; and there be eunuchs that have so made
themselves, for love of the kingdom of heaven. In conclusion he
saith, Who, that receiveth this saying, (thinking that it should be
inexpedient for him to marry, and that he may live chaste through the
gift given him of God,) let him take it and so live. So he leaveth
singleness of life to all men's election, without any compelling them
thereto.

     "Hereunto assenteth St. Paul:  when that by many reasons he had
persuaded the Corinthians to single life, finally he concludeth thus,
This, quoth he, say I unto you, willing that which should be for your
profit, but not to bring you in bondage. And a little before, I
would, quoth he, that all men were even as myself am. But every one
hath a several gift of God, one one wise, another otherwise:  showing
thereby, that unto some it is given of God to live continently, and
to others to engender and procreate children, and therefore his will
cannot come to effect. Which thing you may easily perceive in this,
that after he had showed forth his good wish and desire, saying, I
would that all men were even as I am, he putteth a conjunction
adversative, that declareth an obstacle or stop, saying, But every
man hath his proper gift of God. Upon this he proceedeth further,
whereby you may apertly see, that he would have all men, none except,
to marry, wanting the gift of continency. This, quoth he, I say to
the unmarried and widows; expedient it were for them to remain as I
do:  but if they cannot live continent, let them contract marriage;
for better is it to marry than to burn. This proveth well, that all
priests, wanting continency of heart, had need to marry for to avoid
burning lust, unless they be inobedient to the mind of Christ that
spake in Paul, in observing the traditions of men. In the beginning
of the same chapter also he saith, It is good that a man should not
deal with a woman:  notwithstanding, for avoiding fornication, quoth
he, let every man have his wife, and every woman have her husband. He
saith here, every man and every woman; and not some man or some
woman. He excepteth neither priest nor nun, but every one, both man
and woman, is bound, for avoiding of burning and fornication, to
marry, not having the gift given of chastity.

     "The same also confirmeth your own law, where it is written
thus, 'If any man do hold that a priest, being married, in that
respect that he is married, ought not to minister in his function, be
he accursed.' And, 'If any man shall find fault with matrimony, and
detest a faithful and devout woman lying with her husband, and think
her culpable, as one that could not therefore enter into the kingdom
of God, be he accursed.' And every where else such-like are to be
seen.

     "Moreover, in Historia Tripartita it is written, that a noble
martyr of Christ called Paphnutius, in the Nicene council, when all
other bishops were purposed to have enacted there, that priests
should live unmarried, this holy man resisted them so mightily both
with reasons, and also with authority of Scripture, that then their
purpose altered, and their first device could not pass. And one
authority I remember was this, which he borrowed of Paul in the
Second Epistle to Timothy:  Your device, quoth he, may have a
semblance of holiness, but indeed, it shall be the destruction and
undoing of the same.

     "Moreover, in one of the principal histories of France, called
Les Illustrations de Galles, whosoever please may there read it as it
standeth, within six leaves afore the end of the same; how the author
with deep sorrow lamenteth the ordinance that first decreed priests
to live unmarried, showing, and that amply, the miseries that have
ensued in France thereby, imputing it unto Calixtus the pope, of whom
he maketh a doleful mention in metre, whereof the first I yet
remember, and it is thus:  'O holy Calixtus! all the world hateth
thee;' which followeth in writing, to all that lust to behold
therein. But what need I to make longer treatise hereof, forasmuch as
you do daily both hear and see, what foul abomination ariseth in
every corner, of this piteous law, made of men that would presume to
be wiser than God; thinking (as we ever do) that either he would not,
or else for lack of wisdom he could not, show us a sufficient law or
way, to direct our life and conversation to come to the joy and
resting-place by him promised, and so by us longed and looked for;
whereby both we be far unreasonable in so deeming of him after our
unwise wit, and he much dishonoured. The which I beseech him to help.
Amen.

     "Unto the fifth, where ye do ask, whether I believe that
whatsoever is done of man, whether it be good or ill, cometh of
necessity; that is (as you construe) to wit, whether man hath free-
will, so that he may deserve joy or pain I say (as I said at the
beginning) that unto the first part of your riddle, I neither can nor
will give any definitive answer, forasmuch as it surmounteth my
capacity; trusting that God shall send hereafter others that shall be
of better learning and wit than I, for to indite it. As concerning
the second part, where you do interpret; that is to say, whether man
hath free-will or no, so that he may deserve joy or pain:  as for our
deserving specially of joy, I think it very slender or none, even
when we do the very commandments and law of God. And that I am taught
by our Saviour in St. Luke, where he saith thus, Which of you, quoth
he, having a servant that hath eared your land, or fed your beasts,
will say unto him, when he cometh home out of the field, Go thy way
quickly, and sit down to thy meat; and rather will not say unto him,
Make ready my supper; serving me thereat till I have made an end
thereof, and afterwards take thyself meat and drink? Think you that
he is bound to thank his servant which thus shall do his commandment?
I trow, saith he, nay. Even so you, saith he, when you have done all
things to you commanded, say yet you be unprofitable servants, and
have done that which you were bound to do.

     "In which words you may clearly see, that he would not have us
greatly esteem our merits, when we have done that is commanded by
God, but rather, reckon ourselves to be but servants unprofitable to
God, forasmuch as he hath no need of our well-doing for his own
advancement, but only that he loveth to see us do well for our own
behoof; and moreover, that when we have done his bidding, we ought
not so to magnify, either ourself, or our own free will, but laud him
with a meek heart, through whose benefit we have done, (if at any
time we do it) his liking and pleasure; not regarding our merit, but
his grace and benefit, whereby only is done all that in any wise is 
to him acceptable. And thus, if we ought not to attend our merits in
doing the commandment of God, much less should we look for merit for
observing of our own inventions or traditions of men, unto which
there is no benefit in all Scripture (which Paul calleth the word of
truth and of faith) promised.

     "But here may be objected against me, that the reward is
promised in many places to them that do observe the precepts of God.
That I affirm to be very sooth. Notwithstanding such reward shall
never be attained of us, except by the grace and benefit of Him who
worketh all things in all creatures. And this affirmeth well St.
Augustine, with St. Ambrose, Fulgentius, and others, as you may see
everywhere in their works, and especially in the treatise called
'Unio Dissidentium,' wherein Jerome treateth 'De Gratia et Meritis.'
And of St. Augustine I remember two or three right notable sentences,
concerning the same. One is in the ninth book of his Confessions, in
this form; 'Woe be to the life of men, be they ever so holy, if Thou
shalt examine them, setting thy mercy aside. Because thou dost not
exactly examine the faults of men, therefore we have a vehement hope
and trust to find some place of mercy with thee. And whosoever
recounteth unto thee his merits, what other thing doth he recount but
thy benefits? O would to God all men would see and know themselves,
and that he who glorieth, would glory in the Lord.' Again, in the
first book, he saith thus unto God:  'Doth any man give what he oweth
not unto thee, that thou shouldest be in his debt? and hath any man
aught that is not thine? Thou renderest debt, and yet owest to no
man. Thou forgivest debts, and yet losest nothing.' And therefore his
usual prayer was this:  'Lord give that thou commandest, and command
what thou wilt.'

     "Also in the book called Manuale Augustini, or De
Contemplatione Christi, he saith in this wise, 'All my hope is in the
Lord's death. His death is my merit, my refuge, my health, and my
resurrection. My merit is the mercy of the Lord. I am not without
merit, so long as the Lord of mercy shall continue; and if the
mercies of the Lord be great and rich, then am I also great and rich
in merits.'

     "And to conclude, they be Christ's own merits and good works,
(as saith St. Ambrose well-nigh every where,) that he worketh in us,
which he doth reward and crown; and not ours, if one should look
narrowly upon the thing, and speak properly. Howbeit, they yet
nevertheless are ours by him, forasmuch as his merciful bounty
imputeth his goods to be ours; so that in this, I wot not how others
do mean, which lust to sell their merits unto their neighbours, who
haply have scarcely enough for themselves:  but I do wholly deem and
believe, according as the Scriptures, with these holy doctors and
such other, do teach, wishing that men ever, for good doing, should
not so much (as the common people do) regard their merit Or reward,
for that is not the thing that engendereth the love of God in us, but
rather maketh men to honour God in a servile fashion, and for the
love of themselves, in doing works for love of reward, or for dread
of pain, more than because it so pleaseth God, and liketh him: 
whereas, if we regarded first, yea and altogether, that it is our
duty to do well, (which is the keeping of his commandments,) and that
so we should content his pleasure, reward should undoubtedly ensue
good deeds, although we minded no whit the same, as heat followeth
evermore the fire unseparate therefrom. And thus, we should serve God
with hearty love as children, and not for meed or dread, as unloving
thralls and servants.

     "Concerning free-will, I mean altogether as doth St. Augustine,
that of ourselves we have no liberty nor ability to do the will of
God, but are subject unto sin and thralls of the same, 'shut up and
sold under sin,' as witness both Isaiah and also Paul but, by the
grace of God, we are rid and set at liberty, according to the portion
that every man hath taken of the same, some more, some less.

     "Whereas, in your sixth demand, you do inquire whether the
sacrament of the altar be a sacrament necessary unto salvation, and
whether after the consecration of the bread and wine done by the
priest, as by the minister of God, there is the very body and blood
of Christ in likeness of bread and wine, I neither can nor will
answer one word otherwise than I have told since I was delivered into
your hands. Neither would I have answered one whit thereunto, knowing
so much at the first as now I do, till you had brought forth some
that would have accused me to have trespassed in the same; which I am
certain you cannot do, bringing any that is honest and credible.

     "As concerning the other six sacraments, I make you that same
answer that I have done to the sacrament of the altar, and no other;
that is, I will say nothing until some men appear to accuse me in the
same, unless I know a more reasonable cause than I have yet heard,
why I so ought to do. But as touching the form and fashion, I shall
answer willingly so far forth as my rudeness will serve. I hold well
that such as be duly elected ministers in the church, ought to
baptize, except necessity require otherwise; and that the form used
in the church is, in mine opinion, not uncommendable. Nevertheless it
should edify much more, if it were uttered in the vulgar language,
and cause people, in the baptism of children, more effectuously to
thank God for his institution, and the high benefit thereby
represented.

     "In like condition do I also deem of ministration in all the
others, that it should be expedient to have them ministered openly in
the vulgar language, for the edifying of the people. As concerning
the form used in matrimony, I like it right well, and think it
commendable, saving in all countries lightly Judas hath set in his
foot over far, and taketh in hand to sell his Master, accompanied
with Simon Magus, saying, 'What will you give me, if I deliver unto
you Christ?' This is the saying of all them that require, without any
lawful authority, in some places twelvepence, in some sixpence, in
some more, in some less, but in every place lightly some money, when
a couple should he married:  and this they call 'the church's right.'
Moreover, that they will not suffer marriage to be solemnized at all
times of the year, I think it standeth not with Christ's rule, but
rather is against the same; and that they will not suffer the bans
upon all holy-days to be proclaimed, unless a dispensation for money
be purchased there-for. All this God forbiddeth. Finally, like as no
money ought to be given for this, no more should any be taken for any
other. But the contrary is seen, which is great pity; yea, even at
the receiving of the sacrament of the altar, priests every where use
to claim somewhat, and in some parts of the west country, no less
than twopence, of every poll.

     "As touching priesthood in the primitive church, when virtue
bare (as ancient doctors do deem, and Scripture, in mine opinion,
recordeth the same) most room, there were no more officers in the
church of God, than bishops and deacons; that is to say; ministers: 
as witnesseth, besides Scripture fully apertly, Jerome, in his
Commentaries upon the Epistles of Paul, where he saith, that those
whom we call priests, were all one and none other but bishops; and
the bishops none other but priests; men ancient both in age and
learning, so near as they could be chosen. Neither were they
instituted and chosen, as they be now-a-days, with small regard by a
bishop or his officer, only opposing them if they can construe a
collect; but they were chosen not only by the bishop, but also with
the consent of the people among whom they should have their living,
as showeth St. Cyprian; and the people (as he saith) ought to have
power to choose priests that be men of good learning, of good and
honest report. But, alack for pity! such elections are now banished,
and new fashions brought in; which if we should confer with the form
of the election showed of Christ by his apostle Paul, we should find
no small diversity, but all turned upside down. To conclude, I say,
the order or state of priests and deacons was ordained by God; but
subdeacons and conjurers, otherwise called Exorcistæ and Accolitæ,
which we call Benet and Collet, were instituted by the invention of
men. And this you may find in the law, Dist. 21, and in other places
where it is written, 'Subdeaconship, in the time of the apostles, was
no holy order.'

     "As touching ear-confession, I say that the common fashion now
used, was never ordained by Christ's law, that is, written in the
Bible; neither can you prove by any authority of the same, that we
ought to confess all our offences particularly, with the
circumstances of all and of every such, to any man. Again, for the
maintenance of this which I have said, you shall know that Chrysostom
standeth stiffly with me, in his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews; in a homily also that he maketh upon the Psalm Miserere; and
moreover in a sermon that he maketh, De Pœnitentia, besides many
other treatises, wherein he continueth ever one, testifying in
semblable wise.

     "In like manner doth one of your principal doctors, writing
upon your canon law, named Panormitane, testify that it is made by
the law of man, and not of God, in cap. Omnis utriusque sexus. In the
book also called Historia Tripartita, you shall find how it was first 
instituted, (as I remember,) and afterwards undone again, because of
a huge villany committed with a woman by a minister of the church,
through confession.

     "Also it is mentioned in the end of the first Distinction De
Pœnitenti, how the Greek church, whom I think you do not note to be
heretics, will not yet hitherto allow it. There are also many reasons
brought forth, both to prove that confession made to a priest should
not be necessary, and also that confession made unto God should
suffice, concluding in this wise, Quibus authoritatibus, &c. I could
bring forth others that be yet living, men of surmounting and
excellent literature, who exactly, by many and mighty both
authorities and reasons, do show and confirm this my saying to be 
just:  but I keep silence, and will not name them, lest I should bring
them into hatred. Notwithstanding, I never said, nor will say, but
that men feeling themselves aggrieved in conscience with some great
temptation, had need to go unto such whom they know and trust to he
of stedfast credence, and to have good skill in the law of God,
opening their grief unto them, to the intent they may know, through
counsel, some ease and remedy thereof.

     "But in this I mean not that they ought to go unto their
curate, or to any other priest, whose credence they deem not at all
trusty, or their counsel not sage, but to any other, whatsoever he
be, whom they know most sufficient in properties above-showed, when
their curate doth lack them. And this thing is most behoveable, when
men, needing counsel, be so void of knowledge in Christ's law, that
they cannot find therein remedy themselves. For the doctrine of
Christ, if it were well known, containeth remedies for all
infirmities and maladies of the mind, so that men, by spiritual
knowledge, might ease themselves.

     "To the other part of your question, where you do ask whether a
priest, in cases unto him limited, may loose a sinner confessed and
contrite for his sin, enjoining him wholesome penance; I say that
only Christ looseth a sinner who is contrite, by his word and
promise,, and the priest doth nothing but show and declare the word: 
neither doth declaration or ministry of the priest any whit avail for
to loose any person, unless he that should be loosed give credence
unto the word ministered and showed by the priest, which word or
promise of Christ is called the word of reconciliation or atonement
making betwixt God and man. And this testified St. Paul, in the
Corinthians, where he saith in this wise, God hath reconciled us unto
him through Jesus Christ.

     See how it is God that looseth us from sin, who is to make
reconciliation or atonement betwixt us and him, and that through
Christ, whom he caused to die for the same purpose. And he, quoth St.
Paul, hath ordained us ministers of the said atonement. See how
Christ's apostles called not themselves the authors of binding and
loosing, but ministers; For he, that is to wit, God, reconciled the
world unto him, forgiving their sins (where you may know what
reconciling is); and hath committed, saith Paul, unto us, to be
messengers of the same word, or tidings of atonement or reconciling.

     "Also, that the power whereby men are loosed from sin is not
the priest's power, you may know by the vulgar saying, which is right
true; yea, and with leisure, I doubt not but that I can show the same
in the Decrees, which is thus, 'Only God forgiveth and pardoneth us
of our sins.' And this was preached at Paul's Cross the Sunday next
after the Epiphany last, the bishop of London sitting by; the
preacher speaking after this form, treating of this text, 'Behold the
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world.' In that, 'said
the preacher, 'testimony is given of Christ to be a lamb, it is
showed that he was an innocent man. But in that it is said, that he
taketh away the sins of the world, is showed that he was God;'
alleging there, for the confirmation of this part of his purpose, the
vulgar saying above said by me, Solus Deus remittit peccata. And the
same proposition, or another equal with the same, useth St.
Chrysostom, in a homily that is made upon this text of St. Matthew,
His name shall be called Jesus; for he shall save his people from 
their sins. Also St. Chrysostom, in Opus lmperfectum, upon this text,
Woe be unto you, scribes and Pharisees! because ye shut up the
kingdom of heaven before men, &c. As near as my remembrance doth
serve me, or else in some other place, but in the book, (as I
suppose,) he affirmeth that the keys of heaven are the word and
doctrine of God. This witnesseth moreover St. Gregory, I trow, in his
book called Pastoralia, or else it is an epistle that he writeth to
the bishop of Constantinople, in these words:  'The key of loosing is
the word of the corrector, who, rebuking, doth disclose the fault,
which many times he knoweth not, that committeth the same.'

     "St. Ambrose, agreeing to the same, saith, 'The word of God
forgiveth sin.' But shall we then say that God's ministers do not
bind and loose? I say, No, not as the authors of so doing; but they
do loose and bind in like manner as it is said of Paul in the Acts of
the Apostles, where our Saviour spake unto him in this manner,:  I
shall, said our Saviour, deliver thee from the people and nations
unto whom I send thee, that thou shouldest open their eyes, that they
may be converted from darkness to light. Here Paul is said to open
the eyes of men's hearts, albeit to speak properly, it is God that so
doth; and therefore David prayeth unto him, Open mine eyes, O Lord.
And in like manner it is spoken of John Baptist, that he should go
before Christ in the spirit and power of Elias, and turn the hearts
of the fathers to their children, and the unbelievers to the wisdom
of the righteous:  albeit to turn men's hearts, and to work in them,
belongeth to God; but so use we to speak metonymice. As, if your
Lordship had defined to me to be excommunicated, and thereupon should
send a commandment to the parson of Knoll, to declare the same, the
people would say, that the parson of Knoll, proclaiming your
commandment, had accursed me; but yet doth he not properly curse me,
but you rather, when he, in pronouncing the same, doth your act and
commandment, rather than his own.

     "Touching cases limited to priests and ministers, for loosing
from sin, or binding in the same, I do know no such things showed in
Scripture, which is the perfect way of our life:  neither can any man, 
I suppose, show by authority thereof, that one should have more or
less limited him than another. And if you can or will thereby teach
it me, I shall thank you for your doing, and pray God to requite you.

     "Concerning enjoining of penance, I know of none that men need
to admit, nor you to put or enjoin the same, except it be renovation
of living in casting apart old vice, and taking them unto new virtue,
which every true penitent intendeth, or ought to intend, verily by
the grace and assistance of our Saviour Christ, to show and perform.

     "Unto the eleventh article I say, that grace is given unto them
that duly receive the sacraments of Christ and his church; but
whether by them or no, that I cannot define; for God sendeth his
grace where he pleaseth, either with them, or without them, and when
he pleaseth:  so that it is at his arbitrement, how and when.
Moreover, many a lewd person receiveth the sacraments, who is
destitute of grace, to his confusion. So that I cannot affirm that 
the sacraments give grace; yet, in due receipt of the sacraments, I
suppose and think, that God giveth unto them grace that so take them,
as he doth unto all good, even without them also.

     "Whereas in your twelfth article you do ask, whether all things
necessary unto salvation are put in Holy Scripture, and whether
things only there put be sufficient, and whether some things, upon
necessity of salvation, are to be believed and observed, which are
not expressed in Scripture:  this is the question, as great learned
men have showed me, whom I do count my friends, since the time I
appeared at your Lordship's assignment before Master doctor Lesse,
and Master Melling, with other, in your chapel of Lambeth, when these
questions were first propounded:  this, I say, is the question, which,
as they told me, is the head and whole content of all others objected
against me. Yea, this is both the helm and stern of all together, and
that which they contended right sorely to impugn:  but love of the
truth (wherewith in this point I reckoned me well fenced) would not
suffer me to apply and yield to their will, thinking 'that the truth
ought to be preferred before all friendship and amity; 'and also, If
thy right hand offend, it ought to be cut off, and cast away.

     "But touching an answer unto this question, I suppose verily,
that if I had St. Cyril's works by me, I should not need to show any
other answer in this, than he hath showed beforetime, writing upon
this saying of St. John, There are many things more which Jesus did.
Notwithstanding, forasmuch as every man at all seasons cannot have
what he would, and therefore must make other shift, such as he may, I
say, that I suppose the first part of your question to be very true,
and therefore to be affirmed, that is to wit, that all things needful
for man's salvation be mentioned and showed in Holy Scripture, and
that the things only there put be sufficient for the regiment of
spiritual living, and man's soul's health. And in this shall you find
both the ancient doctors standing with me; and moreover, the suffrage
of holy writ, whose authority is of most sovereign and infallible
stedfastness.

     "Look what St. Jerome saith upon this verse, The Lord shall
rehearse it, when he writeth up the people. St. Ambrose also, in a
treatise, De Paradiso, doth show likewise, where he bringeth this
text of Paul, written in 2 Cor. xi., I am afraid lest it may, by some
means, be brought to pass, that as the serpent deceived Eve through
wiliness, so your minds may be corrupted from the simple verity that
is in Christ. And also in his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Colossians, upon this text, In Christ Jesus is all treasure of
wisdom; and in divers other places of the same work.

     St. Chrysostom also, in his Commentaries upon Paul, declaring
this saying, 'The whole Scripture given by inspiration of God,' &c.
And in his book called Opus Imperfectum, I wot not precisely upon
what text, but there you shall find, that he would have a true
preacher of God's law not swerving therefrom, neither on the right
hand, neither on the left, but keeping thereafter, according to the
teaching of Solomon:  for he that should thereunto add or withdraw,
should enterprise, as saith St. Chrysostom, to be wiser than God.
These, or else such like words, doth he say. I will be deemed by the
book brought forth, because my remembrance cannot retain perfectly
all such things.

     "St. Cyprian maintaineth well the same in an epistle that he
writeth, Ad Cecilium Fratrem, which I would to God were in English,
that all men might learn the devout goodness in it contained. In the
same he teacheth clearly, how we ought to hear Christ only, and his
learning, not regarding or attending to the traditions of men; like
as he doth also in many other places. And this agreeth well with
Scripture, which is called the word of salvation; the administration
of righteousness; the word of truth, yea, and the truth itself; the
rod of direction; our spiritual food; the spiritual sword that we
ought to fight with against all temptations and assaults of our
ghostly enemies; the seed of God; the kingdom of heaven, and the keys
of the same; the power of God; the light of the world, which whoso
followeth shall not be overcome with darkness; the law of God; his
wisdom and testament. Of which words, and such like, every one will
give matter of substantial argument, that we, following the same
doctrine only, shall have sufficient safe-conduct to come unto the
inheritance promised, albeit none other ways or means were annexed
with the same. And certain I am, that in this blessed doctrine of
Christ is taught how we ought to do truth and mercy, which is all
that we need to do, as testifieth the Psalm, in these words, All the
ways of the Lord are mercy and truth. And again, the prophet, willing
us to do as he did, saith in this manner, I have cleaved to thy
testimonies, O Lord; confound me not. In like manner the said whole
Psalm warneth us; yea, all the Scripture biddeth us stick fast, to
the steady and true word of God, saying, that he is true, and all his
ways are truth; but all men are vain and liars. For that is the sure
foundation which cannot fail them that ground thereupon, as reporteth
Christ:  Every one, saith he, that heareth my words, and doth them, is
like to a wise man that buildeth upon a sure foundation. And there
ought to be none other foundation to Christian men, but only the
undoubted truth of Jesus to build our faith upon, and direct our
living thereafter, as showeth St. Paul, saying, Other foundation can
no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And
likewise in, the Epistle unto the Ephesians, where he saith, Now ye
are no more strangers and foreigners, but citizens with the, saints,
and of the household of God. And in the same Epistle, St. Paul,
dilating of Christ's beneficence, showeth how that he ordained in the
church divers officers, to the edifying of Christian people, that
hecalleth Christ's body, until all we may come unto the unity of
faith; which cometh by following of one doctrine, which is Christ's,
whereby we may grow to be perfect men; and that we should not be here
like to children, carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
deceit and wiliness of men that study to deceive us.

     "In like form doth he warn us, in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
that we should not be carried about as the wind, with divers and
strange doctrines, but continue in that which ever continueth like
and all one, agreeable for all men in all parts, and that at all
times; not being changeable, as men's constitutions be, whereof look
what one doth counsel or ordain to be of effect, another annuls the
same, according as men's minds do always alter, and are full
unsteady. Neither do such pertain unto all men; for the Greeks, with
others, (whom neither the pope, nor any of his people, will yet deny
to be of Christ's church,) will in no condition admit such, neither
for men to live after them, nor to believe them as pertaining to
their faith. But they allow well the doctrine that persevereth every
one, and is immutable, as showeth St. Paul, saying, Jesus Christ
yesterday and to-day is all one, and so ever shall be. He is white
bread, without any sour leaven of Pharisaical traditions; verity
without guile; light without any darkness; the very straight way that
hath neither hook nor crook. From this ought we not to turn, neither
upon one hand nor the other, unless we will go from him that is our
felicity and anchor of safety.

     "But should I more treat of this, except I would recite all
Scripture, which in every part is full of admonitions, exhorting and
warning us to cleave fast unto this way, which is the doctrine of the
gospel, which God, I beseech him, grant us all both to know and love,
taking heed that in no wise we be seduced therefrom by laws and
doctrines of men. Look also into Colossians ii., and into the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus. So that I conclude that in Holy
Scripture is contained sufficiently enough of doctrine for the
regiment and salvation of our souls; and because learned men do call
this the head article laid against me, I would that all men should
well note it, and record my saying therein hereafter, whatsoever
shall betide of me; for the truth is so indeed, that hereupon hangeth
the sum of all. Therefore I shall recite it once again. I say, that
in Holy Scripture the doctrine there only contained, is sufficient
for the salvation of Christian men's souls:  God give us grace that we
may know it, to build our faith stedfastly upon the same, in working
thereafter

     "As touching the latter part of your question, I say that there
are many things both to be observed, and to be believed, that are not
expressed in Scripture; as the civil laws of princes and
commonalties, ordained for civil regiment of the body, and all other,
so that they be not hurtful to faith or charity, but helpful to the
same:  I reckon that we ought to keep them, not only for fear of
punishment, but also for conscience' sake, although such ordinances
be not expressly and particularly in Scripture expressed; for they
are generally therein contained and spoken of.

     "Moreover, if you mean by this word 'expressed,' that which in
Scripture is clearly showed out, and appeareth evidently to every
reader or hearer that hath but a mean understanding, so do I affirm
that there are some things which a man ought to believe, although
they be not by him expressly understood:  as I have ever believed that
the Virgin Mary was, and is, a perpetual virgin, and that the same
might be gathered by the Scripture. But if, by this word 'expressed,'
you mean comprehended or contained, (as methinks the mind of him that
wrote the demand should he,) so that he meaneth by this question
thus:  whether any thing ought to be observed and believed, which is
not contained in Scripture, and that, upon necessity of salvation;
then I say, that there is nothing either to be observed, or to be
believed upon necessity of salvation, which is not contained in
Scripture and mentioned in the same either generally or specially.
Yet do I not deny but other things are to be believed, as I believed
that Dr. Warham was archbishop of Canterbury, ere ever I saw your
Lordship; and I believe that I knew verily who was my father and
mother, albeit I had no intelligence when they begot me; and such
like:  and yet in such points, although a man have not a steady
belief, he may be saved.

     "To the thirteenth article, where you do ask, whether I believe
that purgatory is, and whether that souls departed be therein
tormented and purged? I say that there is a purgatory in this world,
and that doth the Scripture, and also do the holy doctors, call the
fire of tribulation, through which all Christians shall pass, as
testifieth St. Paul to Timothy, whose testimony is full notable and
true, albeit that few do know it, and fewer, peradventure, will
believe it. Mark you the words, good people! and know, that they be
his, and not mine. They be thus, All that will live godly in Jesus
Christ, shall suffer persecution. In this purgatory do I now reckon
myself to stand; God send me well to persevere unto his honour! Of
this speaketh also St. Peter in these words, which pertain to the
instruction of all Christian people:  Ye, quoth he, are preserved
through the power of God, by faith, unto salvation, which is,
prepared to be revealed in the last time; wherein ye now rejoice,
though for a season (if need require) ye are sundry ways afflicted
and tormented; that the trial of your faith, being much more precious
than gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be
found unto laud, glory, and honour, at the appearing of Jesu Christ,
&c. Other purgatory know I none, that you can prove by Scripture,
unless it be by one place of the same, which, well examined, I trow,
shall make but little against me, for the maintenance of any other
than I have showed.

     "But whatsoever be brought against me, I trust that holy
doctors shall, by their interpretation, sustain the part which I do
take upon me, making answer for me sufficient; so that you shall say,
it is no new thing which I have or shall speak. Yet, that you should
see even now somewhat written of ancient doctors concerning the same,
I shall show you what I have read in St. Augustine; first, in a
sermon that he maketh De Ebrietate, in this wise, saying, 'Brethren!
let no man deceive himself, for there be two places, and the third is
not known. He that with Christ hath not deserved to reign, shall
without doubt perish with the devil.' In another also that he maketh,
it is said thus:  'Know you, that when the soul is departed from the
body, it is incontinent, for its good deeds, put in paradise, or else
thrown headlong into the dungeon of hell for its sins. Choose ye now
which ye list, and purpose, while ye be here in this life, either to
joy perpetually with the saints, or else to be tormented without end
among wicked sinners.' Thus saith holy Augustine.

     "To make an end, I hope surely, that by the aid of our Saviour,
I shall come to heaven, and reign with Christ, ere that I shall feel
any purgatory beside that I have and shall sustain in this life. And
he that believeth not stedfastly any other to be, shall yet be saved
as well (and God wotteth whether better or no, but I think no whit
less) as such as teach the people, or suffer them to be taught, that
in going from this station to that, from one altar to another, they
shall cause souls to be delivered:  yea, and as well as such as say,
that a man, being buried in a Grey Friar's frock, shall so have
remission of the third part of his sins, (as is granted in a bull
unto the said religion,) and such like. For St. Augustine shall make
with me in his book called Enchiridion, after he hath confuted the
opinion of some that in the church of Christ, living in mischief,
ungraciously, taking thereof no repentance, did yet falsely deem that
they should be saved through the cleansing of purgatory, where he
concludeth thus:  'Such a thing after this life to be,' saith he, 'is
not incredible; but whether it be so or no, a doubt may be thereof
moved, or a question demanded.' The same words doth he again recite
in a book called Quæstiones ad Dulcium, or Dulcitium, I wot not
'whether it is called, and there he treateth of the same more
copiously; and would I might see the place once again.

     "To this agreeth St. Paul, writing thus to the Corinthians, For
we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every man
may receive the things which are done in his body, according to that
he hath done, whether it be good or evil. And again, where he writeth
unto the Hebrews, I trow it be said in this wise:  Remember them that
are in bonds, even as though you were bound with them; be mindful of
them which are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the
body.

     "To the fourteenth article, where you ask whether holy martyrs,
apostles, and confessors, departed from this world, ought to be
honoured, called upon, and prayed unto? I answer, as touching the
honouring of them, with the very words of St. Augustine, in his book
De Vera Religione, in his last leaf, where he saith thus 'Non sit
nobis religio cultus hominum mortuorum:  quia si pie vixerunt, non sic
habentur, ut tales quærant honores, sed ilium a nobis coli volunt,
quo illuminante lætantur meriti sui nos esse consortes; honorandi
stint ergo propter imitationem non adorandi propter religionem. Si
autem male vixerunt, ubicunque sunt, non sunt colendi.' Again, a
little after the same, he saith, 'Nam id ipsum actum est temporali
dispensatione ad salutem nostram, ut naturam humanam ipsa Dei virtus,
et Dei sapientia incommutabilis, et consubstantialis Patri et
coæternus suscipere dignaretur, per quam nos doceret, id esse homini
colendum, quod ab omni creatura intellectuali et rationali colendum
est:  hoc est, ipsos optimos angelos, et excellentissima Dei
ministeria velle credamus, ut unum cum ipsis colamus Deum, cujus
contemplatione beati sunt; neque enim et nos videndo angelum beati
sumus, sed videndo veritatem, qua ipsos etiam diligimus angelos et
his congratulamur.

     "Nec invidemus quod ea paratiores, vel nullis molestiis
interpedientibus perfruuntur, sed magis eos diligimus, quoniam et nos
tale aliquid operate a communi Domino jussi sumus. Quare honoramus
eos charitate, non servitute; nec eis templa construimus. Nolunt enim
se sic honorari a nobis, quia nos ipsi cum boni sumus, templa summi
Dei esse noverunt. Recte itaque scribitur, hominem ab angelo
prohibitum ne se adoraret, sed unum Deum, sub quo ille esset et
conservus.'

     "Thus saith St. Augustine, handling the same matter a little
after more at large.

     "The contents of this unto you I expound, that know no Latin;
for I covet that all persons should know both my thought in this and
all manner of doing, to the intent that of all persons I would have
true report and testimony, whatsoever shall betide me. St. Augustine,
in these words, would have that we should worship no men departed, be
they ever so good and holy, (for they seek no such honour,) but would
have us to worship God alone; no, nor yet any angel, nor honour the
same, but only in imitation of them, following their good acts in our
living, as they followed our most merciful God while they were alive;
not building churches in the name or honour of them, for they would
have no such honour done unto them:  it is to them no pleasure, but
contrariwise. No, the angels will not that we should build any
churches in reverence of them; but would that with them we should
honour the original Maker and Performer of all. They refuse all
honour, saving that which is called honor charitatis, which is
nothing else but to be loved. Thus saith St. Augustine, Which love we
shall testify in following their good acts, by helping the poor or
helpless with alms and mercy, and dealing truly in word and deed,
according to our state and calling, both towards God and man; which
is no light matter to them that do consider the thing well. But
whosoever shall truly and duly follow that trade, shall feel it, I
dare say, as the burden of Christ's cross was unto him, right weighty
and grievous when he bare it to Calvary; saving that we need not
fear, for he hath promised to be with us in tribulation, to rid us
from the same. For the prophet David saith, When a just person
beginneth to fall, he shall not be borne flat down to be broken, for
the Lord shall put his hand under him to rear him up again. And in
the Gospel he biddeth, Come you unto me, all that do travail and are
sore charged, and I shall comfort or refresh you. Take my yoke upon
you, learning of me that am soft and meek-minded, and you shall find
ease thereby in your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burthen
light. See you here how he is ever ready to support them that for
truth shall sustain the chargeable and sore vexations put upon them
by the world, which cannot endure the truth to prevail, and the
untruth to be disclosed.

     "As touching invocation, that is, to wit, calling upon them, we
have in Scripture, how we should call upon Almighty God in all
necessities or tribulations. As in the Psalms every where; as in
this, Call upon me in time of your tribulation, and I shall deliver
you. Mark how he saith here, Call upon me, appointing neither St.
Thomas, nor Master John Shorn. Also in another place, The Lord is
nigh unto them that call upon him, that call upon him truly; and with
that he showeth who calleth truly upon him, saying thus:  He shall do
the will or desire of them that reverence him, and shall hear
graciously their prayer, and make them safe; for the Lord loveth all
that love him, and all sinners shall be destroyed. And thus used the
holy prophets, patriarchs, apostles, and other good faithful people
in old time, in all tribulation and anguish, to resort unto the head
fountain, which is of grace infinite, as is showed in other places in
this wise:  In my trouble I called upon the Lord, saith David, and he
heard me graciously. When I was troubled, I cried unto the Lord, and
he mercifully heard me. Also, I lift mine eyes unto the mountains.
But from whence shall help come unto me? Mine help, quoth he, shall
come from the Lord, that made both heaven and earth. I read the first
of these verses in form of interrogation, following St. Augustine,
who, as I remember, interpreteth it in this wise. If I recite not
authorities in all places in the most perfect form, I would pray you
somewhat to pardon me, for you know that I lack books, and have not
them lying by me. Notwithstanding, I am certain, I shall not decline
much from him. The hills toward which David did lift up his eyes,
were saints and holy men, by whom when he could not have his mind
satisfied, he turned another way, saying, From whence shall help come
unto me? Anon, remembering himself better, he sued unto God himself,
of whom incontinent he obtained the accomplishment of his wish, and
so witnessed the same for our instruction, saying, Mine help is of
the Lord, or cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth. This
interpretation, as near as I remember, is after the mind of St.
Augustine; and I suppose verily, that it is not contrary unto the
mind of God, nor disagreeing with the sequel of Scripture. Also, in
this wise it is reported in the New Testament, by authority deduced
out of the Old, where it is written, Every one that calleth upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved. And mark how, cum energia, it is
said, upon the name of the Lord; without any sending us either to St.
Christopher, (though he be painted ever so stout,) or to St.
Patrick's purgatory in Ireland, or to St. James in Galicia, in the
year of grace, or yet to any other saint or place; but he would have
us that we should call upon Almighty God, and upon his name, for the
love that he beareth to Christ, who is alway our advocate before our
Father, to purchase mercy for our sins; and not for our sins only,
quoth St. John, (who is the writer of this saying and testimony,) but
also for the sins of all the world. St. Augustine upon the same,
noteth that St. John, in that place, saith, We have an advocate, and
that Christ is advocate for him, like as he is for all others, to
purchase mercy for him, like as he doth for all others that shall be
saved; and that St. John will not be known for our advocate, but that
Christ should be taken for advocate of all. St. Bede (as I remember)
upon the same, maketh as much for this purpose as doth St. Augustine,
or well more; so that by course of Scripture we are taught to resort
for all aid and relief (as I have said) unto the head-spring and
fountain of all comfort and mercy, as St. Paul calleth him, the
Father of mercies and of all comfort, who is ready to comfort us in
all tribulation:  which, as the Psalm reporteth, healeth all our
infirmities, and taketh mercy upon all our iniquities. For he is
sweet, as is said in another place, and gentle, and many mercies are
laid up for all those that call upon him. Yet he showeth us no where,
I trow, of benefits that we shall purchase by praying unto saints
departed; and if any person can or will vouchsafe to teach me that,
by some authority of Scripture, I would think myself highly beholden
to him, whatsoever he were, either great or small, young or old:  but
I ween it cannot be. I have made truly long search, yet could I never
find any such substantial teaching; howbeit, I offer myself ever to
learn, and know that my rude wit, foolish youth, inexpert experience,
and feeble discretion, had need of good instruction as much as any
other. Howbeit I see (thanked be God) that sometimes he showeth some
sparkle of light and wisdom to children, hiding the same from others
that are reputed of higher prudence; so that the world thereby many
times is brought into admiration, seeing such facts done by God
before their face, and laugh thereat sometimes with indignation, as
the Pharisees did at the blind man whom Christ had restored to sight,
where they said to him, Thou, caitiff! wast born blind for thy sins,
and wilt thou teach us, that are a great multitude of high officers
of the temple, and doctors to teach the law? As who would say, It
becometh thee full ill. Yet we ought not to marvel greatly at such
doing, forasmuch as St. Paul, in his First Epistle to the
Corinthians, showeth of the like practice done in his time, and that
he writeth for the instruction of all ages after ensuing; so that it
pertaineth (like as the Holy Scripture doth) as well to our time, as
it did to that it was first written in. The doctrine of Christ's
cross, that is, to wit, of the New Testament, is to them that perish,
folly, saith he; but to us that obtain thereby salvation, meaning
thereby to such as believe, it is the might or power of God; for it
is written, saith he, by the prophet Isaiah, that God aforetime said,
he would destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding or
learning of the learned would he throw away and despise.

     "This prophecy alleged, Paul thought to be authority sufficient
to dissuade the Corinthians from the foolish affiance, vain-glory, or
opinion, that they had in men, whom they peradventure over-highly
esteemed for their offices or solemn titles. So that he proceedeth
forth in the same:  Where are ye now, quoth he, the worldly wise, the
scribes, that is to say, doctors, and such other like officers:  Hath
not God showed the wisdom of the world to be foolish and unsavoury?
For after that by the wisdom of God, which is showed in Scripture, I
suppose, the world hath not studied to know God, by wisdom it hath
pleased God now to save them that believe through the foolishness of
preaching.' He calleth the word of God 'foolish preaching,' not
because it was foolish, for afore he called it godly wisdom, but he
spake after the opinion of them that set a little or nought thereby,
esteeming it as Æsop's cock did the precious stone, and as swine do
pearls.

     "After long process in the same matter, he con- cludeth thus: 
'Brethren,' saith he, 'you see your calling, how that not many wise
men after the flesh are called to the belief of the gospel, nor many
mighty men, nor many of noble parentage; but those that be fools
after the estimation of the world, hath God chosen to confound the
wise,' &c.

     "Therefore I say, as I said afore, that, thanks be to God,
albeit I am, as I showed before, void of such great prudency as
others be well endued with, yet I see partly how their great reasons
be not very substantial, whereby they contend by the treaty of
reason, when authority faileth them, to show that we ought to pray to
saints departed, to be mediators for us to Christ. And amongst other,
this is one that they lean much upon, bringing it forth so usually,
that common people well nigh altogether harp upon the same; some
favouring it, other, contrariwise, esteeming it of no value.

     The reason is this:  If, when one should desire to come to the
speech of our sovereign, to obtain some boon of him, need it were,
first to purchase the favour of his chamberlains, or some other like
officers, to bring him to the king's presence, for else he may watch
long in vain, until he be full cold ere that he shall speak with his
Grace, and much less is he like to obtain his petition. In like wise
it fareth (as they say) betwixt God and us; of whom, if we would
purchase any benefit, we must first break it unto the saints
departed, making them our friends to go betwixt God and us, as
mediators and intercessors. But such, (with their leave I would speak
it,) I think, are deceived, in that they resemble God and the king
together. For though the king be a full gracious prince, (as I hear
by common report he is,) yet is he not in graciousness to he
conferred with God; and though he were as. gracious as might be, yet
hath he not the knowledge that is in God, for God knew of all things
before the beginning of the world, and is every where, to see not
only our outward dealing, but also all secret thoughts of all men's
hearts; so that he needeth no mediators to inform him of our desires,
as the king doth need. And he is full of infinite mercy, that I may
as lightly, or as soon, obtain of him that which is for my be-hoof,
as I should win by praying holy saints to be intercessors to him for
me.

     "Therefore, passing such apparent reasons, I take me to the
ensample of antiquity, I mean of the patriarchs, prophets, and the
apostles, and the authority of Scripture, which teach that we need
not to fear, but may boldly resort unto Chris himself and his holy
Father, forasmuch as he biddeth us, in these words and others like,
so to do, saying, Come unto me, all ye that travail, are vexed, and
sore charged; and I will refresh and ease you. Mark how he biddeth us
to resort unto himself, and that without fear. For he and his Father,
which are all one, giveth abundantly of all goodness unto all men,
and upbraideth nobody for his unworthiness. But if we intend to
obtain of Him, we must, all doubtfulness (as I said before) put
apart, with a sure confidence of his mercy, ask of him what we would
have; so that I leave unto others what they list to do, praying
Jesus, that we all may lust for that which is most pleasing to him.

     "But I think, concerning-myself, that according to Christ's own
commandment I may, without any doubt casting, resort in all
encumbrances, to seek ease thereof, even unto himself and to his
blessed Father. Therefore he biddeth us, when we should pray, to say
after this fashion, 'Our Father which art in heaven,' &c. For there
is no creature, nor creatures, that ever were or be, that have more,
or so much, either of might, whereby cometh ability to give help; or
of mercy and tenderness, which should make them willing in proportion
agreeable with ability; nor of knowledge, that should teach to
minister both the other, as is our Lord God, who not only is
almighty, all-merciful, and all-wise, but also infinite in all these
glorious properties; so that undoubtedly he can, will, and best
knoweth how, to relieve and succour us in all necessity and anguish.
To whom be honour without end for ever, Amen.

     "One thing yet I will show you in this case, of which thing I
was once advertised by a great learned man, who (as I suppose) is now
living. I will not name him, lest I should perhaps cause any
displeasure to be conceived against him through my relation. The
thing was this:  'I will,' quoth he, 'pray unto saints; but that shall
be when I think, that God either cannot or will not give me my
petition. But that (as I showed in the Convocation house) shall never
be, I hope. And therefore it is to me needless to seek any further
about, standing in such trust and belief as, I hope, I have found
upon God's sure promise.'

     "To the fifteenth article, where you do demand whether the
saints in heaven, as mediators, pray for us, I say, that I believe
saints in heaven do pray for us; for I suppose they know that all men
generally living upon earth, be wrapped in manifold miseries, like as
they also were, their souls being imprisoned within their bodies,
being mortal. Albeit I think they know not what particular miseries
men upon earth be entangled and clogged with, as showeth Augustine,
or else some other (as I think rather) under his name, in a certain
work, saying in this wise:  that souls departed neither feel, nor know
of any particular miseries sustained by men living in this world,
whereby they should need to take either patience, or else compassion
after their decease. Yet, forasmuch as they know in general, that all
men living are clad with frailty, and that their charity is not
minished after they be hence departed, but increased; therefore I
believe verily, that they do pray for us as petitioners; but not as
mediators, so far forth as I can see. For Scripture useth to speak
but of one Mediator, which I think signifieth a maker of peace or
atonement betwixt God the Father and man. Record I take of Paul, who,
in the Epistle to Timothy, saith, There is one God, and one mediator,
or peacemaker, betwixt God and man, the man called Christ Jesus,
which gave himself for the redemption of all.

     "Thus, I say, I believe saints in heaven do pray for us as
petitioners, but not as mediators. Yea, all the saints, I ween, do
pray, and long that the day of judgment may soon come, according to
the saying of St. Paul, The fervent desire of the creature waiteth
when the sons of God shall be revealed. And again, Every creature
groaneth with us, and travaileth in pain together unto this present;
which shall be for the accomplishment of glory, both to them and all
others elect of God to be his children, and co-inheritors with
Christ.

     "In the sixteenth article, where you demand, whether I believe
that oblations and pilgrimages may be devoutly and meritoriously done
to the sepulchres and relics of saints, I say, that what they may be,
I cannot perfectly tell; for God can so work, that unto those whom he
hath chosen to be inheritors with him, all things shall turn to a
good conclusion, as saith St. Paul to the Romans, in this wise:  Unto
those that love God, all things shall well succeed, and work together
for their furtherance in goodness:  of whom it is written in the
Psalm, Blessed is that nation that hath the Lord for their God, the
people whom he hath chosen to be his inheritors; yea, their evil
deeds shall not hurt them, but come well to pass for the increase of
virtue. For as it is said in the Gospel. To whom less is forgiven, he
loveth less. And again, it hurted not Onesimus, that he ran away from
his master Philemon, but God wrought, that by occasion thereof he met
with Paul, which converted him to the faith of the gospel, who before
was without belief. Therefore, whether they may be done meritoriously
or no, I will not define; God wotteth. But this I say, that God did
never institute any such thing in the New Testament, which is the
verity and rule of all Christian people to follow and believe:  yea,
that only is of perfect surety, and none other, but as it is
agreeable to, and hath ground of the same. And like as we have no
certain doctrine instituted by Christ, or his disciples, teaching us
thus for to do; no more is there any merit appointed by him
therefore, as I showed before, where I told my mind of our merits.

     "Moreover, where ye put pie, which I call 'devoutly,' very true
devotion (that is called in Latin, pietas) is that which hath annexed
therewith divine promises for this present life, and for that which
is to come, as witnesseth Paul, which is nothing else but the
observation of Christ's law, that, in the Psalm, for the pureness
thereof, is called, silver fined often and many times through the
fire. It hath no chaff in it, as have men's traditions; but is pure
and clean wheat, as showeth Jeremy, writing in this wise, What is the
chaff to the wheat? Therefore behold, I will come against the
prophets, saith the Lord, that steal my word every one from his
neighbour, and deceive my people in their lies and in their errors.
And this devotion is that which St. James calleth the pure religion
of Christ, saying, Pure and immaculate religion before God the Father
is, to visit fatherless children and widows in their vexation;
whereby he meaneth all needy people that are succourless and
helpless, with our counsel and other alms, according to our ability,
whensoever we see them in need and distress.

     "The other part of this religion showed by St. James, is, That
a man should keep himself clean from the world; and that do they
which be not so affectionate unto any thing therein, but that they
have the things of the world, or occupy the same by true dealing, so
that they can find in their heart to depart from them, when God shall
please, or charity so requireth.

     "Thus doing, we shall follow the exhortation of blessed Paul,
which, writing to the Corinthians, saith thus, Brethren, the time is
short:  this remaineth, that they which have wives, should be as they
had them not; and those that weep, should be as they wept not; and
those that buy, as if they were without possession; and they that
occupy this world, as though they occupied it not:  for the fashion of
this world passeth away. And this meaneth none other thing, but that
we should neither love nor dread any worldly thing passing measure,
or inordinately, but God above all things, and all other things in
him or for him; and he that thus doth, fulfilleth the commandment of
Christ spoken to the rich man in the Gospel, where he saith, Go and
sell that ever thou hast, and come, follow me. For he hath sold away
all that ever he had, that surely intendeth for the love of Christ,
to help the poor with all that he may. The will is accepted for the
deed, as is commonly said. And this saying both of James, and also of
the evangelist, I think verily belongeth to all Christian men that
they should perform it, none except, neither lay man nor woman, (as
we use to say,) but to them, as well as to any whom we call
religious.

     "As concerning the relics and tombs of saints, I have said to
your Lordship before, what I do think of the milk of our Lady, the
blood which they say is at Hayles, Norwich, and other places, with
such others, whereof I trust you do know what ought to be done. And I
beseech God you may do therein as your office doth require, so
showing example to other prelates to follow your Lordship in good
doing, as is comely for a primate to do; remembering always, as Paul
saith, the time is short, and therefore it were good to set to hand
in time.

     "Finally, holy Moses, when he died, would be so buried that no
man should know which was his grave, as it is witnessed in the book
of Deuteronomy; and that (as the expositors testify) was, because the
Jews, who were prone to new-fangled worshipping, should not fall into
idolatry, worshipping him as God, for the great and manifold miracles
that were wrought by him while he was alive.

     "To conclude, I say, it is no point of my belief, to think that
oblations and pilgrimages at saints' graves and relics, are
meritorious works, nor yet that there is any devotion in so doing.
That is godly which is instituted by Scripture. If you think
contrary, I would desire to know, for mine instruction, what part of
Scripture should make therefore against me.

     "In the seventeenth article, where you do ask, whether the fast
in Lent, and others appointed by the common law, and received in
common usage of Christian people, (unless necessity otherwise
requireth,) are to be observed, I say that, in mine opinion, they are
to be observed, and fasting discreetly done is commendable, for so
shall a man avoid sloth, and be the more ready to serve God, and also
his neighbours, and thereby tame the rebellion of carnal
concupiscence, according to the saying of the poet, 'Without wine and
good fare, lust waxeth cold.' And as St. Jerome, 'The body inflamed
with wine, bursteth out into lust.'

     "Yet shall not the breaking of these fasts make a man to do
deadly sin, except in his mind be some other malicious affection
therewith annexed, as rashness of mind, despite, or such-like;
forasmuch as no positive law of man, made without foundation of
Scripture, may bind any person, so that in breaking of such, he shall
therefore sin deadly. And of this sort made by man, are the fast of
Lent and other days ordained in your laws without authority of
Scripture, which willeth us to fast perpetually, eating and drinking
but when need requireth (not for any voluptuousness, as many, that
recount themselves great fasters, I fear have done); yea, and that
sparely, foreseeing always that our stomachs be never cloyed with
drunkenness or surfeiting (as is commanded by our Saviour in Luke);
but contrariwise, after the fashion rather of a certain prince that
is mentioned, I trow, in Valerius Maximus, that never rose from his
meal's meat with a full stomach, but rather somewhat empty, or
hungry; which, as the story testifieth, caused him to live so
wonderfully a long season, that a man could scarcely think it
possible for one's life to be so prolonged, had not such a notable
author reported it.

     "And, to tell the truth, I suppose the prelates should better
have persuaded the people to pure fasting by instant preaching of the
word of God, and fatherly exhortations, than by ordaining of so sore
a multitude of laws and constitutions; for the nature of man is well
described by Horace, saying, 'Look, what is forbid, that we most
desire, and always covet the things that be denied us.' And in
another proverb, 'The rope, by overmuch straining, bursteth asunder.'
According to this said a good old father in Cambridge. I remember his
saying well yet:  he was an old doctor of divinity. When a legate came
into England at a time, and he, with certain bishops, had ordained,
that the dedication of all churches through England (as I remember)
should be kept holy and solemnized upon one day, and priests should
have their gowns made close before, with such other like ordinances,
he resisted, not condescending to have them put in execution, when
his diocesan required him; declaring how this multitude of laws
pleased him not; for we had enough and abundantly before. Adding this
reason, 'Adam, being in Paradise, had but one law to observe, and yet
he brake it:  What other thing then shall this multitude do,' quoth
he, 'but multiply transgression? for when a faggot is bound over
strait, the bond must break.'

     "God therefore, I beseech him, send us of the sweet dew of his
heavenly doctrine, to moisten and supple the earthly ground of our
hearts, that we may grow like fashioned unto him; putting apart our
old Adam, with all his dissimulation and painted show, that is much
caused by human laws and constitutions; and do upon us Christ, that
is the very truth, and the way directing men to the same, Amen.

     "Unto the eighteenth article, where you ask, whether it be
laudable and profitable that worshipful images be set in churches for
the remembrance of Christ and his saints, I say, that I know of no
images that ought to be worshipped, specially made by the hand of
men:  for the Psalm saith, Confusion or shame be upon them that
worship and make obeisance unto carved images, and that glory in
their pictures. Moreover St. Augustine, in his book De Vera
Religione, saith thus:  'Let us not have devotion in worshipping the
works of men.' Or else thus:  'Let us not be bound to worship the
works of men; for the workmen are more excellent than the things
which they make, whom notwithstanding we ought not to worship.'
Lactantius also maketh strongly with the same:  I cannot without book
recite his saying, for he teacheth largely of the same matter. Origen 
also, writing against Celsus, I trow, will likewise testify; where,
as I remember, he concludeth, saying, that he would have no
goldsmiths nor gravers in a commonalty; for they do but little profit
or none thereto. And St. Gregory, that was chief, either inventor
that images should be set in churches, or else maintainer thereof,
would not, as I have read, (I trow, it is in an epistle which he
writeth to Servus,) have them worshipped.

     "And as concerning the exciting of men's memory, I would
suppose that if Christ's doctrine were so showed and opened, that
people might clearly understand it, (and that is the principal office
of prelates and curates to do, by diligent teaching thereof,) I think
verily we should have little need of any other images than that which
should, by wholesome doctrine, be showed unto us by word of mouth and
writing:  'Nothing is so effectual, to exercise the remembrance of
disciples, as the lively voice of good teachers;' as it is testified
both by common report, and also by the sentence of learned men.

     "So that I suppose, if this lively doctrine of God had
aforetime been apertly and diligently opened unto the people, as
curates ought to have done, we should have such profit thereby, that
we should not need to contend for setting up, or taking down, of
other dumb stocks, and lifeless stones, carved or made by men; and if
prelates would begin to set up Christ's word, which, alas for pity!
is not looked upon, (but rather trodden down and despised so that
many are not ashamed to say, 'I will have no more learning in
Christ's law than my predecessors, for they that magnify it must be
sore punished, and taken for heretics,' with such other grievous
words,) if this doctrine were yet set up in churches, I say, and
truly opened, that all men might have their judgment thereby reformed
and made clear, I think we should not greatly need the profit that
cometh by images made of men, to excite our remembrance to live
Christianly.

     "For that word which came from the breast of Christ himself,
and was written of others that wrote and spake by the suggestion of
his Spirit, the Holy Ghost, showeth full perfectly his blessed will,
which is the true and certain image of his mind and device. If this,
therefore, were diligently inculcated, I think we should be
transformed anew, according to the mind of Paul, who, writing to the
Colossians, saith thus:  'See that you lie not one to another, after
that now you have put off the old man with his works, and have put
upon you the new man, which is transformed and renovated after the
knowledge and image of Him that made us.' Yea, thus should we all be
taught of God, as is said in John; and all should know God, both
small and great, according to the promise recited in the Hebrews: 
yea, thus should we be restored to goodness, that we should have the
image of God carved in our hearts full expressly. For every man is
transformed into the fashion of virtuous things, that he is
accustomed to read and hear. And, therefore, it were a great grace,
if we might have the word of God diligently and often spoken and sung
unto us in such wise that the people might understand it. Yea, then
it should come to pass, that craftsmen should sing spiritual psalms
sitting at their works, and the husbandman at his plough, as wisheth
St. Jerome.

     "Yea, this holy image of Christ, I mean his blessed doctrine,
doth appoint us also to consider the works made by the hands of God,
such as no man can make like, whereby, as saith St. Paul, writing to
the Romans, The invisible power and divinity of God is known and seen
by the creation of the world, of such as will consider his works that
are therein by him made. Look in the Psalms, Praise ye the Lord from
heaven. The heavens declare the glory of God, with others. And these
two images, God's works and his doctrine, have, ere any images made
by men were set up in churches, well and sufficiently instructed the
primitive church:  and should yet instruct us well, if they were well
considered, so that we should not need so sorely to contend for
setting up of others made by men.

     Whereby I have perceived much harm to arise, and no great
profit; nor the Scripture maketh not for them, but rather contrary;
as concerning which matter, I would your Lordship would please to
read the Epistle of Baruch once again, writing of the same matter.

     "Unto the nineteenth article, where you ask, whether I believe
that prayers of men living, do profit souls departed and being in
purgatory, I made answer in the thirteenth article.

     "Unto the twentieth, where you do ask, whether men merit and
deserve both by their fasting, and also by other deeds of devotion, I
have showed what I do think thereof, in the fifth demand.

     "In the one and twentieth, where you do ask, whether I do
believe that men, prohibited by bishops to preach, as suspected of
heresy, ought to cease from preaching and teaching until they have
purged themselves of suspicion, before a higher judge? I say that men
may be wrongfully suspected of heresy, either because they never
thought to believe such errors as men, by false suspicion, do deem
them to favour; or else, when men, as well of high estate as of low,
by sinister judgment may think that to be error, which is the very
truth. And of this speaketh Isaiah, Woe be to them, quoth he, that
call the light darkness, and the darkness light; the truth falsehood,
and the falsehood truth. As the bishops and the priests, with their
orator Tertullus, called Paul, saying thus, before a judge called
Felix, unto whose court they brought him to be condemned to death:  We
have, quoth they, gotten here a pestilent fellow, a sower of sedition
or discord among all the Jews of the world, and a bringer-up of the
sect of the Nazarenes; which was also minded to have polluted our
temple, &c. This is to call, by perverse judgment, truth falsehood.
And thus did their predecessors speak of the prophets, yea, and of
Christ himself, calling him a seducer and preacher of heresy:  which
is written for our instruction. And men being thus suspected, (as I
would none were,) ought in no wise, therefore, to cease either from
preaching, or teaching.

     "Ensample of this we have in the Acts of the Apostles, where it
is showed that when Peter and John had done a miracle upon a man that
had been lame from his nativity, (whom by the power of Christ they
healed, and caused to go where he pleased,) the people, hearing of
this, came running about Peter and John. Peter, seeing this, did
exhort the people in a sermon, that they should not think him and his
fellow St. John to have done this wonderful thing by their own power
or holiness, but by the virtue of Christ, whom they and their head
rulers had slain.

     While they were thus speaking with the people, there came upon
them the priests and officers of the temple, accompanied with the
Sadducees, being sore displeased that they should enterprise to teach
the people, and preach that men should arise from death by the name
of Christ, whom they had caused to be crucified; and therewith they
laid hands upon them, and put them in ward until next day. The next
day they sent for the apostles before them, demanding by what power,
and in whose name, they did this miracle? Peter made answer, If you,
quoth he, that are head-rulers over the people, lust by examination
to know by what means we did it, we would you should all know, that
we did it through the name of Christ Jesus of Nazareth, whom you did
crucify:  but God did cause him to arise again. In the virtue of his
name doth this man, that afore was lame, now stand afore you here
both whole and sound. For Christ is that head corner-stone, whom you
cast away, which should have builded the people's faith upon him,
neither is there any salvation without him.

     "These great men, seeing that Peter spake so freely, and that
he, with his fellow John, were simple men, without any pompous
apparel, or great guard of servants, being like idiots and men
unlearned, wondered thereat. At last they did command them to depart
out of their council-house, while they should commune more largely of
the matter. Afterwards they called the apostles before them again,
commanding them that they should no more preach, nor teach in the
name of Jesus. But the apostles answered, saying, I beseech you,
judge better. Ought we to obey you more than God, or no? for
certainly we must needs testify of those things which we have both
heard and seen. Then the head priests, threatening them sore, did
give them strait charge not to break their precept; and so did let
them go, not knowing any cause why they might punish them; for they
feared lest the people would have taken part with the apostles, for
the people gave glory unto God for the miracle showed by them.

     "Notwithstanding all these great threats, Peter wrought
miracles still amongst the people, doing them to know that glory
therefore ought to be given to Jesus, by whose power and name they
were done; wherewith the hearts of the people melted for joy, so that
they followed after the apostles whithersoever they went.

     "The primate of the priests, hearing of this, and all that were
about him, replete with indignation, laid hands upon the apostles,
putting them in the common prison. But the angel of God, in the
night, opened the prison-doors, and brought them out, saying, Go you
into the temple, and stand there preaching unto the people all the
words of life; that is to say, Christ's doctrine:  and so they did
early in the morning. Then came forth the chief priest, and they whom
he used to have about him, and called a council, in which were all
the priests of Israel, or ancients of Israel. So they sent unto the
prison-house to have the apostles brought forth before them. When
their servants came to the prison-house, and found the apostles gone
thence, they returned to their masters, saying, We found the prison
fast shut round about in every part, and the keepers watching at the
doors without, full diligently. But when we had opened the prison, we
could find nobody within.

     "Then, as the high priests and officers of the temple heard
this, they were in a great perplexity, doubting what would thereof
come. Then came one unto them and showed them, saying, Behold, the
men that ye put in prison are standing in the temple, preaching unto
the people. Then went they thither, and brought the, apostles with
them without any violence; but they were afraid lest the people would
have beaten them down with stones.

     "Then they caused the apostles to be brought into their
council-house, the high priest beginning his proposition against the
apostles in his form:  Have we not straitly commanded you, said he,
that you should not preach in the name of Christ? and see, you have
filled all Jerusalem with your doctrine. Will you bring this man's
blood upon us, that we should unrighteously have caused him to suffer
death? Then answered Peter and the other apostles, saying, We ought
to obey God more than any man. The God of our fathers hath raised
Jesu from death, whom you did slay, hanging on a tree. Him
notwithstanding hath God raised, and by his power advanced to be our
King and Saviour:  by whom shall be given to all Israel, that will
take repentance, forgiveness of sin.

     "These great rulers hearing this, their hearts were therewith
cloven asunder, and they consulted together to slay the apostles. But
one good man among their multitude advised them otherwise, whose
advice they did approve. Then they called the apostles again before
them, causing them to be scourged, and charged them no more to preach
in the name of Jesus; and so did let them depart.

     "Then went they away out of the council, rejoicing that God had
made them worthy to suffer such rebukes for his name's sake. But yet
they never ceased to teach and preach of Jesus Christ every day in
the temple, and in all houses that they came into. This is written in
the fourth, fifth, and sixth of the Acts of the Apostles, and for our
instruction, doubt you not:  for such practice is showed in all ages.
So that hereby you may see, when men be wrongfully suspected or
infamed of heresy, and so prohibited by bishops to preach the word of
God, that they ought for no man's commandment to leave or stop,
though they do never purge themselves before them:  for such will
admit no just purgation many times, but judge in their own causes,
and that as they lust, which methinketh not at all comely. Therefore
in the old law, the priests and other judges do sit together, hearing
of matters that were in controversy.

     "Yet this I think reasonable, that a man justly and not
causelessly suspected, and namely if be be so found faulty of heresy,
ought to cease from preaching, after he is inhibited, until he have
made his purgation before some judge. But, in my rude opinion, it
were necessary and convenient that our heads should not be over ready
of suspicion, and so inhibiting men approved from preaching,
especially in this session, when the poople do suspect them to do it
more for love of themselves, and maintaining of their private lucre
or honour, than to do it for love of God, or maintenance of his
honour.

     "In the two and twentieth article, where you demand whether I
believe that it is lawful for all priests freely to preach the word
of God or no, and that in all places, at all seasons, and to all
persons to whom they shall please, although they be not sent:  I say,
that priests are called in Scripture by two distinct words, that is
to wit, presbyteri, and sacerdotes. The first is to say, ancient men,
seniors, or elders, and by that word or vocable are the secular
judges, or such-like head officers, sometimes also signified; as we
read in Daniel, that they were so called which defamed and wrongfully
accused Susanna:  that this is seldom, and nothing so customable as
for those to be called presbyteri, who are set to be prelates in the
church, to guide the same by the word of God and his blessed
doctrine, that is the rod of direction, and the foundation of
Christ's faith. And priests thus called presbyteri, in the primitive
church, (what time there were but few traditions and ordinances to
let us from the strait trade or institution made by Christ and his
apostles,) were the very same and none other but bishops; as I showed
you in the first part of mine answer, by the authority of St. Jerome.

     "Paul, also, recordeth the same right evidently in the First to
Titus; in this form:  I left thee Titus, quoth blessed Paul, behind me
in Crete, that thou shouldest set in due order such things as lack,
or be not else perfectly framed; and that thou shouldest set priests
in every town, like as I did appoint thee, if any be without reproach
or blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not
given to riot, or that be not unruly. For so ought a bishop to be,
&c. These are not my words, but St. Paul's in the Epistle to Titus.
Where you may see that a priest, called presbyter, should be the same
that we call a bishop, whom he requireth a little after, to be able,
by wholesome doctrine of God's Scripture, to exhort the good to
follow the same doctrine; and if any shall speak against it, to
reprove them thereby. And mark ye how he would have a bishop
(otherwise called an ancient man or a priest) to make exhortation by
Holy Scripture, and thereby to reprove them that shall speak against
the truth, and not to condemn them by might or authority only, or
else by traditions of men made in general councils. And as many as
are in this wise priests. who are commonly called presbyteri,
(otherwise bishops,) such as in the church are set to take cure of
souls, and to be spiritual pastors, ought to preach freely the word
of God in all places and times convenient, and to whomsoever it shall
please them, if they suppose and see that their preaching should
edify and profit.

     "And whereas you add this particle, 'though they were not
sent;' I say, that all such are chosen to be preachers, and therefore
sent. For of this speaking St. Gregory in his Pastorals, in this
wise:  'Whosoever taketh priesthood upon him, taketh also upon him the
office of preaching.' Yea, your law reporteth in like manner,
Distinction 43, where it is thus said, 'A priest ought to be honest,
that he may show honesty both in words and conditions.' Wherefore it
is said in the Canticles, The cheeks of the spouse, that is, to wit,
of preachers, are to be compared to a turtle dove. Where is moreover
added, he must also have the gift of teaching, because (as saith St.
Jerome) innocent conversation, without speech or preaching, how much
it is available by example-giving, so much doth it hurt again by
silence-keeping:  for wolves must be driven away by barking of dogs,
and by the shepherd's staff, which (as the Gloss showeth) signifieth
preaching, and sharp words of the priest. And this I understand of
such as should be priests elect both by God and men, in God's church;
whose office is to preach.

     "And though many of them who now do minister in the church, and
are elected by bishops, otherwise than after the manner of Christ's
institution, and the form of the primitive church, neither do nor can
preach; yet ought not the multitude of such to be laid for an
authority against me or others, that are compelled to show the truth
and right ordinances of the apostles, that were used aforetime inthe
primitive church:  God bring it in again! Neither ought we, for the
negligence of bishops, who have chosen such an ignorant multitude,
whereby the principal duty of priests is grown out of knowledge, when
we do show you thereof, to be so enforced by a book-oath, and
therefore noted as heretics, imprisoned and burned.

     "Other be called priests in the New Testament, by this word
sacerdotes, that is to say, I think, sacrificers. And thus as Christ
was called king and priest, so be all Christian men in the New
Testament (as is testified, Apoc. i.) by Christ made kings and
priests. The words in the Apocalypse be thus:  To Jesu Christ, which
hath loved us, and washed us from our sins through his blood, and
made us kings and priests unto God, even his Father, unto him be
glory and rule for ever and ever. Amen. Thus saith St. John, speaking
of all Christian people. In like manner it is said, by St. Peter,
where he writeth unto all Christian men, You, quoth he, be a chosen
generation, a regal priesthood, an holy people. St. Bede, expounding
the same, (as my remembrance doth serve,) shall testify plainly with
me. And St. Augustine, I wot well, in divers places recordeth that
all Christian men be so called, regale sacerdotium; and likewise doth
Faber, in his Commentaries upon the same place. Whosoever looketh
upon the treatise called Unio Dissidentium, shall find a multitude of
ancient fathers' sayings, declaring the same.

     "But this may yet seem a strange thing and a new, that all
persons should be called priests, and that, in Scripture, which
cannot lie. Truth it is indeed, it may seem strange to divers, as it
did to me and many other, when we read it first, because we never
read or heard of the same before; and so did Christ's doctrine (and 
his apostles') seem new to his audience, when he himself preached.
Albeit he yet proved his doings and sayings by authority of the law
and prophets, as is showed in Romans i., where Paul reporteth, that
he was chosen apart, to be a minister of the gospel that was promised
before by the prophets. And our Saviour testifieth the same in St.
John, saying to the Jews, Think you not, quoth he, that I shall
accuse you before my Father. There is one to accuse you, which is
Moses, in whom ye do trust. But if you believed Moses, you should
certainly believe me, for he writeth of me, &c. Likewise a little
above, he biddeth them search the Scriptures, for they make report of
him.

     "But although these sayings do seem new, for lack that we have
not had old familiarity with Scripture, and usage in reading the
same, (God amend and help it, when it shall please him I) yet truly
so standeth it written as I have said, and so it is interpreted by
the doctors above named; and so was it preached of a certain doctor
also of divinity in London, the second day of Advent last past, in
this sentence. I wot not whether these were the self words or no: 
'The church,' quoth the doctor, 'is nothing else but the congregation
of faithful people:  and you all,' quoth he to the people, 'are of the
church, as well as I, or any others, if you be of God. And likewise
we and all men are priests, but yet are not all alike ordained
ministers,' said he, 'for to consecrate the body of Christ in the
church.' Thus said the preacher; whom, when I see opportunity, I dare
be bold to name. And these, I say, ought not all to preach openly in
general conventions or assemblies, neither can they, but they rather
should come to learn:  yet privately are they bound, for instruction
of their servants, children, kinsfolk, and such-like, to speak what
should be for the destruction of vice, and for the increase or
upholding of virtue, whensoever time and place so behoveth; as
showeth St. Paul, saying in this wise:  You that are fathers, provoke
not your children to wrath or anger; but bring them up in the
doctrine and discipline of the Lord.

     "In the three and twentieth article, where you do ask, whether
I believe that it is lawful for lay people of both kinds (that is to
wit, both men and women) to sacrifice and preach the word of God:  I
say, that it is meet for none, in mine opinion, to preach openly the
word of God, except they be chosen and elected to the same, either by
God or solemnly by men, or else by both; and therefore St. Paul
calleth himself, in all his epistles, an apostle of God, that is to
wit, a messenger of God. And to the Galatians he writeth thus, Paul
an apostle; not sent of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ. Also to
the Romans, How shall men preach truly, quoth he, except they be
sent?

     "Notwithstanding, I say this, both by supportation of God's
law, and also of laws written in the Decrees, that in time of great
necessity lay people may preach; and that of both kinds, both men and
women; as you may see in the Epistle to the Corinthians, where he
saith that it is a shame for a woman to speak in a multitude or
congregation. Yet in another place he saith that every woman praying
or prophesying, having nothing upon her head, doth dishonour her
head.

     "To this accordeth the prophecy of Joel, recited in the Acts,
where, in the person of God, it is said thus, I shall pour out of my
Spirit upon all flesh, and both your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy. Thus did Anna the prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, give
praise unto Christ in the temple, and spake ofhim to all men of
Jerusalem, that looked after the redemption of Israel.

     "This also doth the Virgin Mary yet speak unto us in the
Scripture, by the song which she made, that is daily recited in the
church, called Magnificat. Yea, Stephen also, being no priest; but a
deacon, made a wonderful good sermon. This also willeth your Decrees,
Dist. 9, De Consecratione, where it is thus said:  'A woman, although
she is learned and holy, may not presume to teach men in the
congregation, nor baptize, except necessity requireth.' So that,
where need is, I shall add this, but not without the mind of him that
wrote the law, like as a woman may baptize, so may she teach the word
of God, or preach, as is declared more plainly, Cap. 16. Quest. 1. et
in Glossa. 11. Cap. Adjicimus. Dist. 18. And I beseech God, that, for
lack of true and well learned officers, such necessity do not now
come upon us, that such shall need to take upon them to preach.

     "There is a learned man, which, in a dialogue that he maketh
betwixt a rude abbot and a gentlewoman having skill in learning,
jesteth, but with pretty earnest, (as his manner is;) and giveth a
watch-word touching somewhat my purpose. It is in the end of the
dialogue. The gentlewoman answering the abbot, for that he had partly
checked her because she was quick in utterance of learning, 'Sir,'
quoth she, 'if you continue therein so dull as you have done, and
daily do, the world perceiving it, (as they begin fast to grow quick
in sight,) it is to be feared lest they will set you beside the
saddle, and put us in your room.'

     "As concerning sacrifice-doing, (so do I understand by the word
which you do use, libare, not knowing else what it should mean,) I
say that it is lawful for all men and women to do sacrifice, of what
sort soever they be:  but I mean not by sacrifice-doing, to say mass
as priests used to do, thereunto appointed; but like as Christian
people be sacerdotes, that is to say, sacrificers, as is showed
before, so ought they to offer, and do offer, spiritual sacrifices,
as writeth St. Paul to the Romans, saying, I beseech you, brethren,
for the love of God's mercy, that you will give your body a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, being a reasonable
worshipping. In that he saith our body should be a sacrifice, he
would have it slain:  for that was the manner, that all beasts that
were wont to be sacrificed should be first slain. But he joineth
therewith, living; saying, Give your body to be a living. sacrifice.
So that he would we should continue to live in this body to God's
pleasure, but fleeing the evil lusts and appetites thereof, and so
shall our worshipping be reasonable, if we do not give unto our
reason overmuch of the bridle whereby it may run at riot, in
following fleshly concupiscence, and wicked vanity or arrogancy:  as
when men will take in hand to devise by their own wit, a more godly
way of living than is instituted by Christ, (which is the wisdom of
his heavenly Father,) saying that his is not sufficient enough for us
to follow; of whom it is said by the prophet Isaiah in these words: 
This people approach near unto me, and honour me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me:  but they do worship me in vain, teaching
doctrines that are laws or precepts of men.

     "Then Paul proceedeth, showing of this Christian sacrifice,
saying, And apply not yourselves unto the fashion of this world, but
be you transformed, by renovation of your mind; that you may know
what is the will of God, what is good, acceptable, and rightful
before him. See how he would have us do this sacrifice, and mortify
our lusts, in refusing the corrupt fashion and behaviour of the
world, altering our minds by a new way, by knowing the will of God,
and following after the same.

     "Another manner of sacrifice which he requireth is, that we
should alway offer unto God the sacrifice of praise, that is, to wit,
the fruits of our lips, that Hosea calleth vitulos labiorum, giving
laud unto his name; and that we should not forget to do good, and to
be beneficial to our neighbours:  For in such sacrifice, saith he, God
hath delight.

     "Thus I say that by plain suffrage of your law in the Decrees,
and also of Scripture, lay persons, in necessity and in time of need,
may lawfully preach or show the word of God, and also do sacrifice: 
but I think, except great need require, they ought not so to do.

     "Thus have you herein my mind, which if it be not firm and
substantial, I will yet reform it when any better is showed; as I
will also do in all other things; for I am not in this yet fully
certified. Albeit methinketh the decrees do pass evidently with me.

     "In the twenty-fourth article, where you do ask, whether
excommunication, denounced by the pope against all heretics, do
oblige and bind them before God:  I say, that it bindeth them before
God, if it be lawfully denounced, that is, if they be in very deed,
as they be named; and if he denounceth them so to be, not of his own
proper head or affection only, but with the consent of others
gathered with him in Christ's name, for the behoof of Christ's
church:  for so used St. Paul, when he did excommunicate the man of
Corinth, which had full horribly defiled his mother-in-law, as
appeareth in 1 Cor. v.

     "And the same form declareth the Gospel, in these words:  If thy
brother hath trespassed against thee, go and reprove him betwixt thee
and him alone. If he will hear thee, thou hast so won thy brother. If
he will not hear thee, take one or two with thee, that in the report
of two or three, every thing may be assured. If he will not hear
them, show it unto the congregation. If he will not follow the mind
of the congregation, let him be unto thee as a paynim, or a notable
sinner. For verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound in heaven. So that such excommunication ought
to be done (as methinketh) by the congregation assembled together
with their pastor, whose advice they ought principally to esteem and
follow, if it be virtuous and godly.

     "And thus is it convenient to be done:  for the pope is made of
flesh, as well as other men; and therefore he may sometimes judge
awry, cursing the blessed, and blessing the cursed. And likewise many
other prelates, judging the Christian to be heretics, and heretics
Christian:  of whom it is also written in the prophecy of Ezekiel,
They slew the souls of them that should not die, and gave life to the
souls that should not live; as did the Pharisees when they did cast
Christ out of the vineyard, which signifieth the church; and as our
Saviour prophesied, saying unto his disciples, There shall be, quoth
he, some that shall excommunicate you:  yea, and the time shall come,
that whosoever shall slay you, shall think to do honour to God. And
this shall they do unto you, because they do neither know my Father
nor me. These words be written in the Gospel of John; whereby you
see, that for lack of knowledge of God, which is taught and seen by
the light of Scripture, Christ prophesied how lewd men should lewdly
excommunicate the good, yea, and slay his true servants, thinking,
through such facts, to please God, and to do him good service.

     "Wherefore send, O Lord! I beseech thee, the knowledge of thee
to be dilated upon earth, (which Hosea bewaileth sore, seeing it
absent,) whereby men's judgments may be rectified; and so do
accordingly to the leading of the same!

     "In the twenty-fifth article, where you do ask, whether every
priest is bound to say daily his matins and even-song, according as
it is ordained by the church, or whether he may leave them unsaid,
without offence or deadly sin. I say that prayer in Scripture is much
commended, and many great and immeasurable benefits are showed to
ensue thereupon, that men should the more lustily give themselves
thereto. With prayer doth St. Paul bid us to fight in divers places,
continuing in the same against our ghostly enemies. A figure of this
is read in Exodus, when the Israelites fought in battle against a
nation of infidels:  I trow their captain was called Amalek. Moses
stood upon a mountain to behold what should be the conclusion, and
lifting up his hands, prayed that it might well succeed with the
Israelites:  but in long holding them up, at last his fervour began to
grow cold and faint, and his hands sagged downwards. And ever as his
hands grew heavy, (which signifieth that his affection in praying
abated and waxed cold,) the infidels prevailed; but as he kept them
heaved upward, (whereby was meant intentive prayer of a devout mind,)
he purchased victory to the Israelites. Aaron and Hur, which indited
the law to the people, and were thereof the interpreters, stood with
Moses; who always, as they did see his arms to faint, did uphold
them, so that finally the victory came unto Israel.

     "By 'Moses' is signified, as show great clerks, devotion; by
'Aaron and Hur,' the knowledge of God's doctrine:  which two things
(devotion, I mean, and knowledge) all men had need to have present
with them:  for devotion doth elevate the mind to God, but knowledge
doth sustain or uphold the same, that it may with courage continue,
not falling down; but so alway doth it incense and kindle it, that it
mounteth up into the presence of our heavenly Father; where they
savour together far more sweetly than any fumigation either of
juniper, incense, or whatsoever else, be they ever so pleasant, do
savour in any man's nose.

     "Therefore St. Paul, seeing how necessary the knot of these
two, devotion and knowledge of God's will, was (which is showed in
Scripture, as teacheth St. Cyprian in these words:  'The will of God,'
saith he, 'is that which Christ hath taught and wrought'):  Paul, I
say, seeing this, wished to be excommunicated and separated from God,
for to have the Jews come to the knowledge of Christ's church, which
is the only right way to salvation; for whom he prayed right
studiously, as appeareth a little after, saying, I bear them record,
that they have a zeal and devotion to God, but not according to the
knowledge of Christ's doctrine, &c. Where you may clearly see how the
Jews (as St. Paul, which is no liar, recordeth here) had a zeal and
devotion to God, but they lacked knowledge therewith. 'Moses' was
amongst them, but 'Aaron' was away; whose absence pained Paul so
sore, that he, ravished with exceeding charity, wished no small harm
unto himself, upon condition that the multitude of them might be
holpen, and have better judgment, even to be separated from God. It
must needs be then greatly hurtful, albeit men have devotion, to be
without the knowledge of God and his law, signified by 'Aaron.'

     "St. Paul also, before that he came to knowledge, had such-like
devotion himself, as he reporteth in these words:  All the Jews, quoth
he, have known my living, that I have led since I entered into man's
age, (which time, as I remember, is accounted from the sixteenth or
eighteenth year of a man's life; in Latin he calleth it
adolescentia,) which, from the beginning thereof, was, saith he, at
Jerusalem, among mine own nation, that did know me afore also from
the beginning, if they would say the truth, and that I lived after
the most strait order or sect of our religion, being a Pharisee. And
I, quoth Paul a little after, thought to do many things in fighting
against the name of Jesus Christ, yea, and did also, being at
Jerusalem; and I thrust many saints or holy men into prison, having
power given me thereto of the high priests; and, when they should be
put to death, I gave sentence:  and I, quoth he, was commonly in all
synagogues, punish, ing them, and compelling them to blaspheme (as
men are fain now-a-days, when the bishops make them to abjure and to
deny the truth of the gospel); yea, moreover did I, quoth Paul, rage
against them, pursuing after them into strange lands.

     "See what zeal Paul had to God before he was instructed in the
doctrine of Christ. He thought to have pleased God highly in
persecuting his servants, of whom one was St. Stephen. He was then
sore blinded, through ignorance, and wanted the assistance of
'Aaron: ' but anon, as Christ, which is the true Aaron, had appeared
unto him, asking him, and saying, in a lamentable form, O Saul! Saul!
why dost thou persecute me, in troubling and striking my servants,
the members of mine own body? of whom it is said, He that smiteth
you, shall smite the tender ball of mine eye:  his heart fell, I dare
say, as low as his body, that is, even down to the earth, repenting
himself full sore, being ready to amend and follow after a new way;
as appeareth by his answer, where he saith, O Lord! what wilt thou
have me to do? As though one would say, Now I see all that I thought
to have done before of good intention, and good purpose or devotion,
hath deceived me. I find it otherwise. That which I esteemed good, in
very deed is and was naught. Teach me therefore, good Lord! quoth he,
a better way, and amend my judgment, that, mine own will or intention
forsaken, I may now follow thine to please thee, and to do thy will.
And so, as he came to Ananias, by the assignment of Christ, the thick
filthiness of his old wayward judgment fell away, as appeareth by the
dross or rubbish that came from his eyes, even like scales, as the
Scripture maketh relation, and he put upon him a new judgment, which
is directed after the straight rule of the gospel:  whereby you may
see that men's devotion may oft beguile and seduce them, except
knowledge do assist the same, for to sustain and direct it; which,
knit together, shall much strengthen men in all trouble and
temptations. So that it is much expedient for all men, as nigh as
they may, to have prayer annexed with knowledge:  and that showeth
full notably Erasmus, in the second passage of Enchiridion, where he
testifieth but of easy liking that he hath, in saying of matins, yea,
rather contrariwise he showeth disliking; and so he doth also in his
exposition of the first Psalm, Beatus vir, where the text maketh
agreeably for the same. It is written in this wise:  Blessed is the
man that hath not gone after the counsel of the wicked, and hath not
stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the chair of pestilence; but
hath his will in the law of God, and shall muse or be occupied in it
both day and night.

     "See how the prophet (which, I doubt not but he knew as
perfectly that will and pleasure of God, as ever did any pope or
general council, or whatsoever they were besides, that ordained long
service to be said of priests) testifieth them to be blessed, that
study and are exercised in the law of God both day and night; . that
is, to wit, always. A great promise put of God to such blessed
exercise, which we may call right devotion, or true godliness. For
Paul, defining godliness, saith thus:  Godliness is profitable unto
all things; for that hath annexed thereto promises of this life
present, and of the life to cone.

     "But no such promise is made of God, I am certain, to them that
say daily matins; neither are we certain by the word of God, that we
shall therefore be blessed of him, no more than we are certain, that
for saying over the fifteen Aves, every day once through a whole
year, we shall apertly see our Lady to aid us before our death, as it
is testified in the scripture of the Primer, but not by scripture of
the Bible; or that we shall have a like benefit for saying of her
Psalter upon the ten beads that come from the crossed friars, or upon
the five beads hallowed at the Charter-house, or for fasting 'the
Lady's fast,' as men call it; nor for fasting on the Wednesday, as is
showed by a book that is allowed to be printed and read of all men
that lust; for it is neither the New Testament nor the Old.

     "They are condemned, you wot well (and I perhaps shall have a
little less favour because I tell the truth freely, for such things
are called offensive). But would God, that all persons, so thinking,
would remember what answer Christ made unto his disciples, when 'they
came to him, and warned him to beware, saying, 'You know that the
Pharisees are offended, hearing such words spoken. I will leave out
Christ's answer, lest I should be thought over free and plain in
tarrying or uttering of abusions, and speak no further.

     "A like demand, with answer thereunto annexed, shall you find
in Luke, where Christ would not refrain to speak any deal more
easily. Therefore I beseech them that deem me (God wotteth whether
righteously or no) slanderously, to revise the said places, and then
counsel me to do what shall be most expedient to follow, if their 
charity will so require. Yet would I that all people should know that
I do not reprove that saying of the fifteen Ooes, which (so far forth
as my remembrance doth serve is a very good prayer, or such-like
prayers; nor would I that any person should think me to disallow any
secret fastings; for such, not only present with you, but even from
hence absent, have I commended in earnest speaking, and so intend to
do, by the assistance of God's grace. Nevertheless such vain promises
I do abhor, as be with them annexed, with the upholders of the same: 
for such do cause vain confidence in the people, withdrawing and
seducing them from the right belief of the gospel, (which Christian
men ought only to build their faith upon,) unto new inventions of
vanity. St. Paul calleth such, old women's tales, where he writeth
unto Timothy, bidding him to beware of them, and to throw them away.

     "The prophet David, likewise, doth accord thereunto, saying,
Blessed is the man that hath in the name of God his affiance or hope;
and hath not looked back to vanities and false dotages or madness.
And this I say again, that the matins-saying hath no more promise of
God made to the sayers, than hath the other above named; for they
were instituted by the fantasy or mind of men, and not by the rule of
Scripture. Neither do I think that the priests who will truly follow
the rule of God written in the Bible, ought so to be charged or
encumbered with saying of them, that they thereby should be hindered
from the study of that, which to know, belongeth principally both to
their own soul's salvation, and also to thedischarge of their duty,
and which God most highly of priests doth require, (I mean the study
of his gospel,) whereby they themselves should be spiritually
nourished, and thereafter should feed Christ's flock, the
congregation of his people, according to the saying of our Saviour:  I
am the door, quoth he; whosoever shall come in by me, shall both come
in and go out, and find good pasture or feeding that is to say,
whosoever shall enter to be a pastor or minister in Christ's church'
or congregation by Christ, shall both enter into contemplation of
God's glory, declared abundantly in Scripture, and after go forth and
show the same abroad to others, for their wealth and edifying.

     "To this accordeth what is written in Luke, where our Saviour
speaketh to all his church signified in the person of St. Peter.
Peter! quoth he, I have prayed that thy faith should not fail; and
thou, being converted, go then about to confirm thy brethren. So that
he would have Peter established first in the faith of his sure
doctrine, and then to go forth as he did, to teach others to be
grounded in the same likewise. And thus ought all priests to be
called presbyteri, which will be ministers in the church; for so
biddeth St. Peter, saying thus:  I beseech the priests, quoth he, that
are among you, I myself being a priest and a witness-bearer of
Christ's afflictions, and also a partaker of the glory which shall be
revealed; see that you with all diligence do feed the flock of
Christ, taking care of the same, not as enforced thereto, but
willingly, not desiring filthy lucre, but with a loving mind; neither
as men exercising dominion over the children or inheritors of God,
but so that you be patterns, or ensample-givers to the flock, 1 Pet.
v. See how he requireth of priests, that they should spend all their
diligence to feed Christ's flock, and to show good ensample of
living, making no mention of long matins-saying, which then was not
mentioned nor spoken of.

     According to this, it is written in your Decrees after this
form:  Ignorance, saith the law, mark it well I beseech you all, is
the mother of all errors; which ought to be eschewed especially of
priests, who, among the people of God, have taken upon them the
office of preaching. Priests are commanded to read the Holy
Scriptures, as saith Paul the apostle to Timothy:  Give heed to
reading, exhortation, and teaching; and continue always in the same.
Let priests therefore know Holy Scripture, and let all their labour
be in preaching and teaching, and let them edify all men both in
knowledge of faith, and in discipline of good works. These be the
words of the law in the Decrees, dist. 38; wherefore you see how the
law lamenteth ignorance in all persons; for it is the original of all
errors. God send us therefore the knowledge of his true' gospel! It
biddeth that ignorance should be utterly eschewed, and principally by
priests, whose labour and diligence should all be bestowed in reading
of Scripture, and preaching the same; bringing in for the same
purpose the saying of the apostle, which willeth it in like manner.

     "Moreover, it requireth that priests should give all their
study to edify others in faith and virtuous living; whereof I do
gather both by the saying of the prophet, that willeth us to be
studious in the law of God day and night; and by the saying of the
apostle, who would have Timothy to be occupied ever in reading and
teaching; and by the report of your own law, which likewise saith,
that a priest ought to bestow all his labour in reading and
preaching:  so that a priest, set thus truly to study, that he may
establish himself in the faith of Christ's doctrine, intending
afterwards to help others with true preaching of the same, or doing
other like deeds of charity assigned in the law of God, shall not
offend deadly, if, so spending his time, he omitteth to say matins,
which is an ordinance of men.

     "Nevertheless, concerning the huge multitude of such as be now
made priests by negligent admission of bishops, and their own
presumption, that labour to be made priests before they be any
clerks, and, ere ever they know what is the very office of a priest,
do not fear to take upon them, if they may attain thereto, to be
curates, they reck not of how many, so they may get a good lump of
money, never minding, after that, the study of Scripture, after they 
are come to Dominus vobiscum:  for such I do think long matins to be
needful, to restrain them from other enormities that they should else
run into; of which you may be weary to see the experience thereof
daily arising. Yea, and if such would be. content to admit it, I
would every one matin were as long to them as five, except they could
bestow their time better.

     In the six and twentieth article, where you do ask, whether I
believe that the heads or rulers, by necessity of salvation, are
bound to give unto the people Holy Scripture in their mother
language:  I say that I think they are bound to see that the people
may truly know Holy Scripture, and I do not know how that may be done
so well, as by giving it to them truly translated in the mother
tongue, that they may have it by them at all times, to pass the time
godly, whensoever they have leisure thereto, like as they have in
France under the French king's privilege, and also the privilege of
the emperor; and so do I know that they have had it these fifty-four
years in France at least, and it was translated at the request of a
king called, I trow, Louis, as appeareth by the privilege put in the
beginning of the book.

     "In like manner have they it in Flanders, printed with the
privilege of the emperor:  in Almain also, and Italy, and I suppose
through all the nations of Christendom. Likewise hath it been in
England, as you . may find it in the English story called
Polychronicon. There it is showed, how when the Saxons did inhabit
the land the king at that time, who was a Saxon, did himself
translate the Psalter into the language that then was generall used.
Yea, I have seen a book at Crowland Abbey, which is kept there for a
relic; the book is called St. Guthlake's Psalter; and I ween verily
it is a copy of the same that the king did translate, for it is
neither English, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, nor Dutch, but somewhat
sounding to our English; and, as I have perceived since the time I
was last there, being at Antwerp, the Saxon tongue doth sound
likewise after ours, and it is to ours partly agreeable. In the same
story of Polychronicon is also showed, how that St. Bede did
translate the Gospel of St. John into English, and the author of the
same book promised that he would translate into English all the
Bible; yea and perhaps he did so, but (I wot not how it cometh to
pass) all such things be kept away; they may not come to light:  for
there are some walking privily in darkness, that will not have their
doings known. It is no lie that is spoken in the Gospel of John, All
that do naughtily, hate the light, and will not have their doings
known. And therefore they keep down the light strongly; for that
opened and generally known, all wrongful conveyance should anon be
disclosed and reproved, yea, and all men should see anon, whether
those that hold against unrighteousness, being there-for sometimes
horribly infamed and slandered, named heretics and schismatics, were
indeed as they be called, or no.

     "Yea moreover, I did once see a book of the New Testament,
which was not unwritten by my estimation this hundred years, and in
my mind right well translated after the example of that which is read
in the church in Latin. But he that showed it me said, he durst not
be known to have it by him, for many had been punished aforetime for
keeping of such, and were convicted therefore of heresy.

     "Moreover I was at Paul's Cross, when the New Testament,
imprinted of late beyond the sea, was first forefended; and truly my
heart lamented greatly to hear a great man preaching against it, who
showed forth certain things that he noted for hideous errors to be in
it, that I, yea, and not only I, but likewise did many others, think
verily to be none. But, (alack for pity!) malice cannot say well. God
help us all, and amend it.

     "So that to conclude, I think verily it were profitable and
expedient, that the Holy Scriptures were delivered, by authority of
the head-rulers, unto the people, truly translated in the vulgar
tongue, in like manner as it is in all other countries. And whereas
you add, whether they be bound by necessity of salvation to deliver
it to the people:  I will not so narrowly touch that point now; but I
say, that they are bound by right and equity to cause it to be
delivered unto the people in the vulgar tongue, for their edifying,
and the consolation which the people, by God's grace, should gather
thereof; which now it is like they want, and are destitute of.

     "In the twenty-seventh article, where you do demand, whether it
be lawful for the rulers, for some cause, upon their reasonable
advisement, to ordain that the Scripture should not be delivered unto
the people in the vulgar language:  all men may here see, that
whosoever devised these questions, thought not contrary (whatsoever
they will yet say) but that it is good for the people to have the
Scripture in the vulgar tongue, and that they thought that I, so
saying, could not be well reproved; and therefore are laid out all
these additions, as it were to snare and trap me in:  Whether the
heads be bound, and that by necessity of salvation, to deliver it to
the people:  and whether, for opportunity of time, they may ordain to
restrain it for some cause, and by some reasonable advisement of them
taken:  But without cause you spread the net before the eyes of the
birds or fowls. I show you plainly, that notwithstanding all these
things, in mine opinion it was not well done to inhibit it, and
worse, that the bishops have not since amended it, if so be they
could, that the people might have it to use and occupy virtuously.

     "And here I will add one reason:  The Scripture is the spiritual
food and sustenance of man's soul. This is showed to be true in many
places of Scripture; like as other corporal meat is food of the body.
Then if he be an unkind father, that keepeth bodily meat away the
space of a week or a month from his children; it should seem that our
bishops be no gentle pastors or fathers, that keep away the food of
men's souls from them (specially when others do offer the same) both
months, years, and ages; neither do I see any opportunity of time, or
reasonable advisement, that should cause it to be withdrawn and taken
away; but the contrary rather, for it is reason, convenient and
needful for men, to eat their meat ever when they are right hungry;
and blessed are they that hunger and thirst after the word of God,
which teacheth to know him and to do his pleasure at all times; for
that we do crave every day in our Pater-noster, saying, Give us,
Lord, our heavenly bread.

     "In the twenty-eighth article, where you do ask, whether I
believe that consecrations, hallowings, and blessings used in the
church are to be praised? I say that I know not of all, and therefore
I will not dispraise them; neither can I therefore overmuch speak of
them all, seeing I know them not:  such as are the hallowing of bells,
the hallowing of pilgrims when they should go to Rome, the hallowing
of beads, and such-like. But those which I am advised of, and do
remember, be in mine opinion good; such as is this:  when the priest
hath consecrated holy bread, he saith, 'Lord, bless this creature of
bread, as thou didst bless the five loaves in the desert, that all
persons tasting thereof may receive health,' &c.:  which I would every
man might say in English, when he should go to meat, I like it so
well.

     "Also this is a right good one, that is said over him that
shall read the gospel:  'The Lord be in your heart, and in your mind
and mouth, to pronounce and show forth his blessed gospel;' which is
also spoken over a preacher taking benediction when he shall go into
a pulpit. All such good things I like very well, and think them
commendable, wishing therefore that all people might know what they
mean, that they with rejoicing of heart might pray joyfully with us,
and delight in all goodness; which should be, if they were uttered in
English, according to the mind of St. Paul, where he wisheth, rather
to speak five words in the church heartily with understanding,
whereby others might have instruction, than ten thousand words in a
tongue unknown:  yea, to say truth, (and truth it is indeed that I 
shall say,) a good thing, the further and the more largely or apertly
it is known, the further the virtue thereof spreadeth, and rooteth in
men's hearts and remembrance. God send therefore the blind to see,
and the ignorant to have knowledge of all good things!

     "Thus I conclude, that consecrations, hallowings, and blessings
used in the church (so far forth as I remember and know) be
commendable. Of others I can give no sentence, wishing, even as I
trust men shall once see it come to pass, that all good things may be
sung and spoken in our vulgar tongue.

     "In the twenty-ninth article, where you do ask, whether I
believe that the pope may make laws and statutes to bind all
Christian men to the observance of the same, under the pain of deadly
sin, so that such laws and statutes be not contrary to the law of
God:  I say, that if that be true which is written in the Decrees,
that is to wit, that laws be never confirmed, until they be approved
by common manners of them that shall use them, then cannot the pope's
laws bind all Christian men; for the Greeks and the Bohemians will
(as you do know full well) never admit them, but do refuse them
utterly, so that I do not find that his laws may bind all Christian
men.

     "Finally, I cannot see that he hath authority to make laws,
binding men to the observance of them under pain of deadly sin, more
than hath the king, or the emperor. And, to say sooth, I say, (as
have said before,) I think verily that the church was more full of
virtue before the decrees or decretals were made, (which is not very
long ago, but in the time of Constantine, if that be true which is
reported in the Decrees,) than it hath been since. God repair it, and
restore it again to the ancient purity and perfection!

     "In the thirtieth article, where you do ask, whether I believe
that the pope and other prelates, and their deputies in spiritual
things, have power to excommunicate priests and lay people, that are
inobedient and sturdy, from entering into the church, and to suspend
or let them from ministration of the sacraments of the same:  I think
that the pope and other prelates have power to excommunicate both
priests and laymen, such as be rebellious against the ordinance of
God, and disobedient to his law:  for such are sundered from God,
before the prelates do give sentence, by reason of their sin and
contumacy, according as it is said in Isaiah by Almighty God:  Your
sins, quoth he, do make division betwixt you and me. And the
prelates, by right judgment, should pronounce of sinners as they do
find them, and that is to pronounce such to be excommunicated of God,
and unworthy to minister any sacraments, or to be conversant with
Christian folk, that will not amend. For thus biddeth Paul, If any
amongst you, called a brother, shall be a whoremonger, a covetous
person, or a worshipper of images or idols, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, see that with such you eat no meat. Such
ought to be put out of the church, and not be suffered to come within
it.

     "I am not certain that prelates have any such power:  and though
they had, I doubt whether charity would permit them to show it forth
and execute it without singular discretion. For in churches ought the
word of God to be declared and preached, through which the sturdy,
coming thither and hearing it, might soon be smitten with compunction
and repentance, and thereupon come to amendment. This confirmeth well
a law made in the council of Carthage, which is this:  'A bishop ought
to prohibit no person to come into the church, and to hear the word
of God, whether he be Gentile, or Jew, or heretic, until the mass
time of them that are called Catechumeni.'

     "Moreover, where you speak of prelates' deputies, I think such
be but little behovable to Christ's flock. It were necessary and
right, that as the prelates themselves will have the revenues,
tithes, and oblations of their benefices, they themselves should
labour and teach diligently the word of God therefore, and not to
shift the labour from one unto another till all be left (pity it is!)
undone. Such doth St. John call thieves and murderers, although they
make ever so goodly a worldly show outward, and bear a stout port.

     "This I say, that the pope and other prelates have power to
excommunicate rebels against God's ordinances, and to suspend them
from receiving or ministering the sacrament:  but I am not sure, that
they have power to forefend them from out of churches, especially
when God's word is there preached, unless the sinners be so sore
desperate that they scorn the same. And I would that every prelate,
receiving his living of benefices, should himself work in the same,
especially in true preaching of Christ's doctrine, without winding
his own neck out of the yoke, and charging therewith others, called
deputies or vicars, curates, and such-like. For God would have every
man to get his living by the sweat of his own face; that is to say,
by his labour, according to his estate and calling. And like as every
workman is worthy his meat, so contrariwise, they that labour not,
unless they be let by impotency, are worthy to have no meat, and much
less to take of those, to whom they do no service, fifty or forty
pounds a year, for waiting after none other thing than the moon
shining in the water. The canon law maketh clearly with the same.
Look in the Decrees, and you shall find plainly as I say.

     "In the thirty-first article, where you ask, whether faith
only, without good works, may suffice unto a man fallen into sin
after his baptism, for his salvation and justifying? I say, that it
is the usage of Scripture to say, faith only doth justify, and work
salvation, before a man do any other good works; and that is showed
by many authorities, both of Scripture and, also of many holy
fathers, in a treatise called Unio Dissidentium, which I would to
Christ, as it is in French, and other languages, we had it truly
translated into English. And truly I do think in this matter, (like
as is here showed by many authorities of holy fathers,) that a man
fallen into sin after baptism, shall be saved through faith, and have
forgiveness by Christ's passion, although he doth no more good deeds
thereafter:  as when a man, having short life, lacketh leisure to
exercise other deeds of mercy. Notwithstanding, true faith is of such
virtue and nature, that when opportunity cometh, it cannot but work
plenteously deeds of charity, which are a testimony and witness-
bearer of man's true faith This declareth St. Augustine upon John; I
trove it is where he expoundeth this text:  If ye love me, keep my
commandments:  where, within a little after, he speaketh in this wise: 
'Good works make not a just or a righteous man; but a man once
justified, doeth good works.'

     "In the thirty-second article, where you ask,whether a priest
marrying a wife, and that without the dispensation of the pope,
begetting also children of her without slander-giving, do sin deadly;
I say, that he doth not so much offend as those which in Wales, (as I
have heard say,) and also in many parts beyond the sea, or rather in
all places, do give openly, for money, dispensations to priests to
take concubines:  neither doth he offend so much as the purchasers of
such dispensations; for they, on every hand, do clearly commit
fornication and adultery, utterly forbidden by God's law; and the
priest, of whom speaketh your demand, offendeth but man's law, if he
do that. For in the Decrees it is written; I ween it be in a gloss,
and certainly I wot not whether it be in the text or no, I can
lightly turn to it having a book:  the sentence is thus:  A priest
doing fornication, ought to be punished more than one who hath
married a wife. Finally, I think such a priest as before is named in
your demand, sinneth not deadly.

     "In the thirty-third article, where you ask, whether a Latin
priest, after he hath taken the order of priesthood, being sore and
oft troubled and stirred with prickings of lust or lechery, and
therefore marrying a wife for a remedy of the same, do sin deadly:  I
say, that a Latin priest and a Greek priest are all one before God,
if they follow both one rule of Christ, left to us in Holy Scripture;
neither doth Christ put any such difference, but the one hath by that
rule the same liberty as another, and no more nor less; for there is
the same God in Greece that is here, and hath left one way for us to
live after, both here and there. And, therefore, I cannot see by his
law, but that a Latin priest may marry, as well as they do. And if
the Greeks should not follow Christ's law in believing the same, and
living thereafter, you would call them heretics. But that will not
the pope have done. Wherefore, seeing they do let priests marry,
affirming it may so be done by the law of God, and yet are not
reputed heretics, why should other men, that say the same, be called
heretics, or be therefore burned? Therefore, following the law of
God, I make the same answer of a Latin priest, that I made before of
all priests:  that a priest, not having the gift of chastity, is bound
to marry, for avoiding fornication.

     "In the thirty-fourth article, where you ask, whether I ever
prayed for John Wickliff, John Huss, and for Jerome of Prague,
condemned of heresy in the council of Constance, or for any one of
them, since they died, and whether I have openly or secretly done any
deeds of charity for them, affirming them to be in bliss and saved:  I
say, that I never prayed for any of them, so far forth as I can
remember:  and though I had, it followeth not, that in so doing I
should be a heretic. For you wot well, that there is a mighty great
country, called Bohemia, which yet doth follow (as men say) that same
doctrine, which John Huss and Jerome of Prague taught their
ancestors, whom (as I trow) neither the pope nor you do account
heretics and infidels.

     "In the thirty-fifth article, where you ask, whether I have
recounted and said them or any of them to be saints, and worshipped
them as saints:  I say that in such secret and hid things which I do
not perfectly know, I follow the counsel of St. Paul, which biddeth
that we should not judge over soon, but abide (unless the things 
which we should pass upon be the more evident) until the coming of
the Lord, who shall illumine, and show forth clearly, things that now
lie hid in darkness. Therefore hitherto have I neither judged with
them, nor against them, but have resigned such sentence to the
knowledge and determination of God, whose judgment I wot is
infallible.

     "And whereas you say, they were condemned of heresy in the
council of Constance:  if so the council did right, God shall allow
it, I doubt not; and that shall suffice to have commendation of him: 
so that it is not need to ask of me whether the acts of the same are
commendable or no; neither can I give any direct answer thereto; for
I do not verily know them. And though I did, yet am not I verily
persuaded that I, because the council hath condemned them, must
therefore believe them to be damned. For a council, as I ween, may
sometimes slip beside the right truth:  but what that council did in
condemning them, I cannot precisely say; God wotteth. Yea, and that
one singular person may judge more rightly, than a great multitude
assembled in a council, appeareth by God's law, and by the law of
man. Experience hereof may you see by the council that is spoken of
in the Gospel, where it is showed, that after our Saviour had
restored Lazarus to life, the bishops and Pharisees then were
gathered together in a council, saying, What shall we do? Truth it is
that this man Jesus doth many miracles, and if we suffer him thus,
all the world will believe him; whereupon the Romans will come, and
put us out of Jerusalem, our dwelling-place, and destroy our nation.
At which time Caiaphas did arise, showing forth his sentence, which
the whole council did admit.

     "In like wise is showed in the Acts, where, in a council of
bishops and priests assembled to know what punishment should be done
unto Christ's apostles, because they preached in the name of Christ,
contrary to the precept of them, (for they before had commanded the
apostles no more to speak in Christ's name,) there, among a shrewd
multitude of them gathered together, did arise a certain man,called
Gamaliel; (a pitiful thing verily, to see but one good man in such a
great convocation or council of priests, that should he the lights of
virtue to all the people;) which Gamaliel was a doctor of the law,
and had in good reputation among the people:  much like he was, as
seemed to me, to Dr. Colet, sometime dean of Paul's in London, while
he lived. I may come no nearer, to name some other of our time, lest
I should be thought offensive. This Gamaliel did bid the apostles go
aside for a while out of the council, or convocation-house; and so he
spake unto the other priests or bishops in the council thus:  You men
of Israel, quoth he, take heed to yourselves what ye shall do unto
these men the apostles:  for afore this time hath risen one called
Theudas, and afterwards another named Judas of Galilee, which have
turned the people after them, and in conclusion they perished, and
all they that followed after them vanished away. And now, quoth he, I
say unto you, refrain from hurting these men the apostles, and let
them alone, or suffer them. For if this enterprise and work that they
have made be of men, undoubtedly it shall perish, and be fore-done: 
but if, quoth he, it be of God, you cannot foredo it. And this I tell
you, said Gamaliel, lest you should be found to strive and fight
against God.

     "Unto this sentence of Gamaliel, did all the others of the
convocation or parliament agree; and so they called in the apostles
of Christ before them, causing them to be scourged, and charging
them, no more afterwards to preach of Christ's name; and so did let
them depart. This was undoubtedly done in the time of our Saviour and
of his apostles, and caused to be written for our comfort and
learning; for the Holy Ghost knew before, that like practice should
come in the latter time of the world, which we are in. Whereby you
may clearly see, that councils do not always discern with Christ, but
sometimes they may do against him. And therefore said David, I did
not sit with the assembly or council of vain doers, or liars, and I
will not go in amongst them that work iniquity:  for I have hated the
convocation of them that are malicious or maligners, and amongst the
wicked will not I sit:  but I will wash my hands among innocents, &c.
Also in another psalm he writeth thus; The Lord doth destroy or
annihilate the counsels of the Gentiles; he reproveth the counsels of
the people and of rulers. But the counsel or device of the Lord
endureth ever; and the purpose of his mind abideth unto the world of
worlds. For that purpose doth St. Peter, in the Acts of the Apostles,
allege this verse out of the psalm, Why did the Gentiles rage, and
the people imagine vain things, &c. Like unto this it is written, in
Isaiah i. Also you may see in the councils of the Pharisees above
showed, that one singular person may sometimes perceive a thing more
than a generality or a multitude:  for Gamaliel only did see better
what was behoveable, than could all the others there congregated.

     "Agreeable unto this we find in the Decrees, where it is
written that the council of Nice, willing to correct or amend the
life of men of the church, ordained laws, called canons or rules. And
as they treated upon such ordinances, some thought it expedient to
bring in a law that bishops, priests, deacons, and subdeacons, should
not lie with their wives whom they had married before they were
consecrated into the order. With that arose Paphnutius, a confessor
of Christ, and gainsayed it, testifying that marriage was an
honourable thing; saying also, that it is chastity for a man to lie
with his own proper wife. And so he persuaded the council, that they
should constitute no such law; affirming, that it was a sore matter
that they were minded to do, which should be either to the priests,
or else to their wives, an occasion of fornication:  and this was
Paphnutius's reason. The words of the canon proceed thus:  'This
declared Paphnutius, he never being married, nor having experience of
marriage; and the council commended his sentence, making no statute
in this matter, but put it to every man's free-will and liberty,
without any enforcement or necessity.' These words stand, as I have
recited them unto you, written in the Decrees, albeit they are
somewhat otherwise rehearsed in Historia Tripartita, as I have showed
before in the fourth article. Upon this, that Paphnutius did thus
resist and prevail against all the other council, doth the Gloss note
in the same law, that one singular person may gainsay or speak
against a universal generality, having a reasonable cause on his
side. Suffrage also of the same have we in Abbot Panormitane, where
he saith thus:  'I would,' quoth he, 'rather believe one lay person,
bringing for him authority of Scripture, than a universal council,
that ordaineth or defineth a thing without Scripture.'

     "Finally, I say, that I never accounted them either saints or
devils, but resigned the judgment thereof to God; neither have I in
earnest reported them the one, or the other; neither have done unto
them particular worship, so far forth as I can remember.

     "In the thirty-sixth article, where you do ask, whether I
believe, hold, and affirm that every general council, and the council
of Constance also, do represent the universal congregation or church: 
I say, that what such councils do represent I cannot certainly tell,
and therefore believe neither yea nor nay; neither can I therefore
make any affirmation, pro or contra, with this demand or against it: 
and no marvel; for I know of no Scripture to certify me of the same,
nor yet any sufficient reason. And methinketh this, (under correction
I speak,) that councils might represent (albeit I know not whether
they do or no) the universal church, not being yet the same as I wot
well they neither are nor were. For the church I do take to be all
those that God hath chosen or predestinated to be inheritors of
eternal bliss and salvation, whether they be temporal or spiritual,
king or subject, bishop or deacon, father or child, Grecian or Roman.
And this church spreadeth through the universal world, where any do
call for help truly upon the name of Christ; and there do they ever
most grow and assemble commonly, where his blessed word is purely and
openly preached and declared:  for that is the relief of man's soul,
whereunto all men, loving their soul's health, lust to resort and
seek (as all things do naturally seek after that which should nourish
and prolong their life); for in it is showed that righteousness,
which whosoever doth thirst after, and is an hungered for, shall come
into the kingdom of heaven. Of this the proverb in the Gospel
(although it be applied to the judgment of God when he shall appear
in the general doom) may well be verified, Wheresoever is a dead
carrion, thither will soon be assembled eagles. That is to wit,
wheresoever is declared, by the course of Scripture, the benefits and
commodities granted to us by Christ's death, thither will men seek
and fly, to know how they may enjoy and attain them; which I beseech
him to grant us. Amen.

     "In the thirty-seventh article, where you do ask, whether I
believe that the same thing which the council of Constance,
representing the universal church, hath approved, and doth approve,
for the maintenance of faith and soul's health, is to be approved and
holden of all Christian people; and that which the same council hath
condemned, and doth condemn, to be contrary to faith and good
manners, ought of the same Christian people to be believed and
affirmed for a thing condemned:  I say that whatsoever the same
council or any other hath approved, being approbation or allowance
worthy, is of all Christian people to be likewise approved, holden,
and allowed. And again, whatsoever the same or any other hath
condemned, being reproof and condemnation worthy, because it is
hurtful to faith or good living, I say that the same ought of all
Christian people to be condemned and reproved. But this surmounteth
my knowledge, to discern in what wise their judgment passed; whether
with right or unright; because I did never look upon their acts,
neither do I greatly covet for to do wherefore I refer the
determination to them that have better advised their doings, and
thereby have some more skill in them than I.

     "In the thirty-eighth you demand, whether the condemnations of
John Wickliff, John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, done upon their
persons, books, and documents, by the holy general council of
Constance, were duly and rightfully done, and so for such, of every
catholic person, whether they are to be holden and surely to be
affirmed:  I answer, that it passeth my knowledge, and I cannot tell;
thinking surely, that though I am ignorant of the same, so that I
cannot discuss the thing determinately, yet my Christendom shall be
therefore nevertheless; and that I and all Christian men may well
suspend our sentence, being thereof ignorant, affirming neither the
one nor the other, neither yea nor nay.

     "In the thirty-ninth you ask, whether I believe, hold, and
affirm, that John Wickliff of England, John Huss of Bohemia, and
Jerome of Prague, were heretics, and for heretics to be named, and
their books and doctrines to have been, and now be, perverse; for the
which books, and pertinacity of their persons, they are condemned by
the holy council of Constance for heretics:  I say that I know not
determinately whether they be heretics or no, nor whether their books
be erroneous or no, nor whether they ought to be called heretics or
no.

     "In the fortieth article, where you ask whether I believe and
affirm, that it is not lawful in any case to swear:  I say, that I
neither so do believe, nor affirm, nor ever did.

     "In the forty-first, where you ask, whether I believe that it
is lawful, at the commandment of a judge, to make an oath to say the
truth, or any other oath in a case convenient, and that also for
purgation of infamy:  I answer, that I never said the contrary, but
that I think and have thought it lawful to give an oath before a
judge, to say the truth, if the judge so require, and that by request
lawful and convenient. As when a thing is in controversy betwixt two
persons, and thereupon they sue unto a judge for sentence; when the
judge can none otherwise bolt out the truth, he may require an oath.
As when the two women who contended before Solomon to avoid the crime
of murder, which the one had committed in oppressing her child to
death, and would have put the same upon the other, if Solomon could
not by his wisdom otherwise have investigated the truth, he might, I
suppose, for to come by the more certain information of the thing,
have caused one of them, or both, seeing it expedient for him, to
swear; wherein the woman had been bound to obey him; but judges had
need to be spare in requiring of oaths; for in customable, or oft
juries, creepeth in always, betwixt times, some perjury, as showeth
Chrysostom in words semblable to these:  and things precious, through
oft haunt or occupying, lose their estimation; and so reverent oaths,
unadvisedly required for every trifle, usually do cause men to regard
little for making of them, yea, and I fear, to break them.

     "Therefore in Almain, they have made of late (as I have heard
say by credible persons, who have come from thence) many notable
ordinances for the commonwealth within a while, and amongst others
this is one:  If a man be set for to enter plea against another in any
town, the peers thereof before whom all actions are used to be
debated, hearing such a plea entered, shall call the parties
privately together, before they come into an open court. And the
matter examined, they shall exhort them to let the plea cease without
further process, showing them the great damage, both godly and
worldly, coming of waging the law, and the great ease and commodity
that is in agreement and concord.:  which exhortation they use to show
with so great gravity and fatherly love, (such wonders are wrought
where the gospel hath free passage,) that very few will commence
plea. And though any plea be commenced, through such sage admonition
it falleth lightly to sequestration and arbitrement of neighbours,
who do set the suitors at unity, ere the matter do come to discussion
in open court.

     "Notwithstanding, if some be so waywardly minded, (as in a
multitude all are not one man's children, and therefore unlike of
intent,) that they will needs proceed and follow the law, they shall
be heard to speak their matters in open court, and taught how the
matter is most like to succeed, and counselled with new exhortation
to stop their process. If they will not be persuaded, and then the
judges, seeing the matter so ambiguous that they cannot give perfect
sentence therein, except, by virtue of an oath made by one of the
parties, they be first better certified; then will they show the same
before the suitors, declaring what a chargeful thing it is to give a
solemn oath for love of winning some worldly profit:  and how, unless
such as shall make it be the better aware to eschew the same, they
shall, beside an evil example given to a multitude, work themselves,
haply, shame, or dishonesty.

     "Upon this, they shall give respite until a certain day
appointed; so that in the mean while the suitors may take
deliberation thereof, what is best to be done. If after this they
will not thus rest, at the day appointed shall they come forth into a
common place, and the great bell of the city he caused to be rung,
whereby the people shall be warned, what they are about to do:  and
the people assembled, the judges shall, in full chargeable and
lamentable wise, charge the parties, under virtue of their oath, to
make true relation of what shall be demanded. So that by reason of
soberly and fatherly exhortations made by the judges or peers of the
town, and persuasion of neighbours, and for avoiding of God's
displeasure and shame of men, there is little suit in courts; and if
at any time any be made, they be lightly stopped; so that jury and
swearing be well excluded, and need not much to be required.

     "This I have showed, because it pitieth me to hear and see the
contrary used in some of our nation, and such also as name themselves
spiritual men, and should be head ministers of the church; who,
incontinent as any man cometh before them, anon they call for a book,
and do move him to swear, without any longer respite; yea, and they
will charge him by virtue of the contents in the Evangely, to make
true relation of all that shall demand him, he not knowing what they
will demand, neither whether it be lawful to show them the truth of
their demands, or no:  for such things there be that are not lawful to
be showed. As if I were accused of fornication, and none could be
found in me; or if they should require me to swear to bewray any
other that I have known to offend in that vice, I suppose it were
expedient to hold me still, and not to follow their will:  for it
should be contrary to charity, if I should so assent to bewray them
that I need not, and to whom, perhaps, though I have known them to
offend, yet, trusting to their amendment, I have promised before to
keep their fault secret without any disclosing of the same. Yea,
moreover, if such judges sometimes, not knowing by any due proof that
such as have to do before them are culpable, will enforce them, by an
oath, to detect themselves, in opening before them their hearts; in
this so doing, I cannot see that men need to condescend to their
requests. For it is in the law (but I wot not certainly the place)
thus:  'No man is bound to bewray himself.' Also in another place of
the law it is written, 'No man should suffer punishment of men for
his thought.' To this agreeth the common proverb, that is thus
'Thoughts be free, and need to pay no toll.' So that, to conclude, I
think it lawful, at the command-merit of a judge, to make an oath to
say the truth, especially if a judge requireth an oath duly, and in
lawful wise; or to make an oath in any other case convenient; and
that also for purgation of infamy, when any infamy is lawfully laid
against a man.

     "In the forty-second, where you ask, whether a Christian
person, despising the receipt of the sacraments of confirmation,
extreme unction, or solemnizing of matrimony, doth sin deadly; I say
the like of the receipt of them, as I have said before of the self-
same things, and none otherwise.

     "In the forty-third, where you ask, whether I believe that St.
Peter was Christ's vicar, having power on earth to bind and loose:  I 
say, that I do not perceive clearly what you mean by this term vicar;
for Christ never called Peter nor any other so, in Scripture. If you
mean thereby that, after the departing hence of Christ, when he was
risen from death in his immortal body, and so hied into heaven, where
he remaineth sitting upon the right hand of his Father, that he so
being away from hence, St. Peter occupied his room:  then, I say, it
is not untrue that Peter, in a manner, (which I shall show
hereunder,) was his vicar:  and like as Peter was his vicar, even so
were Paul and the other apostles, and the one no less than the
others, if it be true that St. Cyprian doth write, which is also
consenting to Scripture. He saith thus:  that Christ spake unto Peter,
saying; I say, quoth our Saviour, that thou art Peter, and upon this
rock of stone shall I build my congregation, and the gates of hell
shall not overcome it. To thee will I give the keys of heaven, and
what things thou shalt bind upon earth, the same shall be bound also
in heaven:  and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be
loosed also in heaven. And to him, after his resurrection, doth
Christ say, Feed my sheep.

     "And albeit that he gave equal power unto all his apostles
after his resurrection, and saith, Like as my Father sent me, do I
also send you. Take you the Holy Ghost. If you shall retain to any
man his sins, they shall be retained. If you shall remit to any man
his sins, to him they shall be remitted. Nevertheless, because he
would declare unity, he ordained, by his authority, the original of
the same unity beginning of one. The other apostles were the same
that Peter was, endued with equal partaking both of honour, and
authority or power; but the beginning cometh of one, that the
congregation should be showed to be one. Those are the words of St.
Cyprian, in a treatise that is called, De Simplicitate Prælatorum;
wherein you may see that Christ made all the apostles of equal honour
and like authority. Notwithstanding, because he would testify the
unity of his church or congregation, he spake, as it were, only unto
Peter, when he said, Feed my sheep; and, I shall give thee, Peter,
the keys of heaven. But in so saying, though the words seem spoken to
Peter only, yet they were spoken unto him, in that he sustained the
general person of all the church, being, as it were, a common speaker
for the same. So that in speaking to him, Christ spake unto all other
the apostles, unto whom also he gave all the same authority that he
gave unto Peter; as you may see both in these words of Cyprian, and
also the same is clearly showed out of St. Augustine in divers
places; but no where more plainly in a few words, than in a treatise
called De Agone Christiano.

     "To this accordeth well that which was written by Paul. Of
those apostles, quoth Paul, which seemed to be of authority, I was
not taught; (what they were in time past it skilleth me nothing; God
regardeth not the exterior appearance of man;) nevertheless, they
which appeared to be of price, showed me no learning, nor gave me any
counsel. But contrary, when they had seen that the gospel of
uncircumcision was committed unto me, like as the evangely of
circumcision was unto Peter, (for He that was mighty in Peter
concerning the apostleship toward the Jews, was mighty also in me
toward the Gentiles,) therefore, when James, Peter, and John, which
appeared to be as pillars, knew the grace given me, they gave unto me
and Barnabas their right hands in sign of fellowship, to be their
partners, so that we should exercise the office of apostles among the
Gentiles, as they did among the Jews. Wherein you may clearly see,
that Paul took no instruction of those who seemed to be in high
authority, and that Peter, James, and John, who were noted
principals, took Paul and Barnabas to be their mates and fellows;
which they would not have done, as I suppose, if they had known that
God had granted unto them a prerogative singular, to excel Paul, and
to be his sovereign. But, according to the prerogative of God
granted, they might have safely showed it, and enjoyed the same; like
as they did rejoice in other benefits granted to them of God, to be
ministers in his church for the edifying of the same; and as St. John
calleth himself the disciple loved of his master Jesus, and
testifieth, how that unto him, Christ, hanging upon the cross, did
commit his blessed mother.

     "Moreover, if these three apostles, James, Peter, and John,
should by humility have left out to make mention of their
prerogative, when they took Paul and Barnabas into their fellowship,
yet it is to be thought that Paul, who never useth any inordinate
arrogancy, writing the words above said for the magnifying of his own
privilege and authority given him of God, would not have suppressed
and passed over their primacy unspoken of, with whom he maketh here
comparison:  for then it might be thought he were envious, to pick
away authority from others to himself unlawful; which cannot so be.
Moreover he saith a little after the words before rehearsed, that he
reproved St. Peter, even before his face. Whereupon St. Jerome,
expounding the same Epistle, saith, (as I remember,) that Paul would
not have been bold so to do, except he had known himself equal to
Peter.

     "In the words also of Paul above written this might be noted,
as serving to my purpose, that Peter had no pre-eminence or primacy
above the others, for James is named before him; which Paul would not
have done, I think, knowing Peter to be James's superior. Therefore
he, making no such variety in order, put James before, saying, And
James, Peter, and John, that appeared the principals, quoth he, gave
unto me, and to Barnabas, their right hands in sign of fellowship.
Yet, notwithstanding, Paul loved good order, I suppose, as well as
any that now are, who contend so sore for superior rooms and pre-
eminency, claiming to be the apostles' successors. I would it were so
much for the commonwealth of Christian people, as it is suspected
that they do it for vain-glory and worldly lucre. According to this
you shall find in Acts xi., where is showed that after Peter, by
instinct of the Holy Ghost, had gone unto one of the Gentiles, called
Cornelius, a petty captain, having the governance of a hundred men,
teaching him the ways and doctrine of Christ, and baptizing him and
others with him assembled, being, like as he before was, pagans; the
apostles, and other Christian brethren that were in Jewry, hearing
thereof, when Peter came to Jerusalem, they which held upon
circumcision made none obeisance unto him, (albeit I think verily he
had more holiness than ever had any pope,) as the emperor is fain to
do to the pope at his coronation, falling down to kiss the pope's
feet, or to hold the pope's stirrup while he mounteth upon his
horse's back; according to the form of law written, I am not certain,
whether in the Decrees, or else the Decretals, or in both rather,
(for such ordinances are inviolable, and worthy to be principally
recorded,) but they reasoned sore, and disputed both against St.
Peter, and also his doings, saying, You have gone amongst them that
you ought not have had to do with, nor to have meddled among them
that are men unclean, because they are uncircumcised; yea, and what
is more, you have eaten and drunk with them. Peter, mildly and
coldly, made answer again, rehearsing all the manner of his doing in
order, showing that he was so instructed to do, by mighty and clear
revelations of God, and not by his own fantasy and pleasure. Which
answer being heard, the others that before had made sore objections
against him, (which were both of the apostles, and other Christian
brethren,) were content, holding their peace without any more
complaining, and gave glory therefore to God, saying, Then God hath
granted also unto the Gentiles to take repentance, and so to come to
eternal life.

     Wherein you may see, that the other apostles were as bold with
Peter, as before is showed of Paul, to dispute against him; neither
were they therefore by Peter reproved of inobedience. He did not
allege any pre-eminency or authority to rebuke them for their
complaining:  as one would say, Why should you that are my sheep
control me, that am the head of the church and your pastor, or
Christ's general vicar, having both jurisdiction temporal and
spiritual? with such other like:  but showed them it was the will of
God that he had done, going to the Gentiles to tell them of eternal
life, which God pleased to give to them, as well as to the Jews; in
token whereof the Holy Ghost did sensibly come among them, and so
were they baptized.

     "Thus may you see, that if Peter were the vicar of Christ, even
so likewise were Paul and all the other apostles. And I do not think
contrary but that Peter, and all other of the apostles, were Christ's
vicars, if you mean by this word 'vicar,' a deputy, or such like, for
to preach his evangely, (which is an office of all others most
sovereign,) to minister sacraments, and to do other such divine
service in God's church. And thus were they worthy to be called (as
the Scripture nameth them) Christ's true apostles, bishops, priests,
legates, or any such like; which authority was given them by Christ
after his resurrection, when he said unto them these words, Peace be
amongst you. Like as my Father hath sent me, so do I send you. Take
you the Holy Ghost:  whose sins soever you shall forgive, are forgiven
them:  and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained. And the
same authority did they receive, when Christ spake unto all the
church, after the mind of St. Augustine and others, in Peter, saying,
Peter, feed my sheep.

     "In the forty-fourth article, where you ask, whether I believe,
that the pope ordinately chosen for a time (his proper name being
expressed) be the successor of Peter:  I say, that it seemeth to me a
thing of no great value, whether a man believe so or no; I cannot see
that it should be numbered amongst the articles of our faith: 
notwithstanding I will show my rude thought in it, which is this: 

     "The pope may succeed in St. Peter's stead or office, and do
the same, duly and diligently feeding Christ's flock, and showing
virtuous example of living to the same:  and, so doing, he may and
ought to be thought and named a true successor of St. Peter. And thus
is your Lordship St. Peter's successor, performing the conditions
aforesaid, with other like properties requisite to your order and
duty; yea, and as many others as do truly their duty, and duly the
office of a bishop:  and otherwise may not the pope be called the
successor of Peter, because he is entered into St. Peter's office,
not regarding to do what is requisite for the same, nor following the
trace of virtue; but the contrary. And then he is wrongfully named,
if at any time such be, which is not impossible. For what should men
call those Peter's successors, that play the pageants, and follow
with the conditions of Caiaphas, Simon Magus, or Judas? Such verily,
if any be, cannot rightly claim to be Peter's successors, no more
than the night may claim to be successor of the day; for Peter was
never so minded, nor taught them so. Yea, they ought rather to be
called Peter's adversaries, forasmuch as they do not his will which
is showed by his own acts and writing, but work against the same. Of
such may be said, 'They are not all saints' children that occupy the
room of saints, but they are their children that exercise their
works.' Yea, of such may be said that which is written of St. Jerome: 
'All bishops,' quoth he, 'are not bishops. Mark you well Peter, but
mark also Judas:  behold Stephen, but behold Nicholas. Ecclesiastical
dignity maketh not a Christian man. Cornelius the centurion, being
yet a pagan, was made clean through the benefit of the Holy Ghost: 
contrariwise, Daniel, being a child, condemneth priests, or ancient
men.' 'It is no easy thing,' saith he, 'to stand in the room of Peter
and Paul, and to keep the seat of them now reigning with Christ:  for
unsavoury salt is nought worth else, but to be thrown out of the
doors, and trodden down of hogs.' This saith St. Jerome. Whereunto
agreeth well St. Augustine:  'Every one,' quoth he, 'that saith unto
you, Pax vobis, ought not to be heard, or to be believed as a dove.
Crows be fed of dead carrion; and so is not a dove, but she liveth by
the fruits of the earth:  her living is pure, innocent, and hurtless.
Whereby you may see, that ill bishops are no bishops, and that they
that follow not saints in virtuous living, are not the successors of
saints, but unsavoury salt; that is, neither of the church, nor shall
come into heaven, to reign there with Peter and Paul, but be thrown
out with great contempt:  for God knoweth a dove from a crow, and an
innocent liver from a devourer of carrion; but such as declare and
show good deeds, as the saints did, be their children and successors,
and shall with them reign in heaven.

     "So that, to conclude, I say, that the pope, ordinately chosen,
is the successor of St. Peter, following St. Peter's godly living.
And else, except he study to do diligently, that he may be so called
worthily, it shall be but a vain name:  for rather may he else be
reputed an image of a pope, or of a bishop, according as such be
called of the prophet, O idol shepherds!

     "In the five and fortieth article, where you ask, whether ever
I have promised at any time by my oath, or made any confederacy or
league with any person or persons, that I would alway hold and defend
certain conclusions or articles seeming to me and to my complices
right and consonant unto the faith; and will that I should certify
you of the course and form of the said opinions and conclusions by
row, and of the names and surnames of them that were to me adherent,
and promised to be adherent in this behalf:  I say, that I do not
remember that ever I made pact or confederacy with any person or
persons, nor made any promise by oath, that I would always hold and
defend any conclusions or articles, seeming to me and others right
and consonant to the faith, unless it hath chanced me to say in this
form:  That I would never, with the aid of God, forsake, nor decline
from, the truth, neither for fear, nor yet for love of man or men.'

     "Thus I have, perhaps, said in some time, or some place,
because I have indeed so intended, and do intend, God's grace
assisting me. But I cannot yet tell you, whether I have so said or
no, or to what persons, or at what time, either in what place;
neither do I reckon me to have any complices, but such as do love me,
and I them, for God, and in God:  and those do I reckon all them that
are or will be truly Christian, in calling upon Christ's name. And
concerning opinions or conclusions, I can tell you of none others
than I have showed; the sum whereof I reckon and think utterly to be
concluded in two propositions, which both are written in the New
Testament.

     "The first is in the Acts of Apostles, in this wise:  Christ is
the head corner-stone of our faith, whereupon it should be set and
grounded, neither is salvation in any other:  for there is none other
name under heaven given amongst men, wherein we may be saved. This is
one of the propositions, wherein is engrossed or comprehended my
saying, which St. Paul doth thus otherwise explicate; Christ is made
of God our wisdom, our righteousness, our pureness, our satisfaction,
and our redemption. And in another place:  There is none other
foundation that any man may put, except that which is already put,
that is, Christ Jesus.

     "The other proposition is written by the prophet Isaiah, and
recited by our Saviour, in the Evangely of Matthew, in these words: 
Men do worship me in vain, teaching doctrines and precepts, or laws
human. Of this writeth Paul very largely in divers places, and every
where well nigh:  amongst others, in the second chapter of Colossians,
where he warneth the Colossians to take heed that no man do spoil
them, or to steal them away by philosophy or vain deception,
according to the constitutions of men, and ordinances of this world.

     "Thus I do certify you of all the opinions and conclusions
which I intend or have intended to sustain, being contained in the
two propositions above written. Others hold I none, but such as are
mentioned in the Creed, both that which is sung at mass, and also in
the other Creed that all people say every day.

     "Finally, in that you require to know of the names and
surnames, in order of them particularly, that be to me adherents, or
that have promised me to be adherent in this part:  I say, that I know
of none particular that I remember, without I should note unto you a
great multitude, which you may know and hear of, I suppose, through
all regions and realms of Christendom, that do think in like wise as
I have showed. I ween the multitude mounteth nigh unto the one half
of Christendom; and more should do likewise, by a great sort, within
a while, I doubt not, but that our ghostly enemy laboureth amain to
have the knowledge of the truth suppressed, and letteth that it
cannot come abroad to be seen. I say therefore again, I know of no
particular adherents, nor of any that have so promised me to be. in
these matters:  and though I did, I would not (except I knew that
charity so required, which I do not find yet hitherto) detect or
bewray any one of them, for any man's pleasure:  for I am bound to
obey God above men:  who be with us, and grant the truth to be known!
Amen."

     These answers of John Lambert to the five and forty articles
above expressed, were directed and delivered to Dr. Warham,
archbishop of Canterbury, as it appeareth, about A.D. 1532, at which
time the said Lambert was in custody in the archbishop's house at
Otford, being there destitute of all help and furniture of books, as
by his own words is to be gathered. But, so the providence of God
wrought for Lambert, that within short space after, A.D. 1533, the
said Archbishop Warham died; whereby it seemeth that Lambert, for
that time, was delivered. In this mean while Dr. Cranmer was sent
over in embassage, with the earl of Wiltshire, Dr. Stokesley, Dr.
Kern, Dr. Benet, and other learned men, to the bishop of Rome lying
then at Bologna, to dispute the matter of the king's marriage openly,
first in the court of Rome, then in the court of the emperor; where,
after sundry promises, and appointments made, yet, when the time
came, no man there appeared to dispute with them, in these two
propositions:  first, that no man, jure Divine, could or ought to
marry his brother's wife:  secondly, that the bishop of Rome by no
means ought to dispense to the contrary. But of this more copiously
we will treat, (the Lord's grace permitting,) in the sequel of our
story, coming to Dr. Cranmer's life.

     After the death of William Warham, succeeded in that see the
said Dr. Cranmer. Lambert, in the mean season, being delivered,
partly by the death of this archbishop, partly by the coming in of
Queen Anne, returned unto London, and there exercised himself about
the Stocks, in teaching children both in the Greek and Latin tongue.
And forasmuch as priests, in those days, could not be permitted to
have wives, he left his priesthood, and applied himself to the
function of teaching, intending shortly after also to be free of the
Grocers, and to be married. But God, who disposeth all men's purposes
after the secret pleasure of his own will, did both intercept his
marriage, and also his freedom, and married him to his Son Christ
Jesus, (as now consequently followeth to be declared,) bringing him
into the freedom of his spiritual kingdom, to reign with him.

     And thus much, briefly, touching the first education and
bringing up of John Lambert; hereafter it followeth more at large to
discourse and declare the whole process and order of his doings and
disputations, with the order and manner of his death and
condemnation. This death and punishment of his happened in this year;
being so much the more lamentable, in that it was first occasioned,
and afterwards brought to pass, by no others than by such, whom, for
the common society of the profession of the gospel, it had been more
meet to have been authors of his safeguard, rather than the causers
of his destruction. But this is the accustomed craft and malice of
that ancient serpent, which intermeddleth himself in all
congregations, envying all men's felicity and welfare, rejoicing in
nothing but in the death and blood of innocents; seeking occasions of
sedition, not only amongst the wicked, but the good also; stirring
brethren oftentimes to contention amongst themselves; and that so
craftily, that his policies can never be perceived until the mischief
be done. I would to God that as this is a common complaint to all
countries, so this our region of England, amongst others, were free
from it, and not more infected herewith than the rest. Where now, in
a manner, shall a man find more slaughter of the commons, subversion
of the nobles, burning of good men, and most cruel contentions, which
are never, in a manner, ended but with bloodshed? that mischievous
disturber of human concord and quietness doth so incessantly rage!

     But as I am here forced to speak against my will, so would to
God that, even with my own contumely and hatred, I might engrave more
meekness in the hearts of our men; which, notwithstanding, I doubt
not but will shortly come to pass, by the most prosperous success of
learning, which daily flourisheth more and more in England:  and as it
is to be hoped, foreign examples, and greater experience of things,
will bring a more civility to this, which is already obtained by
learning. But, because we will not pass our bounds too far, we will
return again to the matter as touching John Lambert, intending to
make declaration of his cause even from the first beginning, so far
forth as we could attain unto the knowledge thereof.

     So soon as the dark clouds of ignorance were driven away, and
that the brightness of the gospel began to shine in England, there
was at the same time, although not of the number of those who
sustained the first assaults of the adversaries, the aforenamed John
Lambert; who, partly for the cruelty of the time, and partly for the
desire of learning, which he was always inclined unto, departed into
foreign lands, being but a young man, where he understood that
learning did most flourish. From thence, after a few years, he
returned again, hoping that the time had been amended, for that, by
the means of Queen Anne and Cromwell, and the abolishing of the pope,
all things seemed more prosperous and quiet in England; and began to
set his mind to the setting forth of the gospel.

     Thus then, after that John Lambert now had continued in this
vocation of teaching, with great commendation, and no less commodity
to the youth, it happened this present year (1538) he was present at
a sermon in St. Peter's church at London. He that preached was named
Dr. Taylor, a man in those days not far disagreeing from the gospel,
and who afterwards, in the time of King Edward, was made bishop of
Lincoln, and, at last, in the time of Queen Mary, was deprived from
the same; and so ended his life among the confessors of Jesus Christ.

     When the sermon was done, Lambert, having gotten opportunity,
went gently unto the preacher to talk with him, and uttered divers
arguments wherein he desired to be satisfied. All the whole matter or
controversy was concerning the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. Taylor, excusing himself at that present for other business,
willed him to write his mind, and to come again at more leisure.
Lambert was contented, and so departed; who, within a while after,
when he had written his mind, came again unto him. The sum of his
arguments were ten, which he comprehended in writing, proving the
truth of the cause, partly by the Scriptures, and partly by good
reason and by the doctors:  the which arguments, although they came
not all unto our hands, yet such men as were present at those
affairs, reported them to be of great force and authority; and of a
few, which were borne away in memory, the first reason was this,
gathered upon Christ's words, where it is said in the Gospel, This
cup is the new testament.

     "And if," saith he, "these words do not change either the cup,
or the wine, corporally into the new testament, by like reason it is
not agreeable that the words spoken of the bread, should turn the
bread corporally into the body of Christ."

     Another reason was this:  "That it is not agreeable to a natural
body to be in two places or more at one time:  wherefore it must
follow of necessity, that either Christ had not a natural body, or
else, truly, according to the common nature of a body, it cannot be
present in two places at once, and much less in many, that is to say,
in heaven and in earth; on the right hand of his Father, and in the
sacrament.

     "Moreover, a natural body cannot be without its form and shape,
conditions and accidents; like as the accidents and conditions also
cannot be without their subject or substance. Then, forasmuch as in
the sacrament there is no quality, quantity, or condition of the body
of Christ, and finally no appearance at all of flesh; who doth not
plainly perceive, that there is no transubstantiated body of his in
the sacrament? And, to reason by the contrary, all the proper
conditions, signs, and accidents, whatsoever they be, pertaining to
bread, we do see to be present in the sacrament, which cannot be
there without the subject; therefore we must of necessity confess the
bread to be there."

     He added also many other allegations out of the doctors. But to
be short, this Taylor the preacher, whom I spake of before, willing
and desiring, as is supposed, of a good mind to satisfy Lambert in
this matter, amongst others whom he took to counsel, he also
conferred with Dr. Barnes; which Barnes, although he did otherwise
favour the gospel, and was an earnest preacher, notwithstanding
seemed not greatly to favour this cause; fearing, peradventure, that
it would breed among the people some let or hinderance to the
preaching of the gospel, (which was now in a good forwardness,) if
such sacramentaries should be suffered. He persuaded Taylor, by and
by, to put up the matter to Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury.
And hereby we may see it truly verified, which William Tyndale
before, writing to John Frith, did note in Dr. Barnes, saying, "That
Dr. Barnes will be hot against you," &c.

     Upon these originals Lambert's quarrel first began, and was
brought unto this point, that, through the sinister doings of many,
it began of a private talk to be a public and common matter:  for he
was sent for by the archbishop, and brought into the open court, and
forced to defend his cause openly. For the archbishop had not yet
favoured the doctrine of the sacrament, whereof afterwards be was an
earnest professor. In that disputation, it is said that Lambert did
appeal from the bishops to the king's Majesty. But howsoever the
matter was, the rumour of that disputation was, by and by, spread
throughout the whole court.

     I told you before, how that King Henry for two years past,
showing the part of a hard husband, had beheaded Queen Anne his wife;
which deed did not only greatly displease the German princes, (who
for that only cause had broken off the league with him, A.D. 1536,)
but also many other good men in England. Moreover, how that, within a
while after, abbeys began to be subverted, and all their goods to be
confiscated and given abroad:  for which causes, but especially for
the late abolishing of the bishop of Rome, the commons had conceived
a very evil opinion of him, insomuch that the seditious sort rebelled
against him.

     At that time Stephen Gardiner, then bishop of Winchester, was
in authority amongst the king's councillors, who, as he was of a
cruel nature, so was he no less of a subtle and crafty wit, ever
gaping for some occasion how to let and hinder the gospel:  albeit a
long time he was not so greatly esteemed with the king, that he could
much prevail to achieve his conceived purpose. But, at length, upon
this matter advising himself, he thought he had apt occasion and
opportunity to accomplish his desire:  neither did he foreslack the
occasion ministered, but went straight unto the king, privily
admonishing him, and with fair flattering words giving him most
pernicious counsel, declaring how great hatred and suspicion was
raised upon him in almost all places; first, for abolishing the
bishop of Rome's authority; then for subversion of the monasteries;
and also for that the divorce of Queen Katharine was yet fresh in
men's minds; and now the time served, if he would take it, easily to
remedy all these matters, and pacify the minds of them that were
displeased and offended with him, if only in this matter of John
Lambert he would manifest unto the people how stoutly he would resist
heretics; and by this new rumour he would bring to pass, not only to
extinguish all other former rumours, and as it were with one nail to
drive out another, but also should discharge himself of all
suspicion, in that he now began to be reported to be a favourer of
new sects and opinions.

     The king, giving ear more willingly than prudently or godlily
to this siren, immediately received the wicked counsel of the bishop,
and by and by sent out a general commission, commanding all the
nobles and bishops of this realm to come with all speed to London, to
assist the king against heretics and heresies, which commission the
king himself would sit in judgment upon.

     These preparations made, a day was set for Lambert, where a
great assembly of the nobles was gathered from all parts of the
realm, not without much wonder and expectation in this so strange a
case. All the seats and places were full of men round about the
scaffold.

     By and by the godly servant of Christ, John Lambert, was
brought from the prison with a guard of armed men, (even as a lamb to
fight with many lions,) and placed right over against where the
king's royal seat was, so that now they tarried but for the king's
coming to that place.

     At last the king himself did come as judge of that great
controversy, with a great guard, clothed all in white, as covering,
by that colour and dissembling, severity of all bloody judgment. On
his right hand sat the bishops, and behind them the famous lawyers,
clothed all in purple, according to the manner. On the left hand sat
the peers of the realm, justices, and other nobles in their order;
behind whom sat the gentlemen of the king's privy chamber. And this
was the manner and form of the judgment, which, albeit it was
terrible enough of itself to abash any innocent, yet the king's look,
his cruel countenance, and his brows bent unto severity, did not a
little augment this terror; plainly declaring a mind full of
indignation far unworthy such a prince, especially in such a matter,
and against so humble and obedient a subject.

     When the king was set in his throne, he beheld Lambert with a
stern countenance; and then, turning himself unto his councillors, he
called forth Dr. Day, bishop of Chichester, commanding him to declare
unto the people the causes of this present assembly and judgment. The
whole effect of his oration tended in a manner to this point: 

     "That the king in this session would have all states, degrees,
bishops, and all others to be admonished, of his will and pleasure,
that no man should conceive any sinister opinion of him, that now,
the authority and name of the bishop of Rome being utterly abolished,
he would also extinguish all religion, or give liberty unto heretics
to perturb and trouble the churches of England, without punishment,
whereof he is the head. And moreover, that they should not think that
they were assembled at that present, to make any disputation upon the
heretical doctrine; but only for this purpose, that by the industry
of him and other bishops, the heresies of this man here present,
(meaning Lambert,) and the heresies of all such like, should be
refuted or openly condemned in the presence of them all."

     When he had made an end of his oration, the king, standing up
upon his feet, leaning upon a cushion of white cloth of tissue,
turning himself toward Lambert with his brows bent, as it were
threatening some grievous thing to him, said these words:  "Ho! good
fellow; what is thy name?" Then the humble lamb of Christ, humbly
kneeling down upon his knee, said, "My name is John Nicholson,
although of many I be called Lambert." "What," said the king, "have
you two names? I would not trust you, having two names, although you
were my brother."

     Lambert. "O most noble prince! your bishops forced me of
necessity to change my name." And after divers prefaces and much talk
had in this manner, the king commanded him to go unto the matter, and
to declare his mind and opinion, what he thought as touching the
sacrament of the altar.

     Then Lambert, beginning to speak for himself, gave God thanks,
who had so inclined the heart of the king, that he himself would not
disdain to hear and understand the controversies of religion:  for
that it happeneth oftentimes, through the cruelty of the bishops,
that many good and innocent men, in many places, are privily murdered
and put to death, without the king's knowledge. But now, forasmuch as
that high and eternal King of kings, in whose hands are the hearts of
all princes, hath inspired and stirred up the king's mind, that he
himself will be present to understand the causes of his subjects,
specially whom God of his divine goodness hath so abundantly endued
with so great gifts of judgment and knowledge, he doth not mistrust
but that God will bring some great thing to pass through him, to the
setting forth of the glory of his name.

     Then the king, with an angry voice, interrupting his oration: 
"I came not hither," said he, "to hear mine own praises thus painted
out in my presence; but briefly go to the matter, without any more
circumstance." Thus he spake in Latin. But Lambert, being abashed at
the king's angry words, contrary to all men's expectation, stayed a
while, considering whither he might turn himself in these great
straits and extremities. But the king, being hasty, with anger and
vehemency said, "Why standest thou still? Answer as touching the
sacrament of the altar, whether dost thou say, that it is the body of
Christ, or wilt deny it?" And with that word the king lifted up his
cap.

     Lambert. "I answer, with St. Augustine, that it is the body of
Christ, after a certain manner." The king. "Answer me neither out of
St. Augustine, nor by the authority of any other; but tell me
plainly, whether thou sayest it is the body of Christ, or no." These
words the king spake again in Latin.

     Lambert. "Then I deny it to be the body of Christ."

     The king. "Mark well! for now thou shalt be condemned even by
Christ's own words, Hoc est corpus meum."

     Then he commanded Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, to
refute his assertion; who, first making a short preface unto the
hearers, began his disputation with Lambert very modestly, saying,
"Brother Lambert! let this matter be handled between us
indifferently, that if I do convince this your argument to be false
by the Scriptures, you will willingly refuse the same; but if you
shall prove it true by the manifest testimonies of the Scripture, I
do promise, I will willingly embrace the same."

     The argument was this, taken out of that place of the Acts of
the Apostles, where Christ appeared unto St. Paul by the way: 
disputing out of that place, that is not disagreeable to the word of
God, that the body of Christ may be in two places at once, which
being in heaven was seen of St. Paul the same time upon earth; and if
it may be in two places, why, by the like reason, may it not be in
many places?

     In this manner the archbishop began to refute the second
argument of Lambert, which, as we have before said, was written and
delivered by the said Lambert unto the.preacher; for the king had
first disputed against his first reason.

     Lambert answered unto this argument, saying, that the minor was
not thereby proved, that Christ's body was dispersed in two places or
more, but remained rather still in one place, as touching the manner
of his body. For the Scripture doth not say that Christ, being upon
earth, did speak unto Paul; but that suddenly a light from heaven did
shine round about him, and he, falling to the ground, heard a voice,
saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest, &c. Here this place doth nothing let, but that
Christ, sitting in heaven, might speak unto Paul, and be heard upon
earth:  for they that were with Paul verily heard the voice, but did
see no body.

     The archbishop, on the contrary part, said, "Paul himself doth
witness that Christ did appear unto him in the same vision."

     But Lambert again said, that Christ did witness in the same
place, that he would again appear unto him, and deliver him out of
the hands of the Gentiles:  notwithstanding, we read in no place that
Christ did corporally appear unto him.

     Thus when they had contended about the conversion of St. Paul,
and Lambert so answering for himself that the king seemed greatly to
be moved therewith, and the bishop himself that disputed to be
entangled, and all the audience amazed, then the bishop of
Winchester, who was appointed the sixth place of the disputation,
fearing lest the argument would be taken out of his mouth, or rather
being drowned with malice against the poor man, without the king's
commandment, observing no order, before the archbishop had made an
end, unshamefacedly kneeling down to take in hand the disputation,
alleged a place out of 1 Corinthians ix., where St. Paul saith, Have
I not seen Jesus? And again in the fifteenth chapter:  He appeared
unto Cephas, and afterwards unto James, then to all the apostles;
but, last of all, he appeared unto me, as one born out of due time.

     Hereunto Lambert answered, he did nothing doubt but that Christ
was seen, and did appear; but he did deny that he was in two or in
divers places, according to the manner of his body.

     Then Winchester again, abusing the authority of Paul, repeated
the place out of 2 Cor. v., And if so be we have known Christ after
the flesh, now, henceforth, know we him so no more, &c.

     Lambert answered, that this knowledge is not to be understood
according to the sense of the body, and that it so appeared
sufficiently by St. Paul, who; speaking of his own revelation, saith
thus I know one, whether in the body, or without the body, God
knoweth, who was rapt into the third heaven; and I know not whether
in the body or without, God knoweth:  whereby, even by the testimony
of St. Paul, a man shall easily gather, that in this revelation he
was taken up in spirit into the heavens, and did see those things;
rather than that Christ came down corporally from heaven, to show
them unto him:  especially for that it was said by the angel, that
even as he ascended into heaven, so he should come again. And St.
Peter saith, whom it behoveth to dwell in the heavens. And moreover,
appointing the measure of time, he addeth, even until all things be
restored, &c. Here again, Lambert, being taunted and rebuked, could
not be suffered to prosecute his purpose.

     After the bishop of Winchester had done, Tonstal, bishop of
Durham, took his course, and after a long preface, wherein he spake
much of God's omnipotency, at the last he came to this point, saying,
that if Christ could perform that which he spake, touching the
converting of his body into bread, without doubt he would speak
nothing but what he would perform.

     Lambert answered, that there was no evident place of Scripture,
wherein Christ doth at any time say, that he would change the bread
into his body:  and moreover that there is no necessity why he should
do so. But this is a figurative speech, every where used in
Scripture, when the name and appellation of the thing signified is
attributed unto the sign; by which figure of speech, circumcision is
called the covenant, the lamb the passover; besides six hundred such
other. Now it remaineth to be marked, whether we shall judge all
these, after the words pronounced, to be straightway changed into
another nature.

     Then again began they to rage afresh against Lambert, so that
if he could not be overcome with arguments, he should be vanquished
with rebukes and taunts. What should he do? He might well hold his
peace like a lamb, but bite or bark again he could not.

     Next orderly stepped forth the valiant champion Stokesley,
bishop of London, who afterwards, lying at the point of death,
rejoiced, boasting that in his lifetime he had burned fifty heretics.
This man, amongst the residue, intending to fight for his belly, with
a long protestation promised to prove, that it was not only a work of
a divine miracle, but also that it did nothing abhor nature. "For it
is nothing dissonant from nature, the substances of like things,"
saith he, "to be oftentimes changed one into another, so that
nevertheless the accidents do remain; albeit the substance itself,
and the matter subject, be changed." Then he declared it by the
example of water boiling so long upon the fire, until all the
substance thereof be evaporated. "Now," saith he, "it is the doctrine
of the philosophers, that a substance cannot be changed but into a
substance:  wherefore we do affirm the substance of the water to pass
into the substance of the air; notwithstanding the quality of the
water, which is moistness, remaineth after the substance is changed;
for the air is moist even as the water is."

     When this argument was heard, the bishops greatly rejoiced, and
suddenly their countenance changed, as it were assuring themselves of
a certain triumph and victory by this philosophical transmutation of
elements, and like as it had been of more force than Chrisippus's
argument, which passed all manner of solution.

     Lambert's answer was long looked for here of all men; who, as
soon as he had obtained silence, and liberty to speak, first of all
denied the bishop's assumpt, that the moisture of the water did
remain after the substance was altered. "For albeit," saith he, "that
we do grant, with the philosophers, the air to be naturally moist;
notwithstanding ithath one proper and a diverse degree of moisture,
and the water another. Wherefore, when the water is converted into
the air, there remaineth moisture, as you do say; but that is not the
moisture of water, but the proper and natural moisture of the air.
Whereupon there is another doctrine amongst the philosophers, as a
perpetual rule, that it can by no means be, that the qualities and
accidents in natural things should remain in their own proper nature,
without their proper subject."

     Then again the king and the bishops raged against Lambert,
insomuch that he was not only forced to silence, buf also might have
been driven into a rage, if his ears had not been acquainted with
such taunts before. After this the other bishops, every one in his
order, as they were appointed, supplied their places of disputation.

     There were appointed ten in number, for the performing of this
tragedy; for his ten arguments, which (as before we have declared)
were delivered unto Taylor the preacher. It were too long in this
place to repeat the reasons and arguments of every bishop; and no
less superfluous were it so to do, especially forasmuch as they were
all but common reasons, and nothing forcible, and such as by the long
use of disputation have been beaten, and had little in them either
worthy the hearer or the reader.

     Lambert, in the mean time, being compassed in with so many and
great perplexities, vexed on the one side with checks and taunts, and
pressed on the other side with the authority and threats of the
personages; and partly being amazed with the majesty of the place in
the presence of the king, and especially being wearied with long
standing, which continued no less than five hours, from twelve of the
clock, until five at night; being brought in despair, that he should
nothing profit in this purpose, and seeing no hope at all in
speaking, was at this point, that he chose rather to hold his peace.
Hereby it came to pass, that those bishops which last of all disputed
with him, spake what they listed without interruption, save only that
Lambert now and then would allege somewhat out of St. Augustine for
the defence of his cause; in which author he seemed to be very prompt
and ready. But, for the most part, (as I said,) being overcome with
weariness and other griefs, he held his peace; defending himself
rather with silence, than with arguments, which, he saw, would
nothing at all prevail.

     At the last, when the day was passed, and that torches began to
be lighted, the king, minding to brake up this pretended disputation,
said unto Lambert in this wise:  "What sagest thou now," said he,
"after all these great labours which thou hast taken upon thee, and
all the reasons and instructions of these learned men? art thou not
yet satisfied? Wilt thou live or die? what sayest thou? thou hast yet
free choice."

     Lambert answered, "I yield and submit myself wholly unto the
will of your Majesty." Then said the king, "Commit thyself unto the
hands of God, and not unto mine."

     Lambert. "I commend my soul unto the hands of God, but my body
I wholly yield and submit unto your clemency." Then said the king,
"If you do commit yourself onto my judgment, you must die, for I will
not be a patron unto heretics." And, by and by, turning himself unto
Cromwell, he said, "Cromwell! read the sentence of condemnation
against him." This Cromwell was at that time the chief friend of the
gospellers. And here it is much to be marvelled at, to see how
unfortunately it came to pass in this matter, that through the
pestiferous and crafty counsel of this one bishop of Winchester,
Satan (which oftentimes doth raise up one brother to the destruction
of another) did here perform the condemnation of this Lambert by no
other ministers than gospellers themselves, Taylor, Barnes, Cranmer,
and Cromwell; who, afterwards, in a manner, all suffered the like for
the gospel's sake; of whom (God willing) we will speak more
hereafter.

     This, undoubtedly, was the malicious and crafty subtlety of the
bishop of Winchester, which desired rather that the sentence might be
read by Cromwell, than by any other; so that if he refused to do it,
he should likewise have incurred the like danger. But, to be short,
Cromwell, at the king's commandment, taking the schedule of
condemnation in hand, read the same; wherein was contained the
burning of heretics, which either spake or wrote any thing, or had
any books by them, repugnant or disagreeing from their papistical
church and tradition touching the sacrament of the altar:  also a
decree that the same should be set upon the church porches, and be
read four times every year in every church throughout the realm,
whereby the worshipping of the bread should be the more firmly fixed
in the hearts of the people. And in this manner was the condemnation
of John Lambert; wherein great pity it was, and much to be lamented,
to see the king's Highness that day so to oppose, and set his power
and strength so fiercely and vehemently, in assisting so many proud
and furious adversaries against that one poor silly soul, to be
devoured, whom his Majesty, with more honour, might rather have aided
and supported, being so on every side oppressed and compassed about
without help or refuge, among so many wolves and vultures; especially
in such a cause, tending to no derogation to him nor his realm,but
rather to the necessary reformation of sincere truth and doctrine
decayed. For therein, especially, consisteth the honour of princes,
to pity the miserable, to relieve the oppressed, to rescue the wrongs
of the poor, and to tender and respect the weaker part, especially
where right and truth stand with him:  which if the king had done that
day, it had been, in my mind, not so much for the comfort of that
poor persecuted creature, as it would have redounded to the immortal
renown of his princely estate to all posterity.

     But how much more commendable for thee, O King Henry! (if that
I may a little talk with thee, wheresoever thou art,) if thou hadst
aided and holpen the poor little sheep, being in so great perils and
dangers, requiring thy aid and help against so many vultures and
leopards; and hadst granted him thy authority, to use the same for
his safeguard, rather than unto the others, to abuse it unto
slaughter. For they, even of themselves, were cruel enough, that thou
shouldst not have needed to have given thy sword of authority unto
those mad-men, whose force and violence if you had that day broken,
believe me! you should have committed a worthy spectacle unto all
men, and have done a most commendable and praiseworthy thing for
yourself. For what hath that poor man Lambert offended against you,
who never so much as once willed you evil, neither could resist
against you!

     But, peradventure, you thought him to be a heretic! At the
least his reasons and allegations should have been moderately heard;
which if they had seemed more sound, you should have given place unto
the truth; if not, notwithstanding, he should have been convinced,
either with the like or more strong arguments, and have been
reclaimed by all manner of means again into the way; for an error is
not overcome with violence, but with truth. Truly it was not meet
that you should have refused him, who so obediently yielded and
submitted himself unto you. But, O King Henry! I know you did not
follow your own nature therein, but the pernicious counsels of the
bishop of Winchester:  notwithstanding, your wisdom should not have
been ignorant of this, (which all other kings also ought to consider,
who, at this present, through the wicked insinuations of the bishops
and cardinals, do so rage against the simple servants of Christ,)
that the time shall once come, when ye shall give account for all the
offences which you have either committed by your own fault, or by the
counsel or advice of others, what shall then happen, if these
miserable heretics, which you here in this world do so afflict and
torment, shall come with Christ, and his apostles and martyrs, to
judge the twelve tribes of Israel, sitting upon their seats? if they,
with like severity, shall execute their power upon you; what then, I
say, shall become of you? With what face will ye behold their
majesty, who here in this world have showed no countenances of pity
upon them? With what heart will ye implore their mercy, who so
unmercifully rejected and cast them off, when they fled unto your
pity and mercy? Wherefore, if that the ears of princes be so prompt
and ready to hearken unto the counsels of others, being void of
counsel themselves, why do they not rather set apart these
flatterers, backbiters, and greedy blood-suckers, and hearken unto
the wholesome counsel of the prophetical king? who, crying out in the
Psalms, sayeth, "Now, ye kings, understand, and ye which judge the
earth, be wise and learned, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in
him with trembling. Embrace his Son, lest that ye err and perish from
the just way; for, when his wrath shall suddenly kindle, blessed are
all they which trust inhim."

     But thus was John Lambert, in this bloody session, by the king
judged and condemned to death; whose judgment now remaineth with the
Lord against that day, when before the tribunal seat of that great
Judge both princes and subjects shall stand and appear, not to judge,
but to be judged, according as they have done and deserved.

     And thus much, hitherto, of Lambert's articles, answers,
disputations, and his condemnation also. Now to proceed further to
the story of his death.
Ilustration:  Lambert burned at the stake

     Upon the day that was appointed for this holy martyr of God to
suffer, he was brought out of the prison at eight o'clock in the
morning unto the house of the Lord Cromwell, and so carried into his
inward chamber, where, it is reported of many, that Cromwell desired
of him forgiveness for what he had done. There, at the last, Lambert,
being admonished that the hour of his death was at hand, was greatly
comforted and cheered; and, being brought out of the chamber into the
hall, he saluted the gentlemen, and sat down to breakfast with them,
showing no manner of sadness or fear. When the breakfast was ended,
he was carried straightway to the place of execution, where he should
offer himself unto the Lord, a sacrifice of sweet savour, who is
blessed in his saints, for ever and ever. Amen.

     As touching the terrible manner and fashion of the burning of
this blessed martyr, here is to be noted, that of all others which
have been burned and offered up at Smithfield, there was yet none so
cruelly and piteously handled as he. For, after that his legs were
consumed and burned up to the stumps, and that the wretched
tormentors and enemies of God had withdrawn the lire from him, so
that but a small fire and coals were left under him, then two that
stood on each side of him, with their halberts pitched him upon their
pikes, as far as the chain would reach, after the manner and form
that is described in the picture adjoined. Then he, lifting up such
hands as he had, and his fingers' ends flaming with fire, cried unto
the people in these words, "None but Christ, None but Christ;" and
so, being let down again from their halberts, fell into the fire, and
there ended his life.

     Thus ye have heard by what craft and subtlety this good man was
entrapped, and with what cruelty he was oppressed; so that now
remaineth nothing but only his punishment and death, which the
drunken rage of the bishops thought should not be long protracted.

     During the time that he was in the archbishop's ward at
Lambeth, which was a little before his disputation before the king,
he wrote an excellent confession or defence of his cause to King
Henry, wherein, first mollifying the king's mind and ears with a
modest and sober preface, he declared how he had a double hope of
solace laid up, the one in the most high and mighty Prince of
princes, God; the other next unto God, in his Majesty, which should
represent the office and ministry of that most high Prince in
governing here upon earth. After that, proceeding in gentle words, he
declared the cause which moved him to that which he had done. And,
albeit he was not ignorant how odious this doctrine would be unto the
people, yet, notwithstanding, because he was not also ignorant how
desirous the king's mind was to search out the truth, he thought no
time unmeet to perform his duty, especially forasmuch as he would not
utter those things unto the ignorant multitude, for avoiding of
offence; but only unto the prince himself, unto whom he might safely
declare his mind.

     After this preface made, he, entering into the book, confirmed
his doctrine touching the sacrament by divers testimonies of the
Scriptures by the which Scriptures he proved the body of Christ,
whether it riseth, or ascendeth, or sitteth, or be conversant here,
to be always in one place.

     Then, gathering together the minds of the ancient doctors, he
did prove and declare, by sufficient demonstration, the sacrament to
be a mystical matter:  albeit he so ruled himself, in such temperance
and moderation, that he did not deny but that the holy sacrament was
the very natural body of our Saviour, and the wine his natural blood: 
and that, moreover, his natural body and blood were in those
mysteries; but after a certain manner, as all the ancient doctors in
a manner do interpret it.

     After this protestation thus made, he inferreth the sentence of
his confession, as here followeth.

A treatise by John Lambert upon the sacrament; addressed to the king.

     "Christ is so ascended bodily into heaven, and his holy manhood
thither so assumpt, where it doth sit upon the right hand of the
Father, (that is to say, is with the Father there remanent and
resident in glory,) that, by the infallible promise of God, it shall
not, or cannot, from thence return before the general doom, which
shall be in the end of the world. And as he is no more corporally in
the world, so can I not see how he can be corporally in the
sacrament, or his holy supper. And yet, notwithstanding, do I
acknowledge and confess, that the holy sacrament of Christ's body and
blood is the very body and blood in a certain manner, which shall be
showed hereafter, with your Grace's favour and permission, according
to the words of our Saviour, instituting the same holy sacrament, and
saying, This is my body, which is given for you:  and again, This is
my blood which is of the new testament, which is shed for many, for
the remission of sins.

     "But now, for approving of the first part, that Christ is so
bodily ascended into heaven, and his holy manhood so thither assumpt,
&c., that by the infallible promise of God he shall not, or cannot,
any more from thence bodily return before the general doom, I shall
for this allege first the Scriptures, following the authorities of
old holy doctors, with one consent testifying with me. Besides this,
I need not to tell, that the same is no other thing but that we have
taught to us in these three articles of our Creed, 'He ascended into
heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty;
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.' For
Christ did ascend bodily; the Godhead, which is infinite,
uncircumscriptible, replenishing both heaven and earth, being
immutable, and unmovable, so that properly it can neither ascend nor
descend."

Scriptures affirming the same.

     "The Scriptures which I promised to allege for the confirmation
of my said sentence, be these:  He was lifted up into heaven in their
sight, and a cloud received him from their eyes. And when they were
looking up into heaven, they saw two men, &c. Here it is evidently
showed, that Christ departed and ascended in a visible and
circumscript body. That this departing was visible and in a visible
body, these words do testify:  And when they were looking up; Why
stand you here looking up into heaven? and, Even as ye have seen him,
&c. That, secondly, it was in body, I have before proved:  and
moreover the Deity is not seen, but is invisible, as appeareth thus;
To God only invisible, &c.; and, He dwelleth in the inaccessible
light which no man seeth, nor may see, &c.:  therefore the manhood and
natural body was assumpt, or did ascend. That, thirdly, it was in a
circumscript body, appeareth manifestly in this:  first, that his
ascension and bodily departing caused them to look up and, secondly,
that he was lifted up; that is to wit, from beneath or, from below: 
and, thirdly, that a cloud received him; whereas no cloud nor clouds
can receive or embrace the Deity, &c.

     "I am fain to leave out other evident arguments for the same
purpose, lest I should be over prolix and tedious. It doth there also
follow, in like form, how the angels made answer to the disciples,
saying, Ye men of Galilee! why stand ye gazing into heaven? This
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come again,
as you have seen him going up into heaven. Here we see again, that
Jesus is assumpt, or taken away into heaven. And then it must be from
out of the world, according to that we read, I went forth from the
Father, and I came into the world:  I leave the world again, and I go
unto the Father. That is, not else but as he came from the Father of
heaven into this world, in that he was incarnate and made man, (for
his Godhead was never absent, either from heaven, or yet from earth,)
even so should his manhood leave the world again, to go to heaven.
Moreover, in that it is said, So shall he come, is plainly testified,
that he is away, and now corporally absent.

     "Finally, it is showed, further, after what manner he shall
come again, by these words, Even as you have seen him going up into
heaven; which is not else but as you did visibly see him ascend or go
away to heaven, a cloud embracing him, and taking him from among you;
even so shall you visibly see him to come again in the clouds, as we
read in Matthew, You shall see the Son of man to come in the clouds
of heaven:  and again, And they shall see the Son of man. Such other
texts have we full many, declaring my sentence to be catholic and
true; of which I here shall briefly note some places, and pass over
them, knowing that a little rehearsal is sufficient to your noble
wisdom. The places be, Mark xvi.; Luke xxiv.; John xiii., xiv., xvi.,
and xvii.; Rom. viii.; Ephes. i. and ii.; and 2 Cor. vi.; Heb. viii.,
ix., x., and xii.; and 1 Thess. iv.; and 1 Pet. ii.; which all do
testify, that Christ hath bodily forsaken the world, and, departing
from it unto his Father, ascended into heaven; sitting still upon the
right hand of the Father, above all dominion, power, and
principality; where he is present Advocate and Intercessor before his
Father; and that he shall so bodily come again, like as he was seen
to depart from hence.

     "Nothing can better, or more clearly, testify and declare, what
is contained in the sacrament of Christ's holy body and blood, than
do the words of Scripture, whereby it was instituted. Mark doth agree
with Matthew, so that in a manner he reciteth his very words. And no
marvel it is; for, as the doctors do say, The Gospel of Mark is a
very epitome or abridgement of Matthew. I shall therefore write the
relations of them, touching the institution of this sacrament,
together. The relation or testimony of Matthew is this:  As they were
eating, Jesus took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake and
gave to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And
taking the cup, and giving thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of this; for this is my blood of the new testament, which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. And I say unto you, I will
not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day, that
I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father.

     "The testimony or relation of Mark, is this:  And as they did
eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it,
and gave it to them, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he
took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and
they all drank of it, and he said unto them, This is my blood of the
new testament, which is shed for many. Verily, I say unto you, I will
drink no more of the fruit of the vine, unto that day that I drink it
new in the kingdom of God. Luke, being the companion of Paul, as
appeareth in the Acts, and 2 Tim. iv., doth so next agree with him in
making relation of this supper, and holy institution of the
sacrament. His relation or report is this:  When he had taken bread,
and given thanks, he brake it, and gave to them, saying, This is my
body, which is given for you; do this in remembrance of me. Likewise
also, after supper, he took the cup, saying, This cup is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

     "Paul's testimony doth follow next, agreeably to Luke, and it
is thus:  For I have received of the Lord that which I also have
delivered to you; that our Lord Jesus Christ, in the same night in
which he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks he
brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body which is broken for
you:  this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner he also
took the cup when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new
testament in my blood:  this do, as oft as ye drink it, in the
remembrance of me; for as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye shall show the Lord's death till he come. By these
testimonies shall I declare my sentence to your Grace, which I
conceive of the holy sacrament of Christ's blessed body and blood,
and in all points of difficulty shall I annex the very interpretation
of the old holy doctors and fathers, to show that I do not ground any
thing upon myself. Thereafter shall I add certain arguments, which, I
trust, shall clearly prove and justify my sentence to be true,
catholic, and according both with God and his laws, and also with the
mind of holy doctors.

     "My sentence is this:  That Christ ascended into heaven, and so
hath forsaken the world, and thereshall abide, sitting on the right
hand of his Father, without returning hither again, until the general
doom; at which time he shall come from thence, to judge the dead and
the living. This all do I believe done in his natural body, which he
took of the blessed Virgin Mary his mother, in which he also suffered
passion for our safety and redemption upon a cross; who died for us,
and was buried:  in which he also did rise again to life immortal.
That Christ is thus ascended in his manhood and natural body, and so
assumpt into heaven, we may soon prove; forasmuch as the Godhead of
him is never out of heaven, but ever replenishing both heaven and
earth, and all that is besides, being infinite and interminable or
uncircumscriptible, so that it cannot properly either ascend or
descend, being without all alterations, and immutable or unmovable.
So that now his natural body, being assumpt from among us, and
departed out of the world, the same can no more return from thence
unto the end of the world. For as Peter witnesseth, Whom the heavens
must contain, until the time that all things be restored which God
had spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world
began. And the same doth the article of our Creed teach us, which is,
From thence [i. e. from heaven] shall he come, to judge the quick and
the dead;' which time Paul calleth the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

     "Seeing then this natural body of our Saviour, that was born of
his mother Mary being a virgin, is all whole assumpt into heaven, and
departed out of this world, and, so as saith St. Peter, He must
remain in heaven until the end of the world, which he calleth, the
time when all things must be restored; this, I say, seen and believed
according to our Creed and the Scriptures, I cannot perceive how the
natural body of him can, contrariwise, be in the world, and so in the
sacrament. And yet, notwithstanding, is this true, that the holy
sacrament is Christ's body and blood, as after shall be declared."

Doctors affirming the same.

     "But first, for the establishing of my former purpose, that the
natural body of our Saviour is so absent from this world, and
ascended into heaven, that it can be here no more present until the
general doom; I would beseech your Grace to consider the mind and
sentence of the old holy doctors in this purpose or matter, how
agreeably they testify with that which is before showed. Amongst whom
we have first St. Augustine, writing thus to Dardanus.

     "Therefore as concerning the Word, Christ is the Creator, all
things are made by him. But as touching man, Christ is a creature
made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and ordained
according to the similitude of men. Also, because man consisteth of
two things, the soul and the flesh, in that he had a soul, he was
pensive and sorrowful unto death; in that he had flesh, he suffered
death. Neither when we call the Son of God Christ, we do separate his
manhood; nor, when we call the same Christ the Son of man, we do
separate his Godhead from him. In that he was man, he was conversant
upon the earth (and not in heaven, where he now is) when he said, No
man ascendeth up into heaven, but he which descended from heaven, the
Son of man, which is in heaven:  although in that respect that he was
the Son of God, he was in heaven; and in that he was the Son of man,
he was yet in the earth, and as yet was not ascended into heaven.
Likewise, in that respect that he is the Son of God, he is the Lord
of glory; and in that he is the Son of man, he was crucified:  and
yet, notwithstanding, the apostle saith, And if they had known the
Lord of glory, they would never have crucified him. And by this, both
the Son of man was in heaven; and the Son of God, in that he was man,
was crucified upon earth. Therefore, as he might well be called the
Lord of glory, being crucified, when as yet that suffering did only
pertain unto the flesh; so it might well be said, This day thou shalt
be with me in paradise, when, according to the humility of his
manhood in his flesh, he lay in the grave; and according to his soul,
he was in the bottom of hell that same day. According to his divine
immutability, he never departed from paradise, because, by his
Godhead, he is always every where. Doubt you not, therefore, that
there is Christ Jesus according to his manhood, from whence he shall
come. Remember it well, and keep faithfully thy Christian confession;
for he rose from the dead, he ascended into heaven, and sitteth at
the right hand of the Father:  neither will he come from any other
place than from thence, to judge the quick and the dead. And he shall
come, as the voice of the angel beareth witness, as he was seen to go
into heaven; that is to say, in the selfsame form and substance of
flesh, whereunto, undoubtedly, he gave immortality, but he did not
take away the nature thereof:  according to this form of his flesh, he
is not to be thought to be everywhere. And we must take heed that we
do not affirm the Divinity of his manhood, that we thereby take away
the truth of his body:  for it is not a good consequent, that that
thing which is in God should so be in every place as God. For the
Scripture saith very truly of us, that in Him we live, move and have
our being:  and yet, notwithstanding, we are not in every place as he
is; but that man is otherwise in God, because God is otherwise in
man, by a certain proper and singular manner of being; for God and
man is one person, and only Jesus Christ is both. In that he is God,
he is in every place; but in that he is man, he is in heaven.'

     "By these words of holy Augustine, your Grace may evidently
see, that he testifieth and teacheth the blessed body or flesh of
Christ to be no where else than in heaven. For to it being assumpt or
ascended into heaven, God, as he saith, hath given immortality, but
not taken away nature:  so that by the nature of that holy flesh or
body, it must occupy one place. Wherefore it followeth, 'According to
this form,' that is to wit, of his flesh, 'Christ is not to be
thought to be in every place;' for if Christ should, in his humanity,
be every where diffused or spread abroad, so should his bodily
nature, or natural body, be taken from him. And therefore he saith,
'For we must beware that we do not so affirm the divinity of man,
that we do take away the humanity of his body.' But in that he is
God, so is he every where, according to my words before written; and
in that he is man, so is he in heaven. And, therefore, it is said,
For God and man is one person, and only Jesus Christ is both. He, in
that he is every where, is God:  but in that he is man, he is in
heaven.

     "And yet do we read, agreeably to the same matter, more largely
in the same epistle, by these words:  'Thou shalt not doubt Christ our
Lord, the only Son of God, equal with his Father; and the same being
the Son of man, whereby the Father is greater, is present every where
as God, and is in one and the same temple of God as God, and also in
some place of heaven, as concerning the true shape of body.'

     "Thus find we clearly, that for the measure of his very body he
must be in one place, and that in heaven, as concerning his manhood;
and yet every where present in that he is the eternal Son of God, and
equal to his Father. Like testimony doth he give in the thirtieth
treatise that he maketh upon the Evangely of John. These be his words
there written:  Until the world be at an end, the Lord is above, but
here is the truth of the Lord also; for the body of our Lord in which
he rose must be in one place, but his truth is abroad in every place.
The first parcel, that is, Until the world's end, is so put, that it
may join to the sentence going before, or else to these words
following, The Lord is above, &c.; and so should well accord to my
sentence before showed, which is, The Lord is so bodily ascended,
that in his natural body he cannot again return from heaven until the
general doom.

     "But howsoever the said clause or parcel be applied, it shall
not greatly skill, for my sentence notwithstanding remaineth full
stedfast; insomuch as the Scripture doth mention but two advents or
comings of Christ, of which the first is performed in his blessed
incarnation, and the second is the coming at the general doom. And
furthermore, in this article of our Creed, 'From thence he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead,' is not only showed wherefore he
shall come again, but also when he shall come again; so that in the
mean while, as the other article of our Creed witnesseth, 'He sitteth
at the right hand of God his Father,' which is nothing else than to
say, he remaineth in glory with the Father. Furthermore, even as I
have before rehearsed the aforesaid authority of Augustine, so have I
read in his Quinquagenes, upon a psalm, of which I cannot now
precisely note or name the number. And the same words doth he also
write in the epistle to St. Jerome; so that we may know he had good
liking in it, that he so commonly doth use it as his usual proverb,
or by-word.

     "In the same is also testified, that his blessed body can be
but in one place, so that it being now, according to the Scripture
and article of our belief or Creed, in heaven, it cannot be in earth;
and much less can it be in so innumerable places of the earth, as we
may perceive that the sacrament is. Thus, although the body of our
Saviour must be in one place, as he writeth agreeably to the saying
of Peter, Whom the heavens must receive until the time of the
restitution of all things; yet, as the words following make mention,
But his verity is scattered every where. This verity of Christ, or of
his body, I do take to be what he in other places doth call the
virtue of the sacrament. As in the twenty-fifth treatise upon John we
find thus written:  'The sacrament is one thing, and the virtue of the
sacrament is another thing.' And again, 'If any man eat of him, he
dieth not; but he meaneth of him that doth appertain to the virtue of
the sacrament, and not of him that pertaineth to the visible
sacrament.' And to declare what is the virtue of the sacrament,
'which I count to be the truth of the Lord or of his body,' he saith,
'He who eateth inwardly in spirit, not outwardly; he that eateth in
heart, and not he who cheweth with teeth.'

     "So that finally, this 'truth of the Lord or his body,' which
is dispersed every where abroad, is the spiritual profit, fruit, and
comfort, that is opened to be received every where of all men, by
faith in the verity of the Lord, that is to wit, in the very and true
promise or testament made to us in the Lord's body that was crucified
and suffered death for us, and rose again, ascending immortal into
heaven, where he sitteth, that is, abideth, on the right hand of his
Father, from thence not to return until thegeneral doom or judgment.
This bodily absence of our Saviour is likewise clearly showed in the
fiftieth treatise that he maketh upon John, where he doth expound
this text, Ye have the poor always with you, but ye shall not always
have me with you, to my purpose, that thereby I count and hold mine
opinion to be rather catholic, than theirs that hold the contrary.
Finally, the same doth he confirm in his sermons of the second and
third Feries of Easter; and in so many places besides, as here cannot
be recited, the number of them is so passing great.

     "With him consenteth full plainly Fulgentius, in his second
book to Thrasimundus, writing in this wise:  "'One and the same man,
being local in that he is man, who is God Almighty of the Father. One
and the same, according to human substance, being absent from heaven
when he was in the earth, and leaving the earth when he ascended up
into heaven; but, according to his Divine and almighty substance,
neither departing from heaven when he descended from heaven, neither
leaving the earth when he ascended into heaven. The which may well be
known by the undoubtful saying of our Lord himself; which, that he
might the better show his humanity occupying a place, said unto his
disciples, I ascend up unto my Father and your Father, unto my God
and your God. Also when he had said of Lazarus, Lazarus is dead, he
adjoined, saying, And I am glad for your sakes, that you may believe,
because I was not there. But, showing the greatness of his Divinity,
he said to his Disciples, Behold, I am with you unto the end of the
world. For how did he ascend into heaven, but because he is local and
true man? and how is he present to his faithful, but because he is
Almighty and true God?' &c.

     "In this manner doth Fulgentius proceed forth, speaking much
full agreeably to my sentence, which is now over-long here to write.
But what can be said more plainly in so few words making for me?

     "First he saith, that Christ being a man, is, as concerning his
manhood, local, that is to say, contained in one place. And to
express that more clearly, he addeth to it, saying, 'He is one and
the same, according to his human substance; absent from heaven when
he was in earth, and leaving the earth when he ascended into heaven;'
whereas he hath a contrary antithesis for the godly nature, to show
forth the first point the more effectually. The antithesis is thus: 
'But according to his Divine and incomparable substance, neither
leaving heaven when he descended from heaven, neither forsaking the
earth when he ascended into heaven.' Whereby that is also confirmed
which I said:  Christ did descend and ascend, as touching his
humanity, but not in his Deity, which is immutable and unmovable; as
we may perceive by that he here doth call it 'almighty substance.'
Furthermore, to show that Christ (as touching his human and natural
body) is local, and in one place, he allegeth, and that right justly,
two texts of Scripture:  the first is, I ascend to my Father, &c.; and
the second is of Lazarus, I am glad for your sakes, &c.

     "Finally, he maketh this demand:  'But how did he ascend into
heaven, but because he is a local and very man?' whereby we may see,
that by this sentence Christ could not ascend, except he had been
local, that is, contained in one place, and so very man. And that is
according to St. Augustine, writing as is above showed:  'And he shall
so come (as the angel witnesseth) even as you have seen him go up
into heaven; that is to say, in the same form and substance of his
flesh. According to this form he is not spread abroad in every place: 
for we must beware that we do not so esteem his Divinity, that we
thereby do take away the verity of his body. So that they both do
testify, and that very plainly, that Christ could not have ascended,
except he had been local, that is to wit, contained in one place, and
very man; and that if he were not local, he could not be a man.
Wherefore St. Augustine saith further, to Dardanus, 'Take away
locality, or occupying of place from bodies, and they shall be no
where:  and because they shall be no where, they shall have no being
at all.'

     "We, therefore, coveting to find Christ or his natural body,
should seek for him in heaven, where his natural manhood is sitting
on the right hand of his Father. So willeth us St. Ambrose, in the
tenth book which he writeth upon Luke, speaking of Christ's humanity
assumpt, in this wise:  'Therefore we ought not to seek thee upon the
earth, nor in the earth, neither according to the flesh, if we will
find thee:  for now, according to the flesh, we do not know Christ.
Furthermore, Stephen did not seek thee upon the earth, when that he
did see thee standing on the right hand of God the Father:  but Mary,
which sought thee upon the earth, could not touch thee. Stephen
touched thee, because he sought thee in heaven:  Stephen amongst the
Jews saw thee being absent,' &c.

     "Thus we must seek for the natural body of Christ, not upon the
earth, but in heaven, if we will not be deceived. And that doth he
more largely show in the same treatise, speaking thus of the verity
of Christ's body:  'How could it come to pass that the body could not
rest in the sepulchre, in which the tokens of the wounds and scars
did appear, which the Lord himself did offer to be touched (in which
doing he did not only establish the faith, but also augmented
devotion)? Because he would rather carry up into heaven the wounds
received for us, and would not put them away, that he might present
to God the Father the price of our liberty:  such a one the Father
doth place at his right hand, embracing the triumph and victory of
our salvation,' &c.

     "Gregory also, in a homily of Pentecost, saith agreeably to the
others, in these words:  'When was it that he did not tarry with them,
which, ascending up into heaven, promiseth, saying, Behold, I am here
with you continually until the end of the world? But the Word
Incarnate tarrieth, and also goeth away. It departeth in body, and
tarrieth in Divinity. And therefore he saith, that he tarried with
them:  even he which was ever present with them by his invisible
power, and now departed by his corporal vision.' In like wise doth he
testify in the homily of Easter-day.

     "With these doth Bede accord in a homily of Easter, in which he
declareth this text, A little while, and ye shall not see me:  and
again, a little while, and ye shall see me:  and also in a homily of
the Vigil of Pentecost. And who can otherwise say or think, knowing
the Scripture and our belief, but that the natural body of Christ is
so assumpt into heaven all whole, that it must there abide without
returning, until the general judgment? Notwithstanding, seeing this
is the chief point whereupon I seek to establish my sentence in this
matter of the holy sacrament, that Christ's holy and natural body is
so assumpt into heaven, that there it must remain all whole without
returning until the general doom, I will yet, with the permission of
your Grace, add one or two arguments deduced out of the Scriptures,
to declare further my sentence to be faithful and catholic."

Arguments out of Scripture.

     "First, as Christ was enclosed, and so borne about, in the womb
of his mother, being a virgin undefiled, and afterwards was born into
this world, and put in a manger, and so he, growing in age, did abide
in divers places, but in one after another, some time in Galilee,
some time in Samaria, some time in Jewry, some time beyond and some
time on this side of Jordan, and consequently he was crucified at
Jerusalem, there being enclosed and buried in a grave, from whence he
did arise, so that the angels testified of him, He is risen, and is
not here; and as at the time appointed, after his resurrection, he
was assumpt, or lifted up into heaven from the top of the mount of
Olivet, in the sight of his disciples, a cloud compassing him about;
even so shall he come from the same celestial place corporally, as
they did see him to depart out of the one place corporally, according
to the testimony of the angels. So that in this we may undoubtedly
find that Christ, as touching his manhood, cannot be corporally in
many and divers places at once; and so to be corporally in his
natural body in heaven, and also in the earth; and that it is,
moreover, in so many parts of the world, as men have affirmed.

     "Neither doth the Scripture require that we should spoil Christ
of the property of man's nature, which is, to be in one place, whom
the same Scripture doth perpetually witness and teach to be man, and
so to confound the condition of his bodily nature with the nature
divine. Paul doth teach, that Christ, in his manhood, was made in all
points like unto his brethren, sin excepted:  how then can his body be
in more places at once, unlike unto the natural property of the
bodies of us his brethren? But here do some witty philosophers, yea,
rather sophisters than divines, bring in, to the annulling of
Christ's humanity, a similitude of man's soul, which, being one, is
yet so all whole in all our whole body, that it is said to be all
whole in every part of the body. But such should remember, that it is
no convenient similitude which is made of things different and
diverse in nature, such as be the soul and body of man, to prove them
to have like properties. This is as if they would prove Christ's body
to be of one nature and property with his soul, and that things
naturally corporal were not most diverse from creatures naturally
spiritual.

     "Furthermore, if so it might be, that the body or flesh of
Christ were merely spiritual, and full like unto the substance of
angels, yet it could not in this wise follow, that his body could be
every where, or in divers places at once. Wherefore such subtleties
are to be omitted, and the trade of Scripture should well like us, by
which the old doctors do define that the body of Jesus, exalted or
assumpt into heaven, must be local, circumscript, and in one place,
notwithstanding that the verity, spiritual grace, and fruit that
cometh of it, is diffused and spread abroad in all places, or every
where. How could Christ corporally depart out of this world, and
leave the earth, if he in the kinds of bread and wine be not only
corporally contained and received, but also there reserved, kept, and
enclosed? What other thing else do these words testify, But Jesus
knowing that his hour was come, that he should pass out of this world
to his Father, &c.; and in like form, And it came to pass that as he
blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried up into heaven?
what do they signify, if Christ went not verily out of this world,
his natural body being surely assumpt into heaven?

     "They do therefore undoubtedly declare that Christ, being very
God and very man, did verily depart out of this world in his natural
body, his humanity being assumpt into heaven, where he remaineth
sitting in glory with the Father:  whereas yet his Deity did not leave
the world, nor depart out from the earth. Paul doth say, that of two
things he wist not which he might rather choose, that is to wit, to
abide in the flesh, for preaching the gospel; or else to be dissolved
from the flesh, seeing that to abide with Christ is much and far
better. By which Paul doth manifestly prove, that they be not
presently with Christ, who yet do abide mortal in the flesh. Yet they
be with Christ in such wise as the Scripture doth say, that the
believing be the temple of Christ; and as Paul doth say, Do you not
know yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you? in which sense he also
promised to be with us unto the end of the world. Christ, therefore,
must be otherwise in that place in which the apostle desired to be
with him, being dissolved, and departed from his body, than he doth
abide either in the supper, or else in any other places of the
churches. He therefore doth undoubtedly mean heaven, which is the
paradise of perfect bliss and glory; where Christ, being a victor,
triumpher, and conqueror over death, sin, and hell, and over all
creatures, doth reign and remain corporally. Thus do I trust that
your Grace doth see my sentence, so far forth, to be right catholic,
Christian, and faithful; according to Holy Scripture, to holy
fathers, and the articles of our Christian belief. Which sentence is
this:  Christ's natural body is so assumpt into heaven, where it
sitteth or remaineth in glory of the Father, that it can no more come
from thence, that is to wit, return from heaven, until the end of the
world:  and therefore cannot the same natural body naturally be here
in the world, or in the sacrament, for then should it be departed or
gone out of the world, and yet be still remaining in the world. It
should then be both to come, and already come; which is a
contradiction, and variant from the nature of his manhood."

The second part of this matter.

     "Now my sentence in the second part of this matter is this (if
so be your Grace shall please to know it, as I, your poor and
unworthy, but full true subject, would with all submission and
instance beseech you to know it):  I grant the holy sacrament to be
the very and natural body of our Saviour, and his very natural blood,
and that the natural body and blood of our Saviour is in the
sacrament after a certain wise, as after shall appear:  for so do the
words of the supper testify, Take, eat; this is my body which is
given for you:  and again, Drink ye all of this; this is my blood
which is of the new testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. Of which words, seeing on them depend a great
trial and proof of this matter, and that for the interpretation of
them is, and hath been, all the controversy of this matter, I,
therefore, shall show the interpretation that holy doctors have made
of them, that, as to me seemeth, be full worthy of credit.

     "First, We find in the second book of Tertullian, which he
writeth against Marcion, 'Christ did not reprove the bread, because
it doth represent his body.' This Marcion, against whom Tertullian
doth thus write, did erroneously reprove all creatures as evil. Which
thing Tertullian doth improve by the sacrament, saying as is above
written, 'Christ did not reprove the bread, which representeth his
body.' As who would say, If Christ had judged the bread evil, then
would he not have left it for a sign or sacrament to represent his
blessed body. Agreeably to the same doth he also say in the fourth
book made against the said Marcion in these words 'Christ made the
same bread, which he took and distributed to his disciples, his body,
saying, This is my body; that is to say, the figure of my body. But
it could not have been a figure, unless it were the body of a very
true thing indeed. Furthermore, a void thing, which is a fantasy,
could not receive a figure or a form.' This Marcion had an erroneous
opinion, that Christ had no natural body, but a body fantastical;
which error or heresy, this famous doctor Tertullian doth improve by
the holy sacrament, saying, as before is written, that the sacrament
is a figure of Christ's body:  ergo, Christ had a very and true body;
for a thing which is vain and fantastical can receive no figure. So
that in both places we may clearly perceive his interpretation of
these words, This is my body:  which interpretation is not new, but
authentic, or full ancient, like as is the writer. And this
interpretation do I the rather allow, because none of the older
doctors which followed him did ever reprove him there-for, but rather
have followed it; as appeareth by holy Augustine. In the preface upon
the third Psalm, doth the said Augustine highly commend the wonderful
sufferance of Christ, which so long did suffer and forbear Judas, as
if he had been a good and an honest man:  whereas, notwithstanding, he
did know his traitorous thoughts, when he received him to the feast
or supper in which he did commend and deliver to his disciples the
figure of his body and blood. The words of Augustine be these:  'In
the history of the New Testament, the patience of our Lord was so
great, and so to be marvelled at, because he suffered Judas so long
as a good man, when be knew his thoughts when be received him to the
feast in which he did commend and deliver the figure of his body and
blood to his disciples.'

     "The same holy doctor also, writing against Adamantius, saith
thus:  'For the Lord did not doubt to say, This is my body, when he
gave a sign of his body.' And for a further declaration, in the same
chapter, he saith, 'For so the blood is the soul, as the rock was
Christ.' Notwithstanding he doth not say, that the rock did signify
Christ:  but he doth say, that the rock was Christ.

     "Expressly doth Augustine here call the sign of Christ's body,
his body; plainly interpreting these words, This is my body, as both
he and Tertullian did before.

     "Moreover, he taketh these three sentences, This is my body,
The soul is the blood, and Christ was the stone, to be of one phrase,
and to be like speeches, or to be expounded after one fashion. And
this text, The rock was Christ, doth he commonly thus expound, 'The
rock did signify Christ;' as appeareth, lib. xviii. De Civitate Dei,
cap. 48. Also in the Book of Questions upon Genesis, and in the Book
of Questions upon Leviticus, handling John xviii.; and in his sermon
of the Annunciation of our Lady.

     "In like manner also St. Jerome expoundeth it in the small
Scholies, written upon 1 Cor. i., and all other writers with one
consent, so far as I can read; and so doth the text require it to be
expounded. For Christ was not a natural stone, as all men may well
perceive, and yet was he the very true stone figuratively, as Lyra
saith, 'The thing which signifieth, is wont to be called by the name
of the thing which it doth signify.' And so is the stone signifying
Christ, called Christ, which thereby is signified. And as he doth
approve this text, The stone was Christ, likewise doth he expound The
blood is the soul, with which he doth knit this text, This is my
body, to be figuratively expounded, as they be. According to this
doth the holy doctor write, 'Unless a man do eat my flesh, he shall
not see eternal life. They understood that very foolishly, and
conceived the same carnally; and thought that our Lord would cut away
lumps or pieces of his body, and give to them. And they said, This is
a hard saying. But they were hard of belief, and not the saying hard.
For if they had not been hard, but meek, they would have said to
themselves, He speaketh not this without a cause, but because there
is some hid sacrament or mystery therein. They should have aboden
with him, easy of belief, and not hard; and then should they have
learned of him that which other learned, that tarried after they were
gone away.'

     "In this may we see, that our Saviour willeth his precious
flesh to be eaten. But for the manner of eating, there is, and hath
been, much controversy. The Jews of Capernaum were offended with
Christ when he said, he would have his flesh eaten, and, except a man
should eat his flesh, he could not come to life eternal. They
supposed grossly, and understood him (if a man might so plainly speak
it) butcherly, that he would cut out lumps and pieces out of his
body, as the butcher doth out of dead beasts, and so give it them to
eat of, as Augustine doth here say. And upon this gross, or (as holy
Augustine doth here call it) foolish and fleshly understanding, they
were offended, and said to him, This a sore or hard saying. They did
shoot forth their bolt and unwise saying over soon, and were offended
before they had cause. They took that for hard and sore, which should
have been passing pleasant and profitable to them, if they would have
heard the thing declared throughly to the end.

     "And even so now, that which in this matter may appear at the
first blush a sore, strange, and intolerable sentence, forasmuch as
we have not heard of it before, but the contrary hath of a long time
been beaten into our heads, and persuaded to our minds, yet, by
deliberation and indifferent hearing, and abiding a trial of that
which at the first may appear sore and intolerable, shall (I trust)
be found a sweet truth, to such specially as your Grace is, loving to
hear and to know all truth. But the Capernaites were hard, as here
saith Augustine, and not the word. For if they had not been hard, but
soft and patient to hear, they would have said in themselves, Christ
saith not this without a cause, and there is some hidden mystery
therein:  and so, by patient tarriance, they should have known the
truth, that they could not attain to for perverse hastiness or haste,
which is a great stop and let of true judgment. But the disciples
tarried patiently to hear further, and so did they know this speech
of Christ to be the words of life, that to the other, over readily
departing from Christ, were words of death; for they took them
literally and grossly:  and the letter (as Paul saith) slayeth.

     "But, to show what the disciples remaining with Christ did
learn, St. Augustine doth consequently show, by the words of the
Gospel, saying thus:  'But he instructed them, and said unto them, The
spirit is that which giveth life, the flesh profiteth nothing. The
words that I have spoken unto you are spirit and life. Understand you
that which I have spoken, spiritually. You shall not eat this body
which you see, neither shall you drink that same blood which they
shall shed forth which shall crucify me. I have set forth to you a
certain sacrament or mystery, which, being spiritually understood,
shall give you life. And although it be requisite that this be
celebrated visibly, yet it ought to be understood invisibly.' In this
do we see, that both Christ and Augustine would have Christ's words 
to be understood spiritually, and not carnally; figuratively, and not
literally:  and therefore doth he say, You shall not eat this body
which you see, neither shall you drink that same blood which they
shall shed forth that shall crucify me. And what else is this, but
that Christ would his body to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken?
But he would not his body to be carnally eaten, which was materially
seen of them to whom he spake; nor his material or natural blood to
be carnally drunken, which his crucifiers should cause to issue from
his natural body crucified, as saith Augustine:  but he ordained and
willed his body and blood to be spiritually eaten and drunken, in
faith and belief that his body was crucified for us, and that his
blood was shed for remission of our sins.

     "This eating and drinking is nothing but such true faith and
belief as is showed. Wherefore, as Christ saith, He that eateth my
flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath life everlasting, even so doth he
say, He that believeth in me hath life everlasting. And St.
Augustine, agreeable to the same, treating upon John, doth say, Why
dost thou prepare thy teeth and belly? believe, and thou hast eaten.
I do know that Christ ordaineth his sacrament to be received and
eaten, which is in a certain wise called his body, as after shall be
more largely opened:  but the same doth not feed the mind of men,
except it be taken spiritually, and not corporally. It is good to
establish the heart with grace, and not with meat.

     "And St. Augustine, assenting to the same, doth say in a sermon
that he maketh upon these words in the Gospel of St. Luke, Lord,
teach us to pray:  He said bread, but supersubstantial bread. This is
not the bread which goeth into the body; but that bread which doth
satisfy the substance of our soul.' Our souls therefore, into whom
nothing corporal can corporally enter, do not carnally receive the
body and blood of our Saviour, neither did he ordain his blessed body
and blood so to be eaten and drunken; although our souls cannot live
except they be spiritually fed with the blessed body and blood of
him, spiritually eating and drinking them, in taking also at times
convenient the blessed sacrament, which is truly called his body and 
blood. Not that it is so really, but as is showed by the
interpretation both of Tertullian and Augustine, because it is a sign
or figure of Christ's body and blood. And the signs or sacraments do
commonly, as saith St. Augustine, both Ad Bonifacium, and in his work
De Civitate Dei, take their denomination of the things by them
represented and signified.

     "But forasmuch as some will object that Augustine, in the words
before rehearsed, doth not speak of eating the sacrament; for the
text of the Scripture, upon the which he doth ground, is not spoken
by eating the sacrament, which text is this, Unless a man may eat my
flesh, &c.; I answer, that true it is, he began of spiritual eating,
and thereto serveth the text recited. Nevertheless, he meaneth that
Christ is not ordained to be eaten either without the sacrament or in
the sacrament, but spiritually of the faithful; as more evidently
doth appear by these words there following:  'I have commended unto
you a sacrament, which, being understood of you spiritually, shall
quicken you. Although it were necessary that the same should be
celebrated visibly, yet notwithstanding it ought to be understood
invisibly.'

     "Here doth he show that he meaneth of eating, not without the
sacrament only, but also in the sacrament, and therefore he doth not
only say, 'I have commended unto you a certain sacrament,' &c.; but
he addeth moreover, 'Although it is requisite the same to be
celebrated visibly.' How, therefore, can the eating of Christ and the
sacrament thereof be visibly celebrated, but in the Maundy, or in his
supper; which is celebrated visibly in visible things of bread and
wine, which cannot quicken or relieve us and our souls, except they
be understood and so received spiritually?

     "Furthermore, as concerning the exposition of these words of
the supper, This is my body, &c., St. Augustine, writing to Boniface,
saith thus: 

     "'We use oftentimes this manner of phrase, that when Easter
doth approach, we name the day that cometh after, or the next day
after that, the Passion of the Lord, whereas he, notwithstanding, had
suffered before that many years; neither that passion was done but
once for all. So truly do we say, upon the Lord's day, This day the
Lord hath risen:  whereas so many years are passed since he rose.
Wherefore no man is so fond, that he will reprove us as liars for
this manner of speaking, because we call these days according to the
similitude of those in which these things were done:  so that it is
called the same day which is not the same, but which, by course of
time of the year coming about, is like unto it; and also because that
thing is said to be done that day, through the celebration of the
sacrament, which was not done that day, but long before that time.
Was not Christ once offered up in himself? and yet, notwithstanding,
he is not only offered up in the sacrament in the solemn feasts of
Easter, but every day mystically for the people. Neither doth he make
a lie, which being demanded, answereth, that Christ is offered up: 
for, if the sacraments had not a certain similitude of those things
whereof they are sacraments, then should they be no sacraments at
all. By reason of this similitude or likeness, sacraments oftentimes
do receive the names of the selfsame things whereof they are
sacraments.

     "'Therefore as, after a certain manner, the sacrament of
Christ's body is the body of Christ, and the sacrament of Christ's
blood is the blood of Christ; even likewise, the sacrament of faith
is faith:  for to believe, is none other thing than to have faith. And
by this it is answered, that the very infants have faith, because of
the sacrament of faith, and convert themselves unto God, because of
the sacrament of conversion:  for the very answer itself doth
appertain unto the celebration of the sacrament. As the apostle
speaketh of baptism; for he saith, We are buried by baptism into
death. He did not say, We have signified a burying, but he plainly
saith, We are buried. Therefore he named the sacrament of so weighty
a matter or thing by no other name, but by the very name of the thing
itself.'

     "Nothing can be more plainly spoken, or more agreeable to the
natural understanding of the texts of the supper, and to the
exposition before showed of Tertullian and of himself. For seeing
that Christ is bodily in heaven, and so absent from the earth, it is
needful to know how the holy sacrament, which he doth call his body
and blood, should be his body and blood.

     "This holy doctor Augustine, therefore, doth this matter
manifestly and sincerely declare by other like speeches; and first by
common speeches, and secondly by speeches of Scripture. The first
common speech is, 'We do,' saith he, 'use often to say, that when
Easter doth approach or draw nigh, tomorrow, or the next day, is the
Lord's passion:  whereas he did suffer before many years past, and
that passion was never but once done.'

     "The second common speech is, 'And of that Sunday we say, that
this day the Lord did rise from death; whereas so many years be yet
past since the time he arose.' Wherefore to conclude, he saith, 'No
man is so foolish, that he will reprove us for so saying, or to say
that we have lied, because we do call these days after the similitude
of those in which these things were done. So that it is called the
same day, not for that it is the selfsame, but by revolution of time
like unto it. And the resurrection is said to be done in the same
day, through the celebrating of the sacrament of that which is not
done that day, but long time before past.'

     "The third speech, 'Was not Christ offered up once for all in
his own person? yet is he nevertheless offered in the sacrament
mystically for the people, not only every year at the feast of
Easter, but also every day:  neither doth he lie, which, when he is
demanded, shall answer, that he is offered up or sacrificed. For if
the sacraments had not a certain similitude of those things of which
they be sacraments, then should they be no sacraments at all:  by
reason of which similitude they do for the most part receive the
denomination or name of those things signified. And, therefore, after
a certain manner, the sacrament of Christ's body is the body of
Christ, and the sacrament of Christ's blood is the blood of Christ,
and so also be the sacraments of faith called faith.' This doth he
yet prove by another example of speech, which is this:  It is none
other thing to believe, than to have faith. And therefore, when
answer is made that the infants have faith, who indeed have it not in
full working, it is answered that such have faith for the sacrament
of faith, and that they do convert themselves unto faith for the
sacrament of conversion. For the very answer itself doth pertain to
the celebration of the sacrament, &c. Thus doth it sufficiently
appear, that as we use truly to call that Good Friday, or the day of
Christ's passion, which is not indeed the day of Christ's passion,
but only a memorial thereof once done for ever; and as we use to call
the next Easter-day, the day of Christ's resurrection, not because
that Christ in the same day shall arise, but only for a memorial of
his resurrection once done for ever, and that of long time past; and
as Christ, being offered up once for all in his own proper person, is
yet said to be offered up not only every year at Easter, but also
every day in the celebration of the sacrament, because his oblation,
once for ever made, is thereby represented:  even so, saith Augustine,
is the sacrament of Christ's body the body of Christ, and the
sacrament of Christ's blood the blood of Christ, in a certain wise or
fashion. Not that the sacrament is his natural body or blood indeed,
but that it is a memorial or representation thereof, as the days
before showed be of his very and natural body crucified for us, and
of his precious blood shed for the remission of our sins. And thus be
the holy signs or sacraments truly called by the names of the very
things in them signified. But why so? for they, saith Augustine, have
a certain similitude of those things whereof they be signs or
sacraments; for else they should be no sacraments at all:  and
therefore do they commonly, and for the most part, receive the
denomination of the things whereof they be sacraments.

     "So that we may manifestly perceive that he calleth not the
sacrament of Christ's body and blood the very body and blood of
Christ, but as he saidbefore. But yet he saith, in a certain manner
or wise. Not that the sacrament absolutely and plainly is his natural
body and blood; for this is a false argument of sophistry, which they
call Secundum quid ad simpliciter; that is to say, that the sacrament
of Christ's body is in a certain wise the body of Christ:  ergo, it is
also plainly and expressly the natural body of Christ. For such
another reason might this be also:  Christ is after a certain manner a
lion, a lamb, and a door:  ergo, Christ is a natural lion, and a lamb,
or a material door. But the sacrament of Christ's body and blood is
therefore called his body and blood, because it is thereof a
memorial, sign, sacrament, token, and representation, spent once for
our redemption:  which thing is further expounded by another speech
that he doth here consequently allege of baptism:  Sicut de ipso
baptismo apostolus dicit, &c. 'The apostle,' quoth Augustine, 'saith
not, We have signified burying, but he saith utterly, We be buried
with Christ. For else should all false Christians be buried with
Christ from sin, who yet do live in all sin.' And therefore saith
Augustine immediately thereupon, He called therefore the sacrament of
so great a thing, by none other name than of the thing itself.'

     "Thus, O most gracious and godly prince! do I confess and
acknowledge, that the bread of the sacrament is truly Christ's body,
and the wine to be truly his blood, according to the words of the
institution of the same sacrament:  but in a certain wise, that is to
wit, figuratively, sacramentally, or significatively, according to
the exposition of the doctors before recited, and hereafter
following. And to this exposition of the old doctors am I enforced
both by the articles of my creed, and also by the circumstances of
the said Scripture, as after shall more largely appear. But by the
same can I not find the natural body of our Saviour to be there
naturally, but rather absent both from the sacrament, and from all
the world, collocate and remaining in heaven, where he, by promise,
must abide corporally, unto the end of the world.

     "The same holy doctor, writing against one Faustus, saith in
like manner, 'If we do prefer with great admiration the Maccabees,
because they would not once touch the meats which Christian men now
lawfully use to eat of, for that it was not lawful for that time,
being then prophetical, that is, in the time of the Old Testament;
how much rather now ought a Christian to be more ready to suffer all
things for the baptism of Christ, and for the sacrament of
thanksgiving, and for the sign of Christ, seeing that those of the
Old Testament were the promises of the things to be complete and
fulfilled, and these sacraments in the New Testament are the tokens
of things complete and finished?' In this do I note, that according
to the expositions before showed, he calleth the sacrament of
baptism, and the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, otherwise
properly named Eucharistia, signum Christi, that is, a sign of
Christ; and that, in the singular number, forasmuch as they both do
signify well-nigh one thing. In both them is testified the death of
our Saviour. And moreover, he called them indicia rerum completarum;
that is tò wit, the tokens or benefits that we shall receive by the
belief of Christ for us crucified. And them he doth usually call both
the sacraments, signum Christi, in the singular number. And as the
same St. Augustine in his fiftieth treatise upon the Gospel of St.
John teacheth, where he saith thus:  'If thou be good, if thou pertain
to the body of Christ, (which this word Petrus doth signify,) then
hast thou Christ both here present, and in time to come:  here present
through faith; here present by the figure and sign of Christ; here
present by the sacrament of baptism; here present by the meat and
drink of the altar,' &c."

     More there was that John Lambert wrote to the king, but thus
much only came to our hands.



192. OTHER MARTYRS, 1538

The death of Robert Packington.

     Among other acts and matters passed and done this present year,
which is of the Lord 1538, here is not to be silenced the unworthy
and lamentable death of Robert Packington, mercer of London, wrought
and caused by the enemies of God's word, and of all good proceedings.
The story is this:  The said Robert Packington, being a man of sub.
stance, yet not so rich as discreet and honest, and dwelling in
Cheapside, used every day at five o'clock, winter and summer, to go
to prayers at a church then called St. Thomas of Acres, but now named
Mercer's Chapel. And one morning amongst all others, being a great
misty morning, such as hath seldom been seen, even as he was crossing
the street from his house to the church, he was suddenly murdered
with a gun, which of the neighbours was plainly heard; and, by a
great number of labourers standing at Soper-lane end, he was both
seen to go forth of his house, and the clap of the gun was heard, but
the deed-doer was a great while un-espied and unknown. Although many
in the mean time were suspected, yet none could be found faulty
therein, the murderer so covertly was conveyed, till at length, by
the confession of Dr. Vincent, dean of Paul's, on his death-bed, it
was known, and by him confessed, that he himself was the author
thereof, by hiring an Italian, for sixty crowns or thereabouts, to do
the feat. For the testimonywhereof, and also for the repentant words
of the said Intent, the names both of them that heard him confess it,
and of them that heard the witnesses report it, remain yet in memory,
to be produced, if need required.

     The cause why he was so little favoured by the clergy, was
this:  for that he was known to be a man of great courage, and one
that could both speak, and also would be heard:  for at the same time
he was one of the burgesses of the parliament for the city of London,
and had talked somewhat against the covetousness and cruelty of the
clergy; wherefore he was had in contempt with them, and was thought
also to have some talk with the king; for which he was the more had
in disdain with them, and murdered by the said Dr. Intent for his
labour, as hath been above declared.

     And thus much of Robert Packington, who was the brother of
Austin Packington above mentioned, who deceived Bishop Tonstal, in
buying the new translated Testament of Tyndale:  whose piteous murder,
although it was privy and sudden, yet hath it so pleased the Lord not
to keep it in darkness, but to bring it at length to light.

The burning of one Collins at London.
Illustration:  Collins burned at the stake

     Neither is here to be omitted the burning of one Collins, some
time a lawyer and a gentleman, which suffered the fire this year also
in Smithfield, A.D. 1538; whom although I do not here recite as in
the number of God's professed martyrs, yet neither do I think him to
be clean sequestered from the company of the Lord's saved flock and
family, notwithstanding that the bishop of Rome's church did condemn
and burn him for a heretic; but rather do recount him therefore as
one belonging to the holy company of saints. At leastwise this case
of him and of his end may be thought to be such as may well reprove
and condemn their cruelty and madness, in burning so, without all
discretion, this man, being mad, and distract of his perfect wits, as
he then was, by this occasion as here followeth: 

     This gentleman had a wife of exceeding beauty and comeliness,
but, notwithstanding, of so light behaviour and unchaste conditions,
(nothing correspondent to the grace of her beauty,) that she,
forsaking her husband, which loved her entirely, betook herself unto
another paramour; which thing when he understood, he took it very
grievously and heavily, more than reason would. At the last, being
overcome with exceeding dolour and heaviness, he fell mad, being at
that time a student of the law in London. When he was thus ravished
of his wits, by chance he came into a church where a priest was
saying mass, and was come to the place where they use to hold up and
show the sacrament.

     Collins, being beside his wits, seeing the priest holding up
the host over his head, and showing it to the people, he, in like
manner counterfeiting the priest, took up a little dog by the legs,
and held him over his head, showing him unto the people. And for this
he was, by and by, brought to examination, and condemned to the fire,
and was burned, and the dog with him, the same year in which John
Lambert was burned, A.D. 1538.

The burning of Cowbridge at Oxford, A.D. 1538.

     With this aforesaid Collins may also be adjoined the
burning of Cowbridge, who likewise, being mad and beside his right
senses, was, either the same, or the next year following, condemned
by Longland, bishop of Lincoln, and committed to the fire by him to
be burned at Oxford.

     The fruitful seed of the gospel at this time had taken such
root in England, that now it began manifestly to spring and show
itself in all places, and in all sorts of people, as it may appear in
this  good man Cowbridge; who, coming of a good stock and family,
whose ancestors, even from Wickliff's time hitherto, had been always
favourers of the gospel, and addicted to the setting forth thereof
inthe English tongue, was born at Colchester, his father's name being
William Cowbridge, a wealthy man, and head bailiff of Colchester, and
of great estimation.

     This man, at his decease, left unto his son great substance and
possessions, which he afterwards abandoning and distributing unto his
sisters and kindred, he himself went about the countries, sometimes
seeking after learned men, and sometimes, according to his ability,
instructing the ignorant. Thus he continued a certain space, until
such time as he came to a town in Berkshire, named Wantage, where,
after he had by a long season exercised the office of a priest, in
teaching and administering of the sacraments, but being no priest
indeed, and had converted many unto the truth, he was at last
apprehended and taken, as suspected of heresy, and carried to a place
beside Wickham, to the bishop of Lincoln, to be examined; by whom he
was sent to Oxford, and there cast into the prison called Bocardo.

     At that time Dr. Smith and Dr. Cotes governed the divinity
schools, who, together with other divines and doctors, seemed not in
this point to show the duty which the most meek apostle requireth in
divines toward such as are fallen into any error, or lack instruction
or learning. For, admit that he did not understand or see so much in
the doctrine and controversies of divinity as the learned divines
did, yet Paul, writing unto the Romans, and in others places also,
saith, that the weak are to be received into the faith, and not to
the determination of disputations; but the imbecility of the weak is
to be borne by them that are stronger, &c. And in another place, we
understand the spirit of lenity and gentleness to be requisite in
such as are spiritual, who shall have to do with the weak flock of
Christ. But, alas! it is a sorrowful thing to see how far these
divines are separate from the rule of the apostolic meekness, who,
after they had this poor man fast entangled in their prison of
Bocardo with famine and hunger, brought this poor servant of Christ
unto that point, that, through the long consumption and lack of
sleep, his natural strength being consumed, he lost his wits and
reason; whereby (as it is the manner of mad-men) he uttered many
unseemly and indiscreet words:  whereupon the divines spread rumours
abroad that there was a heretic at Oxford, who could abide to hear
the name of Jesu, but not the name of Christ, to be named; and
therefore that he ought to be burned:  and so thereupon condemned him.
That done, they sent the articles, whereupon he was condemned, up to
London, unto the lord chancellor, at that time being the Lord Audley,
requiring of him a writ to put him to execution; of which articles we
could only attain to knowledge and understanding but of two, which
were these: 

     "First, That in the second article of the Creed, he would not
have it Et in Jesum Christum, &c., but Et in Jesum Jesum, &c. The
second, That every poor priest, be he ever so poor or needy, being of
a good conversation, hath as great power and authority in the church
of God and ministration of the sacraments, as the pope or any other
bishops.

     What all his opinions and articles were, wherewith he was
charged, it needeth not here to rehearse; for as he was then a man
mad, and destitute of sense and reason, so his words and sayings
could not be sound. Yea rather, what wise man would ever collect
articles against him, which said he could not tell what? And if his
articles were so horrible and mad as Cope in his Dialogues doth
declare them, then was he, in my judgment, a man more fit to be sent
to Bedlam, than to be had to the fire in Smithfield to be burned. For
what reason is it to require reason of a creature mad or
unreasonable, or to make heresy of the words of a senseless man, not
knowing what he affirmed?

     But this is the manner and property of this holy mother church
of Rome, that whatsoever cometh in their hands and inquisition, to
the fire it must. There is no other way; neither pity that will
move,nor excuse that will serve, nor age that they will spare, nor
any respect almost that they consider, as by these two miserable
examples, both of Collins and Cowbridge, it may appear; who rather
should have been pitied, and all ways convenient sought how to reduce
the silly wretches into their right minds again; according as the
true pastors of Israel be commanded, by the Spirit of God, to seek
again the things that be lost, and to bind up the things that be
broken, &c., and not so extremely to burst the things that be bruised
before.

     But, to end with this matter of Cowbridge, whatsoever his
madness was before, or howsoever erroneous his articles were, (which,
for the fond fantasies of them, I do not express,) yet, as touching
his end, this is certain, that, when the day appointed was come, this
meek lamb of Christ was brought forth unto the slaughter with a great
band of armed men; and, being made fast in the midst of the fire,
(contrary to their expectation,) oftentimes calling upon the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, with great meekness and quietness he yielded
his spirit into the hands of the Lord.

Putteden and Leiton, martyrs.

     About the same time and year, or not much before, when John
Lambert suffered at London, there was one Puttedew also condemned to
the fire, about the parts of Suffolk; who, coming into the church,
and merrily telling the priest, that after he had drunk up all the
wine alone, he afterwards blessed the hungry people with the empty
chalice, was for the same immediately apprehended, and shortly after
burned, leaving to us an experiment, Quam parum sit tutum ludere cum
sanctis, as the old saying was then; but rather, as we may see now,
Quam male tutum sit ludere cum impiis.

     The great and almost infinite number of most holy martyrs, the
variety of matter, and the great celerity used in writing this story,
is such, that we cannot use such exact diligence in perusing them
all, or have so perfect memory in keeping the order of years, but
that, sometimes, we shall somewhat the more swerve or go astray;
whereby it hath happened that this man William Leiton, as it were
lying hidden among a great multitude of others, had almost escaped
our hands; whom, notwithstanding that we have somewhat passed his
time, yet do we not think meet to omit, or leave out of this
catalogue or history.

     This William Leiton was a monk of Eye in the county of Suffolk,
and was burned at Norwich, for speaking against a certain idol which
was accustomed to be carried about in the processions at Eye; and
also for holding that the sacramental supper ought to be administered
in both kinds; about the year and time aforesaid.

The burning of N. Peke, martyr, at Ipswich.

     In the burning of another Suffolk man, named N. Peke, dwelling
some time at Earlstonham, and burned at Ipswich somewhat before the
burning of these aforesaid, thus I find it recorded and testified;
that when he, being fast bound to a stake, and furze set on fire
round about him, was so scorched that he was as black as soot, one
Dr. Redyng, there standing before him, with Dr. Heyre and Dr.
Springwell, having a long white wand in his hand, did knock him upon
the right shoulder, and said, "Peke! recant, and believe that the
sacrament of the altar is the very body of Christ, flesh, blood, and
bone, after that the priest hath spoken the words of consecration
over it; and here have I in my hand to absolve thee for thy misbelief
that hath been in thee;" having a scroll of paper in his hand. When
he had spoken these words, Peke answered, and said, "I defy it, and
thee also;" and with a great violence he spit from him very blood,
which came by reason that his veins brake in his body for extreme
anguish. And when the said Peke had so spoken, then Dr. Redyng said,
"To as many as shall cast a stick to the burning of this heretic, is
granted forty days of pardon by my lord bishop of Norwich."

     Then Baron Curson, Sir John Audley, knight, with many others of
estimation, being there present, did rise from their seats, and with
their swords did cut down boughs, and throw them into the fire, and
so did all the multitude of the people. Witness John Ramsey and
others, who did see this act.



193. KING HENRY'S DECREE AGAINST IMPORTED BOOKS

     In the year last before this, which was A.D. 1537, it was
declared how Pope Paul the Third indicted a general council, to be
holden at Mantua:  whereunto the king of England, amongst other
princes, being called, refused either to come or to send at the
pope's call, and for defence of himself directed out a public apology
or protestation, rendering just and sufficient matter why he neither
would, nor was bound to obey, the pope's commandment; which
protestation is before to be read. This council, appointed to begin
the twenty-third day of May, the year aforesaid, was then stopped by
the duke of Mantua, pretending that he would suffer no council there,
unless the pope would fortify the city with a sufficient army, &c.;
for which cause the pope prorogued the said council, to be celebrated
in the month of November following, appointing at the first no
certain place. At length he named and determined the city of
Vincenza, (lying within the dominion of the Venetians,) to be the
place for the council. Whereunto when the king, the year next
following, (which is this present year of our Lord 1538,) was
requested by the emperor and other states, to resort either himself,
or to send, he, again refusing, (as he did before,) sent a
protestation, in way of defence and answer for himself, to the
emperor or other Christian princes.

     As the Lord, of his goodness, had raised up Thomas Cromwell to
he a friend and patron to the gospel, so, on the contrary side, Satan
(who is adversary and enemy to all good things) had his organ also,
which was Stephen Gardiner, by all wiles and subtle means to impeach
and put back the same; who, after he had brought his purpose to pass
in burning good John Lambert, (as ye have heard,) proceeding still in
his crafts and wiles, and thinking, under the names of heresies,
sects, Anabaptists, and Sacramentaries, to exterminate all good books
and faithful professors of God's word out of England, so wrought with
the king, that the next year following, which was A.D. 1539, he gave
out these injunctions, the copy and contents whereof I thought here
also not to be pretermitted, and are these: 

     "First, That none, without special licence of the king,
transport or bring from outward parts into England, any manner of
English books, either yet sell, give, utter, or publish any such,
upon pain of forfeiting all their goods and chattels, and their
bodies to be imprisoned so long as it shall please the king's
Majesty.

     "Item, That none shall print, or bring over, any English books
with annotations or prologues, unless such books before be examined
by the king's privy council, or others appointed by his Highness; and
yet not to be put thereto these words, cum privilegio regali, without
adding, ad imprimendum solum:  neither yet to imprint it, without the
king's privilege be printed therewith in the English tongue, that all
men may read it. Neither shall they print any translated book,
without the plain name of the translator be in it; or else the
printer to be made the translator, and to suffer the fine and
punishment thereof, at the king's pleasure.

     "Item, That none of the occupation of printing shall, within
the realm, print, utter, sell, or cause to be published, any English
book of Scripture, unless the same be first viewed, examined, and
admitted by the king's Highness, or one of his privy council, or one
bishop within the realm, whose name shall therein be expressed, upon
pain of the king's most high displeasure, the loss of their goods and
chattels, and imprisonment so long as it shall please the king.

     "Item, Those that be in any errors, as Sacramentaries,
Anabaptists, or any others, that sell books having such opinions in
them, being once known, both the books and such persons shall be
detected and disclosed immediately unto the king's Majesty, or one of
his privy council; to the intent to have it punished, without favour,
even with the extremity of the law.

     "Item, That none of the king's subjects shall reason, dispute,
or argue upon the sacrament of the altar, upon pain of losing their
lives, goods, and chattels, without all favour, only those excepted
that be learned in divinity:  they to have their liberty in their
schools and appointed places accustomed for such matters.

     "Item, That the holy bread and holy water, procession, kneeling
and creeping on Good Friday to the cross, and Easter-day, setting up
of lights before the Corpus Christi, bearing of candles on Candlemas-
day, purification of women delivered of child, offering of chrisms,
keeping of the four offering-days, paying their tithes, and such-like
ceremonies, must be observed and kept till it shall please the king
to change or abrogate any of them."

     This article was made for that the people were not quieted and
contented (many of them) with the ceremonies then used.

     "Finally, All those priests that be married, and openly known
to have their wives, or that hereafter do intend to marry, shall be
deprived of all spiritual promotion, and from doing any duty of a
priest, and shall have no manner of office, dignity, cure, privilege,
profit, or commodity in any thing appertaining to the clergy, but
from thenceforth shall be taken, had, and reputed as lay persons, to
all purposes and intents:  and those that shall, after this
proclamation, marry, shall run in his Grace's indignation, and suffer
punishment and imprisonment at his Grace's will and pleasure.

     "Item, He chargeth all archbishops, bishops, archdeacons,
deacons, provosts, parsons, vicars, curates, and other ministers, and
every of them, in their own persons, within their cures, diligently
to preach, teach, open, and set forth to the people, the glory of God
and truth of his word; and also, considering the abuses and
superstitions that have crept into the hearts and stomachs of many by
reason of their fond ceremonies, he chargeth them, upon pain of
imprisonment at his Grace's pleasure, not only to preach and teach
the word of God accordingly, but also sincerely and purely, declaring
the difference between things commanded by God, and the rites and
ceremonies in their church then used, lest the people thereby might
grow into further superstition.

     "Item, Forasmuch as it appeareth now clearly, that Thomas
Becket, some time archbishop of Canterbury, stubbornly withstanding
the wholesome laws established against the enormities of the clergy,
by the king's Highness's noble progenitor, King Henry the Second, for
the commonwealth, rest, and tranquillity of this realm, of his
froward mind fled the realm into France, and to the bishop of Rome,
maintainer of those enormities, to procure the abrogation of the said
laws (whereby arose much trouble in this said realm); and that his
death, which they untruly called martyrdom, happened upon a rescue by
him made; and that (as it is written) he gave opprobrious words to
the gentlemen which then counselled him to leave his stubbornness,
and to avoid the commotion of the people, risen up for that rescue,
and he not only called the one of them 'bawd,' but also took Tracy by
the bosom, and violently shook him, and plucked him in such manner
that he had almost overthrown him to the pavement of the church, so
that upon this fray, one of their company, perceiving the same,
struck him, and so in the throng Becket was slain:  and further, that
his canonization was made only by the bishop of Rome, because he had
been both a champion to maintain his usurped authority, and a bearer
of the iniquity of the clergy: 

     "For these, and for other great and urgent causes long to
recite, the king's Majesty, by the advice of his council, hath
thought expedient to declare to his loving subjects, that
notwithstanding the said canonization, there appeareth nothing in his
life and exterior conversation whereby he should be called a saint,
but rather esteemed to have been a rebel and traitor to his prince.

     "Therefore his Grace straitly chargeth and commandeth, that
from henceforth the said Thomas Becket shall not be esteemed, named,
reputed, and called a saint, but Bishop Becket; and that his images
and pictures through the whole realm shall be plucked down, and
avoided out of all churches, chapels, and other places; and that from
henceforth the days used to be festival in his name, shall not be
observed, nor the service, office, antiphons, collects, and prayers
in his name read, but rased and put out of all the books; and that
all their festival-days, already abrogated, shall be in no wise
solemnized, but his Grace's ordinances and injunctions thereupon
observed; to the intent his Grace's loving subjects shall be no
longer blindly led and abused to commit idolatry, as they have done
in times past:  upon pain of his Majesty's indignation, and
imprisonment at his Grace's pleasure.

     "Finally, his Grace straitly chargeth and commandeth, that his
subjects do keep and observe all and singular his injunctions made by
his Majesty, upon the pain therein contained."

     Here followeth how religion began to go backward.



194. THE VARIABLE CHANGES AND MUTATIONS OF RELIGION IN KING HENRY'S
DAYS.
 TO many which be yet alive, and can testify these
things, it is not unknown, how variable the state of religion stood
in these days; how hardly and with what difficulty it came forth;
what chances and changes it suffered. Even as the king was ruled and
gave ear sometimes to one, sometimes to another, so one while it went
forward, at another season as much backward again, and sometimes
clean altered and changed for a season, according as they could
prevail, who were about the king. So long as Queen Anne lived, the
gospel had indifferent success.

     After that she, by sinister instigation of some about the king,
was made away, the course of the gospel began again to decline, but
that the Lord then stirred up the Lord Cromwell opportunely to help
in that behalf; who, no doubt, did much avail, for the increase of
God's true religion, and much more had brought to perfection, if the
pestilent adversaries, maligning the prosperous glory of the gospel,
by contrary practising had not craftily undermined him, and
supplanted his virtuous proceedings. By means of which adversaries it
came to pass, after the taking away of the said Cromwell, that the
state of religion more and more decayed during all the residue of the
reign of King Henry.

     Among these adversaries above mentioned, the chief captain was
Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester; who, with his confederates
and adherents, disdaining at the state of the Lord Cromwell, and at
the late marriage of the Lady Anne of Cleves (who, in the beginning
of the year of our Lord 1540, was married to the king); as also
grieved partly at the dissolution of the monasteries, and fearing the
growing of the gospel, sought all occasions how to interrupt these
happy beginnings, and to train the king to their own purpose. Now
what occasion this wily Winchester found out to work upon, ye shall
hear in order as followeth: 

     It happened the same time, that the Lord Cromwell, for the
better establishing of sincere religion in this realm, devised a
marriage for the king, to be concluded between him and the Lady Anne
of Cleves, whose other sister was already married unto the duke of
Saxony. By this marriage it was supposed that a perpetual league,
amity, and alliance, should be nourished between this realm and the
princes of Germany; and so thereby godly religion might be made more
strong on both parts against the bishop of Rome and his tyrannical
religion. But the devil, ever envying the prosperity of the gospel,
laid a stumbling-block in that clear way for the king to stumble at.
For, when the parents of the noble lady were communed withal for the
furtherance of the said marriage, among others of her friends whose
good will was required, the duke of Saxony, her brother-in-law,
misliked the marriage, partly for that he would have had her bestowed
upon some prince of Germany more nigh unto her sister, and partly for
other causes which he thought reasonable. Whereupon it followed that
the slackness of the duke in that behalf being espied, crafty
Winchester, taking good hold-fast thereon, so alienated the king's
mind from the amity that seemed now to begin and grow between the
duke and the king, that by the occasion thereof he brought the king
at length clean out of credit with that religion and doctrine, which
the duke had then maintained many years before.

     This wily Winchester, with his crafty fetches, partly upon this
occasion aforesaid, and partly also by other pestilent persuasions
creeping into the king's ears, ceased not to seek all means how to
work his feat, and to overthrow religion, first bringing him in
hatred with the German princes, then putting him in fear of the
emperor, of the French king, of the pope, of the king of Scots, and
other foreign powers to rise against him; but especially of civil
tumults and commotion here within this realm, which above all things
he most dreaded, by reason of innovation of religion, and dissolving
of abbeys, and for abolishing of rites and other customs of the
church, sticking so fast in the minds of the people, that it was to
be feared lest their hearts were or would be shortly stirred up
against him, unless some speedy remedy were to the contrary provided: 
declaring, moreover, what a dangerous matter in a commonwealth it is,
to attempt new alterations of any thing, but especially of religion.
Which being so, he exhorted the king, for his own safeguard, and
public quiet and tranquillity of his realm, to see betimes how and by
what policy these so manifold mischiefs might be prevented. Against
which no other way or shift could be better devised, than if he would
show himself sharp and severe against these new sectaries,
Anabaptists and Sacramentaries (as they called them); and would also
set forth such articles, confirming the ancient and catholic faith,
as whereby he might recover again his credence with Christian
princes, and whereby all the world besides might see and judge him to
be a right and perfect catholic. By these, and such-like crafty
suggestions, the king, being too much seduced and abused, began to
withdraw his defence from the reformation of true religion, supposing
thereby to procure to himself more safety both in his own realm, and
also to avoid such dangers which otherwise might happen by other
princes; especially seeing of late he had refused to come to the
general council at Vincenza, being thereto invited both by the
emperor, and other foreign potentates, as ye have heard before, And
therefore, although he had rejected the pope out of this realm, yet
because he would declare himself, nevertheless, to be a good catholic
son of the mother church, and a withstander of new innovations and
heresies, (as the blind opinion of the world then did esteem them,)
first he stretched out his hand to the condemning and burning of
Lambert; then, afterwards, he gave out those injunctions above
prefixed; and now, further to increase this opinion with all men, in
the year next following, which was A.D. 1540, through the device and
practice of certain of the pope's factors about him, he summoned a
solemn parliament to be holden at Westminster the 28th day of April,
of all the states and burgesses of the realm; also a synod or
convocation of all the archbishops, bishops, and other learned of the
clergy of this realm, to be in like manner assembled.

The Act of the Six Articles.

     In which parliament, synod, or convocation, certain articles,
matters, and questions, touching religion, were decreed by certain
prelates, to the number especially of six, commonly called The Six
Articles, (or, The Whip with Six Strings,) to be had and received
among the king's subjects, on pretence of unity. But what unity
thereof followed, the groaning hearts of a great number, and also the
cruel death of divers, both in the days of King Henry, and; of Queen
Mary, can so well declare as I pray God never the like be felt
hereafter.

     The doctrine of these wicked articles in the bloody Act
contained, although it be worthy of no memory amongst Christian men,
but rather deserveth to be buried in perpetual oblivion, yet, for
that the office of history compelleth us thereunto, for the more
light of posterity to come, faithfully and truly to comprise things
done in the church, as well one as another, this shall be:  briefly to
recapitulate the sum and effect of the aforesaid six articles, in
order as they were given out, and hereunder do follow.

The first Article.

     The first article in this present parliament accorded and
agreed upon, was this:  "That in the most blessed sacrament of the
altar, by the strength and efficacy of Christ's mighty word, (it
being spoken by the priest,) is present really, under the form of
bread and wine, the natural body and blood of our Saviour Jesus
Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary; and that after the consecration
there remaineth no substance of bread or wine, or any other
substance, but the substance of Christ, God and man."

The second Article.

     "That the communion in both kinds is not necessary ad salutem,
by the law of God, to all persons:  and that it is to be believed, and
not doubted of, but that in the flesh, under form of bread, is the
very blood, and with the blood, under form of' wine, is the very
flesh, as well apart, as they were both together."

The third Article.

     "That priests, after the order of priesthood received as
before, may not marry by the law of God."

The fourth Article.

     "That vows of chastity or widowhood, by man or woman made to
God advisedly, ought to be observed by the law of God; and that it
exempteth them from other liberties of Christian people, which,
without that, they might enjoy."

The fifth Article.

     "That it is. meet and necessary, that private masses be
continued and admitted in this English church and congregation; as
whereby good Christian people, ordering themselves accordingly, do
receive both godly and goodly consolations and benefits and it is
agreeable also to God's law."

The sixth Article.

     "That auricular confession is expedient and necessary to be
retained and continued, used and frequented, in the church of God."

     After these articles were thus concluded and consented upon,
the prelates of the realm, craftily perceiving that such a foul and
violent Act could not take place or prevail unless strait and bloody
penalties were set upon them, they caused, through their accustomed
practice, to be ordained and enacted by the king and the lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in the said parliament, as
followeth: 

The penalty upon the first Article.

     "That if any person or persons, within this realm of England,
or any other the king's dominions, after the twelfth day of July next
coming, by word, writing, imprinting, ciphering, or any otherwise,
should publish, preach, teach, say, affirm, declare, dispute, argue,
or hold any opinion, that in the blessed sacrament of the altar,
under form of bread and wine, (after the consecration thereof,) there 
is not present really the natural body and blood of our Saviour,
Jesus Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary, or that after the said
consecration there remaineth any substance of bread or wine, or any
other substance but the substance of Christ, God and man; or, after
the time above said, publish, preach, teach, say, affirm, declare,
dispute, argue, or hold opinion, that in the flesh, under the form of
bread, is not the very blood of Christ, or that with the blood of
Christ, under the form of wine, is not the very flesh of Christ, as
well apart, as though they were both together; or by any of the means
above said, or otherwise, preach, teach, declare, or affirm the said
sacrament to be of other substance than is above said, or by any mean
contemn, deprave, or despise the said blessed sacrament:  that then,
every such person so offending, their aiders, comforters,
counsellors, consenters, and abettors therein, (being thereof
convicted in form under written, by the authority above said,) should
be deemed and adjudged heretics, and every such offence should be
adjudged manifest heresy; and that every such offender and offenders
should therefore have and suffer judgment, execution, pain and pains
of death by way of burning, without any abjuration, benefit of the
clergy, or sanctuary, to be therefore permitted, had, allowed,
admitted, or suffered; and also should therefore forfeit and lose to
the king's Highness, his heirs and successors, all his or their
honours, manors, castles, lands, tenements, rents, reversions,
services, possessions, and all other his or their hereditaments,
goods and chattels, farms and freeholds, whatsoever they were, which
any such offender or offenders should have, at the time of any such
offence or offences, committed or done, or at any time after, as in
any cases of high treason."

The penalties upon the last five Articles.

     And as touching the other five articles following, the
penalties devised for them were these:  "That every such person or
persons which do preach, teach, obstinately affirm, uphold, maintain,
or defend, after the twelfth day of July the said year, any thing
contrary to the same:  or if any, being in orders, or after a vow
advisedly made, did marry, or make marriage, or contract matrimony,
in so doing should be adjudged as felons, and lose both life, and
forfeit goods, as in case of felony, without any benefit of the
clergy, or privilege of the church or of the sanctuary, &c.

     "Item, That every such person or persons, which after the day
aforesaid, by word, writing, printing, ciphering, or otherwise, did
publish, declare, or hold opinion contrary to the five articles above
expressed, being for any such offence duly convicted or attainted: 
for the first time, besides the forfeit of all his goods and
chattels, and possessions whatsoever, should suffer imprisonment of
his body at the king's pleasure:  and for the second time, being
accused, presented, and thereof convicted, should suffer as in case
aforesaid of felony.

     "Item, If any within order of priesthood, before the time of
the said parliament, had married or contracted matrimony, or vowed
widowhood, the said matrimony should stand utterly void and be
dissolved.

     "Item, That the same danger that belonged to priests marrying
their wives, should also redound to the women married unto the
priests.

     "Furthermore, for the more effectual execution of the premises,
it was enacted by the said parliament, that full authority of
inquisition of all such heresies, felonies, and contempts, should be
committed and directed down into every shire, to certain persons
specially thereunto appointed; of which persons three at least,
(provided always the archbishop, or bishop, or his chancellor, or his
commissary, be one,) should sit four times at least in the year
having full power to take information and accusation, by the
depositions of any two lawful persons at the least, as well as by the
oaths of twelve men, to examine and inquire of all and singular the
heresies, felonies, and contempts above remembered; having also as
ample power to make process against every person or persons indicted,
presented, or accused before them; also to hear and determine the
aforesaid heresies, felonies, contempts, and other offences, as well
as if the matter had been presented before the justices of peace in
their sessions. And also, that the said justices in their sessions,
and every steward or under-steward, or his deputy, in their law-days,
should have power, by the oaths of twelve lawful men, to inquire,
likewise, of all and singular the heresies, felonies, contempts, and
other offences, and to hear and determine the same, to all effects of
this present Act, &c.

     Provided withal, that no person or persons thereupon accused,
indicted, or presented, should be admitted to challenge any that
should be empannelled for the trial of any matter or cause, other
than for malice or envy; which challenge should forthwith be tried in
like manner, as in cases of felony, &c.

     "Provided, moreover, that every person that should be named
commissioner in this inquisition, should first take a corporal oath,
the tenor of which oath here ensueth.

The oath of the commissioners.

     "Ye shall swear, that ye, to your cunning, wit, and power,
shall truly and indifferently execute the authority to you given by
the king's commission, made for correction of heretics and other
offenders mentioned in the same commission, without any favour,
affection, corruption, dread, or malice, to be borne to any person or
persons, as God you help, and all saints."

     And thus much briefly collected out of the Act and originals,
which more largely are to be seen in the statute, anno 31, reg. Hen.
VIII., concerning the six articles, which otherwise, for the bloody
cruelty thereof, are called The Whip with Six Strings, set forth
after the death of Queen Anne, and of good John Lambert, devised by
the cruelty of the bishops, but especially of the bishop of
Winchester, and at length also subscribed by King Henry. But herein,
as in many other parts more, the crafty policy of that bishop
appeared, who, like a lurking serpent, most slily watching his time,
if he had not taken the king coming out upon a sudden, there where it
was, (I spare here to report as I heard,) it was thought and affirmed
by certain which then were pertaining to the king, that Winchester
had not obtained the matter so easily to be subscribed as he did.

     These six articles above specified, although they contained
manifest errors, heresies, and absurdities against all Scripture and
learning, (as all men having any judgment in God's word may plainly
understand,) yet such was the miserable adversity of that time, and
the power of darkness, that the simple cause of truth and of religion
was utterly left desolate, and forsaken of all friends. For every man
seeing the king's mind so fully addicted, upon politic respects, to
have these articles pass forward, few or none in all that parliament
would appear, which either could perceive what was to be defended, or
thirst defend what they understood to be true, save only Cranmer,
archbishop of Canterbury, who then, being married, (as is supposed,)
like a constant patron of God's cause, took upon him the earnest
defence of the truth, oppressed in the parliament; three days
together disputing against those six wicked articles; bringing forth
such allegations and authorities, as might easily have helped the
cause; who, in the said disputation, behaved himself with such humble
modesty, and with such obedience in words towards his prince,
protesting the cause not to be his, but the cause of Almighty God,
that neither his enterprise was misliked of the king; and again, his
reasons and allegations were so strong,that they could not well be
refuted. Wherefore the king, (who ever bare special favour unto him,)
well liking his zealous defence, only willed him to depart out of the
parliament-house into the council-chamber, for a time, (for safeguard
of his conscience,) till the Act should pass and be granted; which
he, notwithstanding, with humble protestation, refused to do.

     After the parliament was finished, and that matter concluded,
the king, considering the constant zeal of the archbishop in defence
of his cause, and partly also weighing the many authorities and
reasons whereby he had substantially confirmed the same, sent the
Lord Cromwell, (who, within few days after, was apprehended,) the two
dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and all the lords of the parliament, to
dine with him at Lambeth; where they signified unto him, that it was
the king's pleasure, that they all should, in his Highness's behalf,
cherish, comfort, and animate him, as one that for his travail in
that parliament had declared himself both greatly learned, and also a
man discreet and wise; and therefore they willed him not to be
discouraged in any thing that was passed in that parliament contrary
to his allegations.

     He most humbly thanked, first, the king's Highness, for his
singular good affection towards him, and them for all their pains;
adding moreover, that he so hoped in God, that hereafter his
allegations and authorities should take place to the glory of God,
and commodity of the realm:  which allegations and authorities of his,
I wish were extant among us, to be seen and read. No doubt but they
would stand, in time to come, in great good stead, for the overthrow
of the wicked and pernicious articles aforesaid.

Allegations against the Six Articles.
 IN the mean while, forasmuch as the said heretical
articles are not so lightly to be passed over, whereby the rude and
ignorant multitude hereafter may be deceived in the false and
erroneous doctrine of them any more, as they have been in times pift,
for lack of right instruction and experience of the ancient state and
course of times in our fore-elders' days; I thought therefore, (the
Lord thereunto assisting,) so much as antiquity of stories may help
to the restoring again of truth and doctrine decayed, to annex
hereunto some allegations out of ancient records, which may give some
light to the convincing of these new-fangled articles and heresies 
above touched.

     And first, as touching the article of transubstantiation,
wherein this parliament doth enact that the sacrament of the altar is
the very natural body of Christ, the selfsame which was born of the
Virgin Mary; and that in such sort as there remaineth no substance of
bread and wine, after the priest's consecration; but only the body
and blood of Christ, under the outward forms of bread and wine First,
here is to be noted, that this monstrous article of theirs; in that
form of words as it standeth, was never obtruded, received, or holden
either in the Greek church, or in the Latin church, universally for a
catholic, that is, for a general, opinion or article of doctrine,
before the time of the Lateran council at Rome, under Pope Innocent
the Third, A.D. 1216.

     And forasmuch as it hath been a common persuasion amongst the
most sort of people, that this article, in the form of words as here
it standeth, is, and hath been ever since Christ's time, a true
catholic and general doctrine, commonly received and taught in the
church, being approved by the Scriptures and doctors, and consent of
all ages unto this present time; to the intent therefore that the
contrary may appear, and the people may see how far they have herein
been beguiled, we will here (Christ willing) make a little stay in
our story, and examine this foresaid article by true antiquity and
course of histories, to try whether it be a doctrine old or new.

     Now therefore, for the better discussing of the matter, let us
first orderly and distinctly advise the words of the article; the
contents of which article consist in two parts or members. In the
first whereof is noted to us a presence of a thing which there was
not before:  in the second, is noted a privation or absence of a thing
which there before was present.

     The presence is noted by these words of the article, where it
is said that in the blessed sacrament, by the words pronounced, are
present the natural body and blood of our Saviour under the forms of
bread and wine:  so that in these words, both the sacrament and the
natural body are imported necessarily to be present. For else, how
can the natural body of Christ be present in the sacrament under the
forms of bread and wine, if the sacrament there were not present
itself? or how can a thing be said to be in that which is not there?
Wherefore by these words both the sacrament, and also the body, must
necessarily have their being and presence, the one being in the
other. And this presence both of the sacrament and of the body, being
rightly taken, may right well stand together; the sacrament to the
outward eyes and mouth of man, the body of Christ to the inward eyes
of faith, and mouth of the soul. And therefore touching these
prepositions in this article, "in" and"under," if question be asked,
In what is the body of Christ? it may well be answered, In the
sacrament, to the eyes of our faith; like as the outward sacrament is
also present to the outward eyes of the body. Again, if the question
be asked, Under what is the body of Christ? it may be well answered,
Under the forms of bread and wine, so as the doctors did take the
forms to mean the outward elements and natures of the sacrament, and
not the accidents.

     And thus, to the first part of the article, being well
expounded, we do assent and confess the same to have been the true
catholic opinion, approved by the ancient doctors and consent of all
times, even from the first institution of this sacrament.

     But as concerning the second member or part of the article,
which taketh away all presence and substance of bread from the
sacrament; to that we say, that first it standeth not with their own
article:  secondly, that it standeth not with the doctrine of
Scripture:  thirdly, that it standeth not with antiquity, but is
merely a late invention.

     And first, that it agreeth not with their own article, it is
manifest. For whereas in the former part of their article they say,
that the natural body of Christ is present in the blessed sacrament
under the forms of bread and wine, how can the natural body of Christ
be present in the sacrament, if there remain no sacrament? or how can
any sacrament of the body remain, if there remain no substance of
bread, which should make the sacrament? for how can the body of
Christ be in that thing, which is not? or how can the sacrament of
the body have any being, where the substance of bread hath no being?
For first, that the body itself cannot be the sacrament of the body,
is evident of itself.

     Secondly, that the accidents of bread, without the substance of
bread, cannot be any sacrament of Christ's body, certain it is, and
demonstrable by this argument.

Argumentum à definitione.

     "A sacrament is, that which beareth a similitude of that thing
whereof it is a sacrament.

     "Accidents bear no similitude of that thing which is there
signified.

     "Ergo, Accidents can in no wise be a sacrament."

     Wherefore, upon this argument being thus concluded, upon the
same this also must needs follow. "In the sacrament of the Lord's
body, the thing that representeth must needs bear a similitude of the
thing represented.

     "The substance of bread in the sacrament, is only that which
beareth the similitude of Christ's body. "Ergo, The substance of
bread must needs be in the sacrament."

     And therefore, by this demonstration it is apparent that these
two parts in the article aforesaid are evil couched together, whereof
the one must needs destroy the other. For if the first part of the
article be true, that the natural body of Christ is present in the
sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine, and seeing the
sacrament wherein the body of Christ is present must needs be the
substance of bread, and not the accidents only of bread, as is above
proved, then the substance of bread cannot be evacuated from the
sacrament; and so the second member of the article must needs be
false.

     Or, if the second part be true, that there is no substance of
bread remaining, and seeing there is nothing else to make the
sacrament of the natural body of Christ, but only the substance of
bread, forasmuch as the accidents of bread can make no sacrament of
Christ's body, as is above showed; then, taking away the substance of
bread, the first part of the article must needs be false, which
saith, that the natural body of Christ is present in the sacrament;
forasmuch as the substance of bread being evacuated, there remaineth
no sacrament, wherein the body of Christ should be present. Secondly,
that it disagreeth from the whole order and course of the Scriptures,
it is sufficiently explained before in the treatise of John Lambert
upon the sacrament, as also in other sundry places in these volumes
besides. Thirdly, that the said article of transubstantiation is no
ancient or authentic doctrine in the church publicly received; but
rather is a novelty lately invented, reaching not much above the age
of three or four hundred years, or at most above the time of
Lanfranc, A.D. 1070, it remains now to be proved.

     Wherein first may be joined this issue:  that this monstrous
paradox of transubstantiation was never induced or received publicly
in the church, before the time of the Lateran council, under Pope
Innocent the Third, A.D. 1216; or at most before the time of
Lanfranc, the Italian, archbishop of Canterbury, A.D. 1070.

     In which time of Lanfranc, I deny not but that this question of
transubstantiation began to come in controversy, and was reasoned
upon amongst certain learned of the clergy. But that this article of
transubstantiation was publicly determined or prescribed in the
church, for a general law or catholic doctrine, of all men
necessarily to be believed, before the time of the aforesaid
Innocentthe Third, it may be doubted, and also, by histories of time,
proved to be false.

     And though our adversaries seem to allege out of the old
doctors certain speeches and phrases, which they wrest and wring to
their purposes; wherein they say, "that the bread is called, is
believed, and is, the body of Christ;" "that of bread is made the
body of Christ;" 'and "that the bread is changed, altered, or
converted to the body of Christ, or is made to be his body; '" that
the creatures be converted into the substance of the body and blood
of Christ;" "that the bread and wine do pass into the Divine
substance;" with such other like sentences; and bear themselves brag
upon the same, as though this doctrine of transubstantiation stood
upon the consent of the whole universal church, of all ages and
times, of nations and people, and that the judgment of the church was
never other than this:  and yet, if the old doctors' sayings be well
weighed, and the discourse of times by this history well examined, it
will be found that this prodigious opinion of transubstantiation hath
no such ground of consent and antiquity as they imagine; nor yet that
any heresy or treason was made of denying transubstantiation before
the time of Innocent the Third, or, at the furthest, of Lanfranc, as
is aforesaid, about which time Satan, the old dragon, was prophesied
by the Apocalypse, to be let loose, to seduce the world.

     For probation whereof, first I will begin with the time of
Tertullian and of Augustine; which both do teach the sacrament to be
a figure, a sign, a memorial, and a representation of the Lord's
body, and knew no such transubstantiation; and yet were no traitors
nor heretics.

     Neither was St. Ambrose any heretic or traitor, where he
writeth these words, Ut sint quæ erant, nec in aliud convertantur,
&c.; which words Lanfranc could not answer unto any other wise, but
by denying them to be the words of Ambrose. Gelasius was bishop of
Rome, and lived about five hundred years after Christ, and speaketh
of a transmutation of the bread and wine into the Divine nature; but
there, expounding himself, he declareth what he meaneth by that
mutation, so that he expressly showeth the elements of bread and
wine, notwithstanding, to remain still in their proper nature, with
other words more, very plain to the same effect:  unto the which words
Contarenus in the assembly of Ratisbon could not well answer, but
stood astonied.

     Theodoret likewise, speaking of the visible symbols, hath these
words:  "After the sanctification they remain in their former
substance, figure, and form."

     Ireneus, where he saith that "the bread broken, and the cup
mixed, after the vocation of God, cease to be common bread any more,
but are the Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ: " and,
explicating his words more plainly, addeth, moreover, that "the
Eucharist consisteth in two things, one being earthly, which is bread
and wine; the other heavenly, which is the body and blood of Christ,"
&c.:  he declareth, in these words, both his own opinion plainly, and
also teacheth us what was then the doctrine of his time.

     Hesichius also, who was five hundred years after Christ, where
he speaketh of the said mystery, to be both flesh and bread;
declaring thereby two substances to be in the sacrament. By the which
we have to understand that transubstantiation, in his age, was not
crept into the church; and yet neither heresy, nor treason, 
therefore, was ever laid to his charge for so saying.

     Emissene, comparing a man converted unto Christ by
regeneration, unto the holy mysteries converted into the body and
blood of our Lord, expresseth plainly, that outwardly nothing is
changed, and that all the change is inward, &c.; wherein, no doubt,
he spake against this article, and yet no man, in all that age, did
accuse him therefore to be either heretic or traitor.

     Here might be added the words of Fulgentius, "This cup is the
new testament; that is, this cup which I deliver unto you, signifieth
the new testament."

     Bede also, who lived about the year 730, writing upon the
twenty-first Psalm, hath these words:  "Poor men, to wit, despisers of
the world, shall eat indeed really, if it be referred unto the
sacraments, and shall be filled eternally; because they shall
understand in bread and in wine, being visibly set before them, a
thing invisible, to wit, the true body and true blood of the Lord,
which are true meat and true drink, wherewith not the belly is
filled, but the mind is nourished."

     And thus, in these words of Bede, likewise, is to be
understood, that no transubstantiation as yet in his time was
received in the church of England.

     Long it were to stand upon all particulars. Briefly to
conclude; the further the church hath been from these our latter
days, the purer it was in all respects, and especially touching this
barbarous article of transubstantiation. We will now draw more near
our own time, coming to the age of Bertram and of Haymo, who were
about the year of our Lord 810, under Charlemagne.

     By whose writing it is evident, that the church was infected as
yet with no such fantasy of transubstantiation, neither did any almost
dream oftaking away the substance of bread from the sacrament. For
although Haymo, Remigius, Rabanus, and others who lived in that age, do
attribute to the sacrament, that honourable name and reverence (as we
also do) of the Lord's body and blood, yet they exclude not from thence
all substance of meal and bread, and leave the bare accidents, as our
new-come Catholics do, as by the words of Haymo doth appear. Where he,
following the words of Bede, showeth also the cause, why it is so
called by the name of the Lord's body? "Because," saith he, "bread
confirmeth the heart of man, therefore it is called conveniently the
body of Christ; and because wine worketh blood in the flesh of man,
therefore it is referred to the blood of Christ." What can be more
effectually spoken to prove the substance of bread there to remain? for
take away the substance of bread and wine, what is in the accidents
left, that can confirm man's heart, or engender blood in the flesh? And
therefore, seeing there must needs something remain, that must be
referred to Christ's body and blood in that sacrament, it either must
he the substance of bread and wine, or else it can be no sacrament. And
furthermore, speaking of the visible things which are sanctified, how
and whereunto they be converted, he saith, that by the Holy Ghost they
passed to a sacrament of the Lord's body.

     And likewise the same Haymo, in another place, speaking of the
fruits of the earth, that is, of corn and wine, declareth how our
Saviour, making of them "an apt mystery," converteth them to "a
sacrament of his body and blood," &c.

     Bertram likewise, as he lived in the same age, so in like sort
he showed his opinion therein, to the like effect as Haymo did. For,
as Haymo, writing in these words, declareth, "The sacrament is one
thing, and the virtue of the sacrament is another thing; for the
sacrament is received with the mouth, but with the virtue of the
sacrament the inward man is satisfied."

     So after like manner, Bertram, according to the same, thus
writeth:  "The bread, which by the ministry of the priest is made the
body of Christ, doth import one thing outwardly to the senses of man,
and another thing it speaketh to the minds of the faithful.
Outwardly, it is bread, the same it was before; the same form is
pretended, the colour appeareth, the same taste remaineth:  but
inwardly, there is another matter far more precious and more
excellent, because it is heavenly, which is the body of Christ that
is seen, not with the outward eyes of the flesh, but with the sight
of a faithful mind," &c.

     We will now proceed to the testimony of Rabanus Maurus, bishop
of Mentz, and scholar some time to Alcuinus, in.garis, an Englishman;
who, living also in the same age with Haymo and Bertram, (which was
eight hundred years after Christ,) giveth the like testimony of this
doctrine in his Book of Institutions; where he, asking the question
why the Lord would give the mysteries of his body and blood then
under such things as might be kept and reserved whole with great
honour, thus he answereth again:  "The Lord," saith he, "would rather
that the sacraments of his body and blood should be received with the
mouth of the faithful, and made to be their food, that by the visible
action the invisible effect might be showed. For, like as material
meat outwardly nourisheth and quickeneth the body, so also the word
of God inwardly nourisheth and strengtheneth the soul:  for man liveth
not only by bread, but by every word proceeding from the mouth of
God." And after followeth, "For this bread and drink signifieth the
eternal society of the Head and of the members together." And again: 
"For the sacraments are one thing, and the virtue of the sacrament is
another thing. The sacrament is received with the mouth; with the
virtue of the sacrament the inward man is nourished; for the
sacrament is turned to the nourishment of the body; but, by the
virtue of the sacrament, the dignity of eternal life is gotten.
Wherefore, like as the same is turned into us when we eat of it, so
also are we turned into the body of Christ, when we live obediently
and godly," &c.

     Who seeth not by these words of this bishop, what form of
doctrine was then in the church received concerning this article of
the sacrament, such diverse from this our gross opinion of
transubstantiation?

     With the same Rabanus, also, accordeth another of the like
standing and doctrine also, called Christianus Druthmarus, who,
writing upon Matthew, "The wine," saith he, "doth cheer and cherish
the blood, and, therefore, not inconveniently the blood of Christ is
figured thereby:  for whatsoever proceedeth from him to us, it
cheereth us with true gladness, and increaseth all goodness unto us."
And a little before, the said Druthmarus saith, "The Lord gave to his
disciples the sacrament of his body to the remission of sins, and
keeping of charity; that they, alway remembering his doing, might do
that in figure, which he should do for them. This is my body, saith
he; that is, in sacrament." This Druthmarus lived also in the time of
Charlemagne, as witnesseth the abbot of Spanheim.

     After Bertram was Johannes Scotus, or else, as some call him,
Johannes Erigena; a man well accepted with Charles the Bald, and
afterwards with Louis the Stammerer, about A.D. 880. He wrote a book,
De Corpore et Sanguine Domini, so affirming therein, and teaching, as
he knew that Bertram had taught a little before in France. This book
the pope caused to be condemned in the synod of Vercelli. Of the life
and conversation of this Johannes Scotus, and also of his death, read
before.

     In the year of our Lord 950, lived Odo, archbishop of
Canterbury, in whose time, it appeareth, by the Romish Catholics' own
confession, that many priests then affirmed, that the bread and wine,
after consecration, did remain in their former substance, and that
the said mysteries were only a figure of the body and blood of
Christ, as we find it witnessed by Osberne himself, who did write the
lives of Odo, Dunstan, and Elphege, at the bidding of Lanfranc,
archbishop of Canterbury, as reporteth Edmerus, Anselm's chaplain.
The words of Osberne be these:  "About this time," saith Osberne,
writing in the days of Lanfranc, "certain of the clergy, being
seduced by wicked error, did hold and maintain that bread and wine,
which are set upon the altar, after the consecration do remain in
their former substance, and are but only a figure of the body and
blood of Christ," &c. And no doubt but at that time the common
opinion of most of the clergy was so, that the sacrament was the body
and blood of Christ, and that the substance of bread and wine,
notwithstanding, were not transubstantiated, as the Romish Catholics
do now teach. But this is the guise of these men, that in their
writings and stories still they diminish the better number, whereby
their faction may seem ever to be the bigger; and therefore to
extenuate the common opinion then received in the church, he
inferreth mention of certain of the clergy, &c.

     And as he faileth in the number of these clergymen which then
held against transubstantiation, so he upholdeth the same with as
lying a miracle; which miracle he feigned to be wrought the same
time, for the conversion of the said clergymen, by the blood dropping
out of the host at mass, as Odo was breaking the host over the
chalice. At the sight whereof, first, Odo himself (saith he) wept for
joy; seeing his petition accomplished which he so earnestly prayed
for.

     Secondarily, "All those clergymen," saith he, "which before
believed not this transubstantiation, by and by were converted, and
blessed the archbishop that ever he was born; desiring him to pray
again, that the blood might return to his former shape; and straight: 
it was done." And this was the miracle; which seemeth as true as that
which William of Malmesbury writeth of the said Odo, how, by his
prayers, he caused a sword to come flying from heaven into King
Ethelstan's scabbard, when he had lost his own, as he would fight
against Analanus; or else, as that miracle where the said Odo is said
to cover and defend the church of Canterbury, that no drop of rain
could touch it, so long as the roof thereof was in making.

     In the which so miraculous a miracle, many things are to be
marvelled. First, I marvel that at this great miracle of the
archbishop in his cathedral church, amongst so many singing men, we
read of no Te Deum there to be sung after the doing thereof.

     Secondly, I marvel that those priests and clerks which then
denied transubstantiation, were suffered to be so near the archbishop
at his mass, and that they were not committed rather to ward like
heretics and traitors, if this article of transubstantiation had been
then such a catholic doctrine, and so publicly received in the
church, as they say it was.

     Thirdly, I marvel, seeing the time of miracles is expired, we,
having the Scriptures to guide us, why the archbishop would seek to
miracles and apparitions to convert men, rather than to the law and
prophets, according as we are commanded:  especially having no such
examples of all the old doctors, which, in confutation of so many
erroneous opinions, yet never sought to such miracles, or blind
means.

     Fourthly, I marvel much at the discrepance in telling this
tale, between Osberne and the others, which since have written
Legends of Odo. For whereas Osberne, speaking of certain priests,
nameth no place, but leaveth the matter at large; and speaketh
absolutely, certain priests; all other, who have since written the
Legends of Odo, do tell this tale against certain priests of
Canterbury; adding to the words of Osberne, certain priests of
Canterbury. But to convict the falsehood of them all, as well of
Osberne as of the rest, there is a legend of the life of Odo, and of
Oswald together, more ancient than this of Osberne, written (as it
may seem) in the time of Elfric, archbishop of Canterbury, and 
Elphege, then bishop of Winchester, wherein mention is made indeed of
this miracle, but after another sort than this of Osberne, and to
another purpose than to dissuade certain priests, infected with that
error, from the opinion before declared:  which is only brought to
show the holiness of Odo, as commonly the manner of legends is to do: 
so that in this old legend it is thus reported, that when this
miracle was done, Odo disclosed the matter not to many priests of
England that were in that error, as Osberne would, "but called unto
him a certain faithful servant who was near about him, and showed
unto him the miracle secretly;" whereupon the priest (saith the
legend) much rejoiced at the holiness of Odo, and desired him to make
his prayer to Almighty God, that the body might return again to the
former shape, &c. Out of this old lying legend Osberne, and other
likewise that followed him, seemeth to have taken this tale, so that
out of the error of one (as the manner is) springeth the error of a
number more.

     But this much more I marvel, why this miracle is not storied in
Henry Huntingdon, which professedly writeth of such miracles, nor in
Roger Hoveden, and such others; but only in such blind legends, which
commonly have no substance of verity, nor certainty of time or
writer, to know when and by whom they were written, and for the most
part are stuffed with lying visions and prodigious fables.

     Finally, if this miraculous fiction of Osberne were true, that
for the converting of priests of England which would not believe
transubstantiation, this blood did drop out of the host, (of which
blood peradventure came the blood of Hayles,) and by the sight
thereof, the priests eftsoon were all converted, (as Osberne
pretendeth,) how then came it to pass, that after the time of Odo, in
the days of Elfric, which was after him archbishop of Canterbury, the
third from Dunstan, and fourth from Odo, not only the priests of
England, but also the archbishop himself, were not yet brought to the
belief of this transubstantiation, but taught the very same doctrine
of the sacrament then, which we do now:  as most clearly appeareth
both by the epistles and homilies of the aforesaid archbishop Elfric,
which hereunder, for the more evidence (Christ willing) we will
annex.

     This Elfric, as saith Capgrave, in the life of Oswald, bishop
of Worcester, was first abbot of St. Alban's, and after made
archbishop of Canterbury, about A.D. 996, in the time of King
Etheldred, and of Wulfsine, bishop of Sherbourne. Elfric, also, (as
witnesseth William of Malmesbury, in the life of Adelmus,) was abbot
of Malmesbury. Furthermore, the said William of Malmesbury, writing
of Elfric, archbishop of Canterbury, saith, that he was before bishop
of Wells, and afterwards bishop of Canterbury. So, that Elfric was
archbishop of Canterbury, it is out of all ambiguity. But whether
Elfric, who was abbot, (of whom we do here speak,) were the same
archbishop or not, by this diversity of Capgrave and Malmesbury, it
may be doubtful. But whether he were or no, to this our present
purpose is not greatly material, forasmuch as although they were
divers persons, yet were they both in one age, and lived in one time
together.

     Furthermore, the same Elfric, of whom now we speak, of what
calling soever he was, yet, notwithstanding, he was of such
estimation and good liking in those days amongst the most learned,
that for his learning, authority, and eloquence, his writings were 
accepted and authorized among the canons and constitutions of the
church in that time, as hereby may appear. For whereas the bishops
and priests, before the coming of William the Conqueror, had
collected together a certain book of canons and ordinances to govern
the clergy, gathered out of general and particular councils, out of
the book of Gildas, out of the penitential books of Theodore,
archbishop of Canterbury, out of the writings of Egbert, archbishop
of York, out of the epistles of Alcuinus, as also out of the writings
of the old fathers of the primitive church, &c.; among the same
canons and constitutions be placed these two epistles of the said
Elfric hereunder following, whereof the one was sent to Wulfsine,
bishop of Sherbourne, the other to Wulfstane, archbishop of York; as
yet are to be seen in two books belonging to the library of the
church of Worcester, the one written in the old Saxons' tongue,
entitled Beppeost dinothe, the other for the most part in Latin, with 
this title, Admonitio Spiritualis Doctrinæ:  which book of Saxon
canons and constitutions, sometime belonging to Wulfstane, bishop of
Worcester, was given by him, as for a great jewel, to the church of
Worcester, as by the same book appeareth.

     Moreover, besides this book of Worcester above-touched, there
is yet extant also another like book of canons, belonging to the
church of Exeter, wherein the same two epistles of Elfric be
contained in the old Saxon tongue, and also in Latin, and prescribed
yearly to be read to the clerks and priests of that church; which
book, in like manner, was given to the church of Exeter, by Leofric,
the first and most famous bishop of that see.

     Of this Elfric, further, is to be understood, that he
translated two books of fourscore sermons out of Latin into the Saxon
speech, used then orderly to be read in churches on Sundays, and
other festival days of the year.

     Of his epistles especially we read of four which he wrote, one
to the monks of Egnehsam, De consuetudine Monachorum:  another to
Wulfstane, archbishop of York, wherein is touched the matter of the
sacrament:  the third he wrote against priests' marriage, to one
Sygeferth, with whom there was a certain anchorite abiding, who
defended the marriage of priests, affirming it to be lawful. The
fourth he wrote to Wulfsine, bishop of Sherboume, touching the matter
of the sacrament; in the which epistle, he, taking occasion by a
certain abuse in his time, which was, that priests, on Easter-day,
filled their housel-box for sick persons, and so kept it for the
space of a whole year, till Easter came again, writeth upon that
occasion in these words: 

     "Men shall reserve more carefully that holy housel, and not
reserve it too long, but hallow other of new, for sick men, always
within a week or a fortnight, that it be not so much as hoary:  for so
holy is the housel which to-day is hallowed, as that which on Easter-
day was hallowed. That housel is Christ's body not bodily, but
ghostly:  not the body which he suffered in, but the body of which he
spake, when he blessed bread and wine, to housel, the night before
his suffering, and said, by the blessed bread, This is my body:  and,
again by the holy wine, This is my blood which is shed for many in
forgiveness of sins. Understand now that the Lord, who could turn
that bread, before his suffering, to his body, and that wine, to his
blood ghostly, that the selfsame Lord blesseth daily, through the
priest's hands, bread and wine, to his ghostly body and to his
ghostly blood."

     After this epistle of Elfric above prefixed, written to
Wulfsine, bishop of Sherbourne, concerning the sacramental bread, how
it is not Christ's body lichamlice, that is, "bodily," or, as we term
it now, "really; "and also how the same ought not to be over long
kept in the pix; here followeth further another epistle of the said
Elfric, written to Wulfstane, archbishop of York, both reprehending
the said abuse above touched, and also containing matter more at
large, against the bodily presence in the sacramental bread. The copy
of his epistle, in our English, here followeth: 

     "Some priests fill their box for housel on Easter-day, and to
reserve it a whole year for sick men, as though that housel were more
holy than any other. But they do unadvisedly, because it waxeth hoary
or altogether rotten, by keeping it so long space:  and thus are they
become guilty, as the book witnesseth to us. If any do keep the
housel so long, or lose it, or mice or other beasts do eat it, see
what the penitential book saith by this:  'So holy is altogether that
housel which is hallowed to-day, as that which is hallowed on Easter-
day.' Wherefore I beseech you to keep the holy body of Christ with
more advisement, for sick men, from Sunday to Sunday, in a very clean
box; or at the most not to keep it above a fortnight, and then eat
it, laying other in the place. We have an example hereof in Moses'
books, as God himself hath commanded in Moses' law, how the priests
should set, every Saturday, twelve loaves, all new baked, upon the
tabernacle, which were called Panes propositionis:  and those should
stand there, in God's tabernacle, till the next Saturday; and then
did the priests themselves eat them, and set others in the place."

     "Some priests will not eat the housel which they do hallow. But
we will now declare unto you how the book speaketh by them:  'The
priest that doth say mass, and dare not eat the housel, his
conscience accusing him, is accursed.' It is less danger to receive
the housel, than to hallow it. He that doth twice hallow one host to
housel, is like unto those heretics, who do christen twice one child.
Christ himself blessed housel before his suffering:  he blessed the
bread and brake it, thus speaking to his apostles, Eat this bread; it
is my body. And again, he blessed one chalice with wine, and thus
also spake unto them, Drink ye all of this; this is mine own blood of
the new testament, which is shed for many for the forgiveness of
sins. The Lord which hallowed housel before his suffering, and saith
that the bread was his own body, and that the wine was truly his
blood, halloweth daily, by the hands of the priest, bread to his body
and wine to his blood, in ghostly mystery, as we read in books. And
yet, notwithstanding, that lively bread is not bodily so; nor the
self-same body that Christ suffered in; nor is that holy wine the
Saviour's blood which was shed for us in bodily thing, but in ghostly
understanding. Both be truly, that bread is his body, and that wine
also is his blood; as was the heavenly bread which we call manna,
that fed forty years God's people; and the clear water, which did
then run from the stone in the wilderness, was truly his blood, as
St. Paul wrote in one of his Epistles, All our fathers did eat in the
wilderness the same ghostly meat, and drink the same ghostly drink: 
they drank of that ghostly stone, and that stone was Christ. The
apostle hath said, as you have heard, that they all did eat the same
ghostly meat, and they all did drink the same ghostly drink. And he
saith not bodily, but ghostly. And Christ was not yet born, nor his
blood shed, when the people of Israel did eat that meat and drank of
that stone. And the stone was not bodily Christ, though he so said.
It was the same mystery in the old law, and they did ghostly signify
that ghostly housel of our Saviour's body, which we consecrate now."

     Besides these epistles above prefixed of Elfric to Wulfsine and
Wulfstane, which fight directly against transubstantiation, mention
was touched also before of certain sermons, to the number of
fourscore, translated by the said Elfric out of Latin into the Saxon,
that is, into our English tongue, as ye partly have heard before. Of
the which fourscore sermons, twenty-four were chiefly selected to be
read, instead of homilies or treatises, unto the people; in such
order as the first twelve sermons or treatises, treating of general
matters, were appointed to be read at pleasure, and at the discretion
of the minister. The other twelve sermons were prescribed of proper
feasts, whereof this testimony remaineth in the same book yet to be
seen, both in the Saxon tongue, and also in the preface of the latter
twelve sermons.

     Furthermore, as touching these fourscore sermons aforesaid,
which Elfric translated into English, here is to be understood, that
among the said sermons, used then orderly to be recited by the
people, there was one appointed to be read In Die Sancto Paschæ, that
is, upon Easter-day; which sermon, being translated by the said
Elfric, we have here exhibited both in Saxon speech and English, to
the intent that the Christian and indifferent reader, perusing the
same, may judge thereby how the fantastical doctrine of
transubstantiation, in those days of Elfric, and before his time, was
not yet received or known in the church of England; forasmuch as the
said sermon, being in Latin before, doth leave unto us an evident
declaration, what was the common opinion of the sacrament in the
church received, before Elfric did ever set hand to translate the
same out of the Latin.

     And though the Latin copies and exemplars of these aforesaid
sermons are not remaining in our libraries, let that be no marvel to
thee, loving reader! but understand thereby the crafty packing of the
pope's clergy, who, in the time of Lanfranc and Pope Innocent,
studying by all means how to prefer and further this their new-come
doctrine of transubstantiation, did abolish and rase out of libraries
and churches all such books which made to the contrary. And
therefore, because Lanfranc, and other Italian priests here in
England, understood not the Saxon books as they did the Latin, (all
that which they understood they made away,) the Saxon books, because
they knew them not, they let remain:  and this is the cause why our
Saxon copies are now to be found:  which to be true by three reasons
conjectural it may be probably supposed.

     First, for that these Saxon sermons, being translated out of
the Latin, (as ye have heard by the words of Elfric already proved,)
we see only the Saxon books reserved:  of the Latin none do appear.

     Secondly, there is yet remaining one certain piece or fragment
of an epistle of Elfric in the library of Worcester; wherein, so much
as maketh against the matter of transubstantiation, we found in the
middle of the said Latin epistle utterly rased out, so that no letter
nor piece of a letter doth there appear. The words cut out were
these:  "Notwithstanding this sacrifice is not the same body of his
wherein he suffered for us, nor the same blood of his which he shed
for us:  but, spiritually, it is made his body and blood as that manna
which rained from heaven, and the water which did flow out of the
rock. As Paul,' &c. These words, so rased out, are to be restored
again by another Saxon book found in Exeter:  by the rasing of which
one place, it may easily be conjectured what these practisers have
likewise done in the rest.

     Thirdly, by one Italian trick of Polydore Virgil in our days,
the properties and doings of all other Italian papists of elder time
may partly be conjectured:  for so I am informed by such as precisely
will affirm it to be true, that when Polydore, being licensed by the
king to view and search all libraries, had once accomplished his
story by the help of such books as he had compiled out of libraries;
in the end, when he had taken out what he would, like a true factor
for the pope's own tooth, he piled his books together, and set them
all on a light fire. For what cause he so did, I cannot certainly
pronounce; but whoso considereth well his religion, may shrewdly
suspect him:  for a probation whereof, this may serve for a sufficient
trial; that whereas of all other writers of histories that have been
in England, as of Fabian, Lanquet, Rastal, More, Leland, Bale, Hall,
and such others, some of their books which they then occupied, yet
remain in hands to be seen:  only of such books as Polydore used, and
which passed his hands, what Englishman is he that hath seen, or can
show me one? Whereby it may well be thought the aforesaid information
to be true. As also by this one Italian trick of Polydore, may other
Italians likewise be suspected, in making away such Latin books
within this land, as made not for their purpose. But forasmuch as
those Latin books be now abolished, and cannot be had, let us return
to our tongue again, and see what this Saxon sermon of Elfric's
translation doth say for transubstantiation; the copy whereof here
ensueth: 

     "Men beloved! it hath been often said unto you about our
Saviour's resurrection, how he, on this present day after his
suffering, mightily rose from death. Now will we open unto you,
through God's grace, of the holy housel, which ye should now go unto,
and instruct your understanding about this mystery, both after the
old covenant, and also after the new, that no doubting may trouble
you about this lively food.

     "The Almighty God bade Moses, his captain in the land of Egypt,
to command the people of Israel, to take to every family a lamb of
one year old, the night they departed out of the country to the land
of promise, and to offer that lamb to God, and after to cut it, and
to make the sign of the cross, with the lamb's blood upon the side
posts and the upper posts of their door; and afterwards to eat the
lamb's flesh roasted, and unleavened bread with wild lettuce.

     God saith unto Moses, Eat of the lamb nothing raw, nor sodden
in water, but roasted at the fire. Eat the head, the feet, and the
inwards, and let nothing of it be left until the morning; if any
thing thereof remain, that shall you burn with fire. Eat it in this
wise:  gird your loins, and do your shoes on your feet; have your
staves in your hands; and eat it in haste. The time is the Lord's
passover. And there was slain on that night, in every house
throughout all Pharaoh's reign, the first-born child:  and God's
people of Israel were delivered from that sudden death through the
lamb's offering, and his blood's marking. Then said God unto Moses,
Keep this day in your remembrance, and hold it a great feast in your
kindreds, with a perpetual observation; and eat unleavened bread
always seven days at this feast.

     "After this deed, God led the people of Israel over the Red Sea
with dry foot, and drowned therein Pharaoh and all his army, together
with their possessions, and fed, afterwards, the Israelites forty
years with heavenly food, and gave them water out of the hard rock,
until they came to the promised land. Part of this story we have
treated of in another place, and part we shall now declare; to wit,
that which belongeth to the holy housel. Christian men may not now
keep that old law bodily, but it behoveth them to know what it
ghostly signifieth. That innocent lamb which the old Israelites did
then kill, had signification, after ghostly understanding, of
Christ's suffering, who, unguilty, shed his holy blood for our
redemption. Hereof sing God's servants at every mass, 'Thou Lamb of
God! that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.'

     "Those Israelites were delivered from that sudden death and
from Pharaoh's bondage, by the lamb's offering, which signified
Christ's suffering; through which we be delivered from everlasting
death, and from the devil's cruel reign, if we rightly believe in the
true Redeemer of the whole world, Christ the Saviour. That lamb was
offered in the evening; and our Saviour suffered in the sixth age of
this world. This age of this corruptible world, is reckoned unto the
evening. They marked with the lamb's blood, upon the doors and the
upper posts, Thau, that is, the sign of cross, and so were defended
from the angels that killed the Egyptians' first-born child. And we
ought to mark our foreheads and our bodies with the token of Christ's
rood, that we also may be delivered from destruction, when we shall
be marked both on forehead, and also in heart, with the blood of our
Lord's suffering. Those Israelites did eat the lamb's flesh at their
Easter time, when they were delivered; and we receive ghostly
Christ's body, and drink his blood, when we receive with true belief
that holy housel. That time they kept with them at Easter seven days,
with great worship, when they were delivered from Pharaoh, and went
from that land. So also Christian men keep Christ's resurrection at
the time of Easter these seven days, because through his suffering
and rising we be delivered, and be made clean by going to this holy
housel, as Christ saith in his Gospel:  Verily, verily I say unto you,
ye have no life in you except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood. He
that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, abideth in me, and I in
him, and hath that everlasting life, and I shall raise him up in the
last day. I am the lively bread that came down from heaven:  not so as
your forefathers did eat that heavenly bread in the wilderness, and
afterwards died. He that eateth this bread liveth for ever. He
blessed bread before his suffering, and divided it to his disciples,
thus saying, Eat of this bread; it is my body:  and do this in my
remembrance. Also he blessed wine in one cup, and said, Drink ye all
of this. This is my blood that is shed for many, in forgiveness of
sins. The apostles did as Christ commanded; that is, they blessed
bread and wine to housel again afterwards in his remembrance. Even
so, also, their successors and all priests, by Christ's commandment,
do bless bread and wine to housel in his name with the apostolic
blessing.

     "Now men have often searched and do yet often search, how bread
that is gathered of corn, and through fire's heat baked, may be
turned to Christ's body; or how wine that is pressed out of many
grapes is turned, through one blessing, to the Lord's blood. Now say
we to such men, that some things be spoken of Christ by
signification, and some be things certain. True this is, and certain,
that Christ was born of a maid, and suffered death of his own accord,
and was buried, and on this day rose from death. He is said to be
bread by signification, and a lamb, and a lion, and a mountain. He is
called bread, because he is our life, and angels' life. He is said to
be a lamb for his innocency; and a lion for strength, wherewith he
overcame the strong devil. But Christ is not so, notwithstanding,
after true nature; neither bread, nor a lamb, nor a lion. Why is then
the holy housel called Christ's body, or his blood, if it be not
truly what it is called? Truly the bread and the wine which in the
supper by the priest are hallowed, show one thing without, to human
understanding, and another thing within, to believing minds. Without,
they be seen bread and wine, both in figure and in taste; and they be
truly, after their hallowing, Christ's body and his blood, through
ghostly mystery.

     "A heathen child is christened, yet he altereth not his shape
without, though he be changed within. He is brought to the font-stone
sinful, through Adam's disobedience; howbeit he is washed from all
sin within, though he hath not changed his shape without. Even so the
holy font water, that is called the wellspring of life, is like in
shape to other waters, and is subject to corruption; but the Holy
Ghost's might cometh to the corruptible water, through the priest's
blessing, and it may, after, wash the body and soul from all sin,
through ghostly might. Behold, now we see two things in this one
creature:  after true nature, that water is corruptible moisture; and
after ghostly mystery, hath wholesome virtue. So also, if we behold
the holy housel after bodily understanding, then we see that it is a
creature corruptible and mutable. If we acknowledge therein ghostly
might, then understand we that life is therein, and that it giveth
immortality to them that eat it with belief. Much is betwixt the
invisible might of the holy housel, and the visible shape of proper
nature. It is naturally corruptible bread, and corruptible wine, and
is, by might of God's word, truly Christ's body and blood; not so
notwithstanding bodily, but ghostly.

     "Much is betwixt the body of Christ which he suffered in, and
the body that is hallowed to housel. The body truly, that Christ
suffered in, was born of the flesh of Mary, with blood and with bone,
with skin and with sinews, in human limbs, with a reasonable soul
living; and his ghostly body, which we call the housel, is gathered
of many corns, without blood and bone, without limb, without soul,
and therefore nothing is to be understood therein bodily, but all is
ghostly to be understood. Whatsoever is in that housel, which giveth
substance of life, that is of the ghostly might and invisible doing.
Therefore is that holy housel called 'a mystery,' because there is
one thing in it seen, and another thing understood. That which is
there seen, hath bodily shape; and what we do there understand, hath
ghostly might. Certainly Christ's body, which suffered death, and
rose from death, never dieth henceforth, but is eternal and
unpassible. That housel is temporal, not eternal; corruptible and
dealed into sundry parts, chewed between the teeth, and sent into the
belly; howbeit, nevertheless, after ghostly might, it is all in every
part. Many receive that holy body, and yet, notwithstanding, it is so
all in every part, after ghostly mystery. Though some chew the less,
yet is there no more might, notwithstanding, in the more part, than
in the less, because it is whole in all men, after the invisible
might. This mystery is a pledge and a figure:  Christ's body is truth
itself. This pledge we do keep mystically, until that we be come to
the truth itself; and then is this pledge ended. Truly it is, so as
we before have said, Christ's body and his blood; not bodily, but
ghostly.

     "But now hear the apostle's word about this mystery. Paul the
apostle speaketh of the old Israelites, thus writing in his Epistle
to faithful men, All our forefathers were baptized in the cloud, and
in the sea; and all they did eat the same ghostly meat, and drank the
same ghostly drink. They drank truly of the stone that followed them,
and that stone was Christ. Neither was that stone then from which the
water ran, bodily Christ; but it signifieth Christ, that calleth thus
to all believing and faithful men, Whosoever thirsteth, let him come
to me and drink, and from his bowels shall flow lively water. This he
said of the Holy Ghost, which they received who believed on him. The
apostle Paul saith that the Israelites did eat the same ghostly meat,
and drank the same ghostly drink; because that heavenly meat that fed
them forty years, and that water which from the stone did flow, had
signification of Christ's body and his blood, that now be offered
daily in God's church. It was the same which we now offer, not
bodily, but ghostly.

     "We said unto ye ere while, that Christ hallowed bread and wine
to housel before his suffering, and said, This is my body and my
blood. Yet he had not then suffered; but so notwithstanding he
turned, through invisible might, the bread to his own body, and that
wine to his blood, as he before did in the wilderness, before that he
was born to be a man; when he turned that heavenly meat to his flesh,
and the flowing water from that stone to his own blood. Very many did
eat of that heavenly meat in the wilderness, and drank the ghostly
drink; and were nevertheless dead, as Christ said. And Christ meant
not that death which none can escape, but that everlasting death,
which some of that folk deserved for their unbelief. Moses and Aaron,
and many others of that people who pleased God, did eat that heavenly
bread, and they died not that everlasting death, though they died the
common death. They saw that the heavenly meat was visible and
corruptible, and they ghostly understood by that visible thing, and
ghostly received it. The Saviour saith, He that eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, hath everlasting life. And he bade them not eat
that body wherewith he was enclosed, nor to drink that blood which he
shed for us; but he meant with those words, that holy housel which
ghostly is his body and his blood, and he that tasteth it with
believing heart, hath that eternal life.

     "In the old law faithful men offered to God divers sacrifices,
that had foresignification of Christ's body, which, for our sins, he
himself to his heavenly Father hath since offered to sacrifice.
Certainly this housel which we do now hallow at God's altar, is a
remembrance of Christ's body, which he offered for us, and of his
blood, which he shed for us. So he himself commanded, Do this in my
remembrance. Once suffered Christ by himself, but yet, nevertheless,
his suffering is daily renewed at this supper, through mystery of the
holy housel. Therefore we ought to consider diligently, how that this
holy housel is both Christ's body, and the body of all faithful men,
after a ghostly mystery. As wise Augustine saith of it, If ye will
understand of Christ's body, hear the apostle Paul thus speaking:  Ye
truly be Christ's body and his members. Now is your mystery set on
God's table, and ye receive your mystery, which mystery ye yourselves
be. Be that which ye see on the altar, and receive that which ye
yourselves be. Again, the apostle Paul saith by it, We many be one
bread, and one body. Understand now and rejoice:  many be one bread
and one body in Christ. He is our Head, and we be his limbs; and the
bread is not of one corn, but of many; nor the wine of one grape, but
of many. So, also, we all should have one unity in our Lord, as it is
written of the faithful army, how that they were in so great a unity,
as though all of them were one soul and one heart. Christ hallowed,
on his table, the mystery of our peace and of our unity. He that
receiveth that mystery of unity, and keepeth not the bond of true
peace, receiveth no mystery for himself, but a witness against
himself. It is very good for Christian men, that they go often to
housel, if they bring with them to the altar unguiltiness and
innocency of heart; if they be not oppressed with sin. To an evil man
it turneth to no good, but to destruction, if he receive unworthily
that holy housel. Holy books command that water be mingled to that
wine which shall be for housel, because the water signifieth the
people, and the wine Christ's blood; and therefore shall neither the
one without the other be offered at the holy mass, that Christ may be
with us, and we with Christ; the Head with the limbs, and the limbs
with the Head.

     "We would before have treated of the lamb which the old
Israelites offered at their Easter time, but that we desired first to
declare unto you of this mystery, and after, how we should receive
it. That signifying-lamb was offered at the Easter. And the apostle
Paul saith, in the Epistle of this present day, that Christ is our
Easter, who was offered for us, and on this day rose from death. The
Israelites did eat the lamb's flesh, as God commanded, with
unleavened bread and wild lettuce; so we should receive that holy
housel of Christ's body and blood without the leaven of sin and
iniquity. As leaven turneth the creatures from their nature; so doth
sin, also, change the nature of man from innocency to uncleanness.
The apostle hath taught how we should feast, not in the leaven of the
evilness, but in the sweet dough of purity and truth. The herb which
they should eat with the unleavened bread is called lettuce, and is
bitter in taste:  so we should with bitterness of unfeigned
repentance, purify our mind, if we will eat Christ's body. Those
Israelites were not wont to eat raw flesh, and therefore God bade
them to eat it neither raw nor sodden in water, but roasted with
fire. He shall receive the body of God raw, that shall think without
reason, that Christ was only man like unto us, and was not God. And
he that will, after man's wisdom, search the mystery of Christ's
incarnation, doeth like unto him that doth seethe lamb's flesh in
water, because that water, in this same place, signifieth man's
understanding. But we should understand that all the mystery of
Christ's humanity was ordered by the power of the Holy Ghost; and
then eat we his body roasted with fire, because the Holy Ghost came
in fiery likeness to the apostles in divers tongues.

     "The Israelites should eat the lamb's head, and the feet, and
the purtenance; and nothing thereof must be left over-night. If any
thing thereof were left, they did burn that in the fire; and they
brake not the bones. After ghostly understanding we do eat the lamb's
head, when we take hold of Christ's Divinity in our belief. Again,
when we take hold of his humanity with love, then eat we the lamb's
feet, because that Christ is the beginning and the end, God before
all worlds, and man in the end of this world. What be the lamb's
purtenance, but Christ's secret precepts? and these we eat, when we
receive with greediness the word of life. There must nothing of the
lamb be left unto the morning, because that all God's sayings are to
be searched with great carefulness; so that all his precepts may he
known in understanding and deed in the night of this present life,
before that the last day of the universal resurrection do appear. If
we cannot search out thoroughly all the mystery of Christ's
incarnation, then ought we to betake the rest unto the might of the
Holy Ghost with true humility, and not to search rashly of that deep
secretness, above the measure of our understanding. They did eat the
lamb's flesh with their loins girded. In the loins is the lust of the
body, and he who will receive that housel, shall cover or wrap in
that concupiscence, and take with chastity that holy receipt.

     They were also shod. What be shoes, but of the hides of dead
beasts? We be truly shod, if we match, in our steps and deeds, the
life of men departed this life, who pleased God with keeping of his
commandments. They had staves in their hands when they did eat. This
staff signifieth a carefulness and diligent overseeing:  and all they
that best know, and ken, should take care of other men, and stay them
up with their help. It was enjoined to the eaters, that they should
eat the lamb in haste, for God abhorreth slothfulness in his
servants, and that he loveth those that seek the joy of everlasting
life with quickness and haste of mind. It is written, Prolong not to
turn unto God, lest the time pass away through thy slow tarrying. The
eaters might not break the lamb's bones. No more might the soldiers,
that did hang Christ, break his holy legs, as they did of the two
thieves that hanged on either side of him. And the Lord rose from
death, sound, without all corruption:  and at the last judgment they
shall see him, whom they did most cruelly wound on the cross. This
time is called in the Hebrew tongue, pascha, and in Latin, transitus,
and in English, a passover, because that on this day the people of
Israel passed from the land of Egypt over the Red Sea, from bondage
to the land of promise:  so also did our Lord at this time depart, as
saith John the evangelist, from this world to his heavenly Father.
Even so we ought to follow our Head, and to go from the devil to
Christ; from this unstable world, to his stable kingdom. Howbeit we
should first, in this present life, depart from vice to holy virtue,
from evil manners to good manners, if we will, after this our lent
life, go to the eternal life; and, after our resurrection, to Christ.
He bring us to his everlasting Father, who gave himself to death for
our sins! To him be honour and praise of well-doing, world without
end. Amen."

     And thus, I suppose, it standeth clear and evidently proved by
course of all these ages afore recited, from the time of Tertullian
and Augustine, unto the days of this Elfric above mentioned, and
after him, that this new-come miracle of transubstantiation was not
yet crept into the heads of men, nor almost came in any question
amongst learned men, nor was admitted for any doctrine in the church,
(at least for any general doctrine of all men to be received,) till a
thousand years complete after Christ, that is, till Satan began to be
set at large. For who ever heard in all the primitive church, or ever
read in the works of the old ancient doctors, this question once to
be asked or disputed, whether any substance of bread and wine
remained in the Lord's supper? or what man was ever so doltish to
believe any such thing, or ever called heretic for not believing the
same, before the time of seduction, that is, before the thousand
years aforesaid were expired? Wherefore they that stand so much on
the antiquity of this article, as a doctrine which hath ever, since
Christ's time, been received in the church, taught by the apostles,
believed by all catholics, and confirmed by consent of all ages, of
councils, of nations, and people, unto this present day; these, I
say, either show themselves very ignorant in histories, and in all
state of antiquity, or else most impudently they do abuse the simple
credulity of people.

     To proceed now further in this discussion of antiquity, it
followed that after the time of Elfric aforesaid, this matter of
transubstantiation began first to be talked of, and to come in
question among a few superstitious monks; so that as blindness and
superstition began more and more to increase, so the said gross
opinion still more and more, both in number and authority, prevailed,
insomuch that about the year of our Lord 1050, the denying of
transubstantiation began to be counted heresy.

     And in this number first was one Berengarius, a Frenchman and
archdeacon of Angers, which, of all Christian men which we read of,
was first called and counted a heretic for denying of
transubstantiation, and troubled for the same, as ye shall hear.

     This Berengarius lived in the time of Pope Leo the Ninth,
Victor, and Nicholas the Second, which latter died in the year 1061.
Albeit I do find our writers here in some discrepance; for the most
of them do hold, that he first recanted under Pope Leo the Ninth, in
the council of Vercelli, and afterwards again under Pope Nicholas the
Second, about the year 1062, as is to be gathered of Gratian, De
Consecrat. dist. 2, "Ego Berengarius," where he saith that Pope
Nicholas did send about to bishops and archbishops the copy of his
recantation.

     Again, by the acts of the council of Rome it there appeareth
that the said Berengarius made this his said last recantation under
Pope Hildebrand, called Gregory the Seventh. But this difference of
times is no great matter to stand upon. The truth of the story is
this; that when Berengarius had professed the truth of the sacrament,
and had stood in the open confession thereof, according to the
ancient verity of the doctrine received in the church before, he was
so handled by certain malignant and superstitious monks, that, what
by evil entreaty, and what for fear of death, (such is the weak
frailty of man,) he began to shrink, and afterwards did indeed recant
the truth.

     Of these malicious enemies against Berengarius, the chiefest
troublers were Lanfranc, abbot of Caen,afterwards archbishop of
Canterbury; Guimund, a monk likewise first of the abbey of Leufrede,
and afterwards archbishop of Aversa; Algerius also, monk of Corbeny;
Fulbert also, monk and bishop; and Hildebrand, some time monk of
Cluni, and then archdeacon of Tours, and afterward bishop of Rome.

     By these, and such other monks of the like fraternity, the
error and heresy of transubstantiation began first to be defended,
and parts publicly, in writing, to be taken about that matter; of the
which sides and parts, the first that began to set up that faction by
writing seemeth to be Paschasius, who was a little before
Berengarius, about the time of Bertram, and likewise Lanfranc, the
first that brought it into England.

     On the contrary side again, the first that was openly impugned
and troubled for denying transubstantiation, was this Berengarius;
with whom Lanfranc, also, was supposed at the first beginning to hold
and take part; but afterwards, to clear himself, he stood openly
against him in the council, and wrote against him.

     It followeth then in the act of the council, when the synod of
archbishops, bishops, abbots, and other prelates were together
assembled, the greater number (saith the story) did hold that the
bread and wine were turned substantially into the body and blood of
Christ. Notwithstanding, (saith he,) divers there were in the said
council who held the contrary with Berengarius, but at last were
driven to give over. Berengarius, among the rest, after he had long
stood in the constant defence of the truth, at last relented to their
wills, confessing his error, (where none was,) and desired pardon of
the council. And this was (as seemeth by William of Malmesbury) his
first giving over; who afterwards, returning to himself again after
the death of Pope Leo, and pricked with the sting of conscience, was
driven again to recognise the truth, which he before had denied.

     The pope, (saith Malmesbury,) perceiving this, would not leave
him so, but sent into France Hildebrand, his cardinal chaplain, (as
meet a mate for such a feat, as was in all Satan's court,) and made
him with a wanyand to come again coram nobis; who so handled
Berengarius, bringing him before the face of the council holden at
Tours, that he made him to say, erravi, once again:  against whom
stood up in that council Lanfranc, and Guimund aforesaid, impugning
his assertion. And thus standeth the narration of Malmesbury. But, by
the acts of council of Rome, appeareth another declaration, which is,
that this latter recantation of Berengarius should be at Rome under
Hildebrand being then pope, in the year of our Lord 1079, and in the
month of February; and that in the same council, holden in the church
of Our Saviour, this recantation of Ego Berengarius was made, and he
enjoined by the said Pope Hildebrand, upon his oath, never hereafter
to teach or dispute contrary to that faith of the sacrament there
holden, &c.

     Again, Henry Bullinger in his book, De Origine Erroris,
following belike some other author, expresseth the order of the
aforesaid recantation after this sort, and saith, that in the time of
Pope Leo the Ninth, A.D. 1050, there was a Roman council holden at
Vercelli; in the which council, Lanfranc being then present, the book
of John Scotus was openly read, and there condemned. Also Berengarius
was sent for, who, seeing the prejudicial proceeding of that council,
refused himself to come, but sent two clerks, which openly there
defended his cause and quarrel, and were for the same committed unto
prison. Such is the freedom of the pope's general councils, with
prisons and violence to defend their verities. Against the doings of
this council notwithstanding, the Frenchmen stood stiff, both at
Angers and Tours, joining and consenting with Berengarius.

     Not long after this died Pope Leo; and after him succeeded Pope
Victor, by whom another synod was kept at Florence, where the acts
and doings of the aforesaid council of Vercelli were confirmed, and a
legate also appointed to be sent to Tours in France. This legate was
Hildebrand above mentioned, who, calling the clergy of France
together in a synod, fell there in hand with the cause of the
sacrament. Berengarius, not being ignorant of these Roman councils,
so kept himself, that in all his actions he would give none other
answer, but that he believed and consented with the faith of the
catholic church; and so for that time did frustrate the purpose of
the council, rather deluding the pretences of his enemies, than
freely confessing the simple truth.

     Again, after Victor, came Pope Nicholas the Second, who,
congregating another council at Rome, A.D. 1059, sent for Berengarius
there to appear, who, being present, argued what he could for the
justness of his cause, but all would not serve:  in the pope's general
councils such a stroke and mastership beareth authority above verity.
Berengarius being thus borne down on every side by might and
superiority, when no remedy would serve, but he must needs recant
again, (for the law of relapse was not yet in season,) he desired to
know what other confession of the sacrament the pope would require of
him, besides that which he had there confessed. Then Pope Nicholas
committed that charge to Humbert, a monk of Lorraine, and,
afterwards, a cardinal, that he should draw out in formable words the
order of his recantation, after the prescription of Rome, which he
should read, and publicly profess before the people; the form of
which words is registered in the Decrees. The effect thereof is this: 

     "That he pretendeth with heart and mouth to profess, that he,
acknowledging the true, catholic, and apostolical faith, doth
execrate all heresy, namely, that wherewith he hath lately been
infamed, as holding that the bread and wine upon the altar, after the
consecration of the priest, remain only a sacrament, and are not the
very self body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, neither can be
handled or broken with the priest's hands, or chewed with the teeth
of the faithful, otherwise than only by manner of a sacrament: 
consenting now to the holy and apostolical Church of Rome, he
professeth with mouth and heart to hold the same faith touching the
sacrament of the Lord's mass, which the lord pope Nicholas, with his
synod here present, doth hold, and commandeth to be holden by his
evangelical and apostolical authority; that is, that the bread and
wine upon the altar after consecration, are not only a sacrament, but
also are the very true and self body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and are sensibly felt and broken with hands, and chewed with
teeth:  swearing by the holy evangelists, that whosoever shall hold or
say unto the contrary, he shall hold them perpetually accursed; and
if he himself shall hereafter presume to preach or teach against the
same, he shall be content to abide the severity and rigour of the
canons," &c.

     This cowardly recantation of Berengarius, as it offended a
great number of the godly sort, so it gave to the contrary part no
little triumph, whereby, ever since, they have taken the greater
courage to tread down the truth.

     It happened shortly after this, that Hildebrand, the pope's
grand captain in the behalf of his master, Pope Nicholas, went in
warfare against the Normans. This war being finished, shortly after
he set upon a new voyage to fight for Pope Alexander, against
Cadolus; which victory being also achieved, it was not long but he
put the new Pope Alexander beside the cushion, and was made pope
himself:  so that during the busy stir of these wars, the pope's
Holiness had no leisure to attend the debating of this controversy of
the sacrament.

     At length, when all was quieted, and Pope Hildebrand now was
where he would be, his restless brain could not be unoccupied, but
eftsoons summoneth a new council at Rome, in the church of Lateran,
to revive again the old disceptation of Berengarius, about the year,
as some hold, 1079. Thus Berengarius, being tossed by these monks and
Pharisees, was so confounded, and baited on every side, that partly
for worldly fear straining him on the one side, partly for shame and
grief of conscience, that he had now twice denied the truth, on the
other side, the man, (as is of him reported,) after these such
turbulent tragedies, forsaking his goods, his studies, learning, and
former state of life, became a labourer, and wrought with his hands
for his living, all the residue of his life.

     The opinion which Berengarius maintained touching the sacrament
(as by his own words, in Lanfranc's book, may appear) was this: 

     "The sacrifice of the church consisteth of two things:  the one
visible, the other invisible, that is, of the sacrament, and of the
thing or matter of the sacrament. Which thing, (which is to mean, the
body of Christ,) if it were here present before our eyes, it were a
thing visible and to be seen:  but being lifted up into heaven, and
sitting on the right hand of his Father, to the time of restoring all
things, (as St. Peter saith,) it cannot be called down from thence.
For the person of Christ consisteth of God and man:  the sacrament of
the Lord's table consisteth of bread and wine; which, being
consecrated, are not changed, but remain in their substances, having
a certain resemblance or similitude of those things, whereof they be
sacraments," &c.

     By these words of Berengarius's doctrine, all indifferent
readers may see and judge, that he affirmed nothing but what was
agreeable to the Holy Scripture, believing with St. Augustine, and
all other ancient elders of the church, that in the holy supper all
faithful believers be refreshed spiritually with the body and blood
of the Lord, unto everlasting life. Wherefore most impudently they do
misreport him, (as they do many others besides,) which falsely lay to
his charge, as though his teaching should be, that in the sacred
supper of the Lord nothing else were received of the faithful,
besides only the bare signs, which are the bread and the wine.

     And now that you have seen the doctrine of Berengarius, let us
also take a view of the contrary teaching of Lanfranc and his
fellows, conferring and comparing together the institution on the one
side, with the institution of the other, to mark and consider which
of them soundeth nearer to the truth of -the Scriptures. The words of
Lanfranc be these:  "I believe the earthly substances, which, upon the
Lord's table, are divinely sanctified, through the ministration of
the priest, to be converted unspeakably, incomprehensibly, and
miraculously, by the operation of God's mighty power, into the
essence of the Lord's body, the outward forms only of the things
themselves, and certain qualities re-served, and that for two
respects:  the one, lest the sight of the raw and bloody flesh might
otherwise make men to abhor from eating thereof; the other, for that
they which believe the thing they see not, might have the greater
merit for their belief. The conversion of which earthly substances
into the essence of the Lord's body notwithstanding, yet is the
selfsame body of the Lord in heaven, and there hath its essential
being at the right hand of his Father, immortal, inviolate, perfect,
undiminished, and uncorrupted; so that truly it may be affirmed, the
selfsame body both to be received of us, and yet not the selfsame.
The selfsame, I mean, as touching the essence, property, and virtue
of his true nature:  and yet not the selfsame, as touching the forms
of bread and wine, and other outward qualities incurring to our
outward senses," &c.

     And thus have ye the confession of Lanfranc, archbishop of
Canterbury. From this confession of Lanfranc, the opinion and
assertion also of Guimund, archbishop of Aversa, doth nothing differ
in grossness and impiety, but rather passeth the same, thus affirming
and defending:  "that the body of Christ is pressed, and torn with
teeth, even like as it was felt and touched with the hands of
Thomas."

     And moreover, the said Guimund, (if his book be not rather
counterfeited at Louvain,) in the same place, answering to an
objection put out, that it is not lawful for Christ to be torn in
pieces with teeth, doubteth not to pronounce, that whether we take
tearing for hard biting or soft biting, it is not repugnant nor
disagreeing, but that (by the will of God agreeing thereunto) the
body of Christ may be touched with hands, bitten with mouth, crushed,
yea, and divided in pieces, with hard or soft pressing of the teeth: 
and that as he was bruised upon the cross, according to the prophet,
saying, He was bruised for our iniquities, &c.; so the same body, for 
the health of the faithful, may devoutly be torn and rent with their
teeth, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding, &c. Judge now, all
good studious readers, what is to be thought of this kind of
doctrine, and how this opinion cohereth with the infallible voice of
God's word, saying, in Exodus, And of him ye shall not break a bone,
&c.

     This rude and misshapen doctrine of these monks concerning
transubstantiation, as ye have heard when and by whom it began first
to be broached, so, if you would now know by what learning and
scriptures they did confirm and establish the same, ye must here
think and understand, how their chief-est grounds and substance to
persuade the people, were at this time certain miracles by them
forged, and published both in their writings and preachings; whereof
one was the same above recited of Odo, which Osberne or some other
monkish legend invented of him, how he should show unto certain the
host, turned into the likeness of flesh and blood, dropping into the
chalice, for the conversion of those clerks, who before would not
believe it. Another like miracle is also told by the said Osberne of
Dunstan, in this order:  how the said Dunstan appeared to a certain
lame cripple in the night, willing him to resort unto his tomb, to
have his limbs again restored; which cripple, according as he was
willed, after he had there continued praying for health a long time,
and could not obtain, began to return home again after long tarrying,
without all hope of recovery. To whom the said Dunstan, appearing
again by the way, asked from whence he came; and whither he would.
The cripple, answering, declared how he came thither upon hope of
health, where he had long tarried; and because he could find no 
recovery, therefore he now was returning home. To whom then said
Dunstan:  "I am," saith he, "Dunstan, the fellow servant of all God's
servants, and have been occupied with certain necessary business, for
which I could not be present there with my children:  for Elfric,"
said he, "otherwise surnamed Bata, hath attempted to disherit my
church; but I have so stopped him, that he could not prevail."

     Many other fabulous miracles of the like stamp are rife in
popish stories, counterfeited and forged under divers and sundry
names, some referred to Gregory, some to Paschasius, and to others
more, which, to recite all, would fill a whole sea full of lies and
fables. Among many, one is thus invented of Paschasius. "There was a
priest of Almain," (saith he,) "named Plegildus, who did see and
handle with his hands visibly the shape of a child upon the altar;
and so after he had embraced and kissed it, it returned again to the
likeness of bread, as he should come to the receiving thereof." This
miracle when it was objected against Berengarius, he, merrily
deriding the blind fable, answered in these words:  "A godly peace,"
quoth he, "of a false varlet; that whom he kissed before with his
mouth, by and by he goeth about to tear him with his teeth."

     Another miracle is reported of a Jew boy, who, upon a time,
entering into the church with another, a Christian lad, who was his
play-fellow, saw upon the altar a little child broken and torn in
pieces, and afterwards, by portions, to be distributed among the
people:  which sight when the young Jew, coming home, had told unto
his father to be true and certain, he was for the same condemned to
be burned. Thus he, being enclosed in a house, and the door made fast
where he should be burned,he was found and taken out from thence by
the Christians, not only alive, but also having not one hair of his
head blemished with the flames about him. Who then being of the
Christians demanded, how he was so preserved from the burning fire,
"There appeared," said he, "to me, a beautiful woman sitting on a
chair, whose son the child was, which was before divided and
distributed in the church among the people; who reached to me her
hand in the burning flame, and with her gown-skirts kept the flame
from me, so that I was preserved thereby from perishing." Belike
these monks lacked miracles among the Christians, when they were fain
to borrow such figments of the Jews, to prove their feigned
transubstantiation. And these commonly were then the argments of
these monks, wherewith they persuaded the people to believe their
transubstantiation. But to leave these monks' fictions, and to return
again to Berengarius, thus Malmesbury of him reporteth, that after he
had once or twice recanted, as is aforesaid, yet, notwithstanding,
this doctrine of the sacrament still remained in the mind of his
hearers. And howsoever the tyranny of the pope did drive him, through
fear, to deny his opinion, and wrought him much trouble, yet,
notwithstanding, after his death he lacked not his wellwillers; in
the number of whom was Hilbert, bishop of Mans.

     Although in this time of Berengarius, which was about the year
of our Lord 1050, (as ye have heard,) this error of
transubstantiation began to grow in force and strength, by the
supporting of certain popish monks above rehearsed, as Lanfranc,
Guimund, Algerius, Hugo, bishop of Lincoln, Fulbert, (of whom it is
said in stories, that our Lady gave him suck, being sick, with her
own breasts,) and such others:  yet, notwithstanding, all this while
the said transubstantiation was decreed for no public law, nor
doctrine to be holden by any general consent, either of the Church of
Rome, or any other council, before the council of Lateran, under Pope
Innocent the Third, who, A.D. 1215, celebrating in the church of
Lateran a general council of thirteen hundred bishops, enacted there
divers constitutions, as of yearly confession; and the communion to
be used by the whole multitude once a year through every parish
church. Item, for the recovery of the holy land, with subsidy also to
be levied for the same. Item, for the abolishing of the books and
writings of Joachim the abbot, and also the opinions of Almaric
before mentioned. Notwithstanding that the said Joachim did subscribe
with his own hand, that he held the same doctrine which was in the
Church of Rome, and also submitted his books to be presented to the
see of Rome, there to be corrected or approved, yet was he judged,
though not a heretic, yet to be erroneous; and especially in those
books which he wrote against Peter the Lombard, called afterwards the
Master of Sentences.

     In the said council, besides divers other constitutions and the
articles of the Creed there in order repeated, as appeareth, there
was also enacted, decreed, and established, the faith and belief of
transubstantiation, in these words following: 

     "There is one universal church of the faithful, without which
none can be saved; in which church the selfsame Jesus Christ is both
priest and also the sacrifice; whose body and blood are truly
contained in the sacrament of the altar, under the forms of bread and
wine, the bread being transubstantiated into the body, and the wine
into the blood, by the power and working of God:  so that to the
accomplishing of this mystery of unity, we might take of his, the
same which he hath taken of ours. And this sacrament none can make or
consecrate, but he that is a priest lawfully ordained, according to
the keys of the church, which Jesus Christ hath left to his apostles,
and to their successors," &c.

     And thus was the foundation laid for the building of
transubstantiation, upon the consent of these aforesaid thirteen
hundred bishops, in the year of our Lord above specified, under Pope
Innocent, and the doctrine thereof intruded for an article of faith
into the church, necessarily to be believed of all men under pain of
heresy.

     But yet all this while, notwithstanding that the substance of
bread and wine was now banished out of the sacrament, and utterly
transcorporated into the substance of Christ's very body and blood,
yet was not this body elevated over the priest's head, nor adored by
the people, till the days of Pope Honorius the Third, succeeding
after Innocent, who, by his council, likewise commanded adoration and
elevation to he joined with transubstantiation; as one idolatry
commonly bringeth forth another.

     Again, the said sacrament of the Lord's supper being now
consecrated, transubstantiated, elevated, and adored, yet it was not
offered up for a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead,
nor for a remedy of the souls in purgatory, nor for a merit operis
operati, sine bono motu utentis, &c., before that other popes, coming
after, added still new additions to the former inventions of their
predecessors.

     And thus have you the whole order and origin of these
idolatrous parts of the mass described by their times and ages, which
first began with consecration and the form thereof, which were words
of the canon. Then came transubstantiation by Innocent, and
afterwards elevation and adoration by Honorius;and, last of all, came
the oblation, meritorious and propitiatory, for the quick and the
dead in remission of sins, ex opere operato; which things being thus
constituted by the too much usurped authority of the Church of Rome,
shortly after followed persecution, tyranny, and burning among the
Christians; first beginning with the Albigenses, and the faithful
congregation of Toulouse, near about the time of the said Innocent,
as is before remembered.

     And thus much for the first article, of transubstantiation,
which, as you have heard, was not admitted into the church for any
general doctrine of faith, before the year and time above assigned of
Pope Innocent the Third:  and therefore, if any have been otherwise
persuaded, or yet do remain in the same persuasion still of this
doctrine, as though it had been of a longer continuance than for the
time above expressed, let him understand that by ignorance of
histories he is deceived:  and for the more satisfying of his mind, if
he credit not me, let him believe the words of one of his own
catholic sort, John Duns Scotus I mean, who, in his fourth book,
writing of transubstantiation, in what time and by whose authority it
was first established, hath these words, which also are before
mentioned:  "These words of the Scripture might be expounded more
easily and more plainly without transubstantiation; but the church
did choose this sense, which is harder, being thereto moved, as
seemeth, chiefly because men should hold, of the sacraments, the same
which the Church of Rome doth hold," &c. And further, in the same
place, the said Duns, expounding himself what he meaneth by the
Church of Rome, maketh there express mention of the said Innocent the
Third, and of this council of Lateran, &c. And furthermore, to the
intent that such as be indifferent seekers of the truth may be more
amply satisfied in this behalf, that this transubstantiation is of no
antiquity, but of a late invention, I will also adjoin to this
testimony of John Scotus, the judgment and verdict of Erasmus, where
he writeth in these words:  "In the sacrament of the communion, the
church concluded transubstantiation but of late days. Long before
that, it was sufficient to believe the true body of Christ to be
present either under bread, or else by some other manner," &c.

The second article:  of both kinds.
:  AS touching the second article, which debarreth
from the lay-people the one-half of the sacrament, understanding that
under one kind both parts are fully contained, forasmuch as the world
well knoweth that this article is but young -- invented, decreed, and
concluded no longer since than at the council of Constance, not two
hundred years ago, I shall not need to make any long standing upon
that matter; especially for that sufficient hath been said thereof
before, in our long discourse of the Bohemians' story.

     First, let us see the reasons and objections of the
adversaries, in restraining the laity from the one kind of this
sacrament. "The use," say they, "hath been of so long continuance in
the church: " whereunto we answer, that they have no evident nor
authentic example of any ancient custom in the church, which they can
produce in that behalf.

     Item, where they alleged the place of St. Luke, where Christ
was known in breaking of bread, &c.; citing, moreover, many other
places of Scripture, wherein mention is made of breaking of bread:  to
answer thereunto, although we do not utterly repugn, but that some of
those places may be understood of the sacrament, yet that being
granted, it followeth not therefore, that one part of the sacrament
was only ministered to the people without the other, when by the
common use of speech, under the naming of one part, the whole action
is meant. Neither doth it follow, because that bread was broken among
the brethren, therefore the cup was not distributed unto them:  for so
we find by the words of St. Paul, that the use of the Corinthians was
to communicate, not only in breaking of bread, but in participating
the cup also:  "The cup," saith he, "which we participate," &c.

     Also, after the apostles, in the time of Cyprian, of Jerome, of
Gelasius, and others successively after them, it is evident that both
the kinds were frequented in the church. First Cyprian, in divers
places, declareth that the sacrament of the blood was also
distributed. "How do we," saith he, "provoke them to stand in the
confession of Christ, to the shedding of their blood, if we deny unto
them the blood of Christ, when they prepare themselves to the
conflict?"

     The words of Jerome are plain:  "Priests," saith he, "which
minister the Eucharist, and divide the blood unto the people."

     In Historia Tripartita, it was said to the emperor Theodosius,
"How will you receive the body of the Lord with such bloody hands, or
the cup of his precious blood with that mouth, who have spilled so
much innocent blood?"

     In the canon of Gelasius, and in the pope's own decrees, these
words we read:  "We understand that there be some, who, receiving only
the portion of the Lord's body, do abstain from the cup of his sacred
blood; to whom we enjoin that either they receive the whole sacrament
in both kinds, or else that they receive neither; for the dividing of
that whole and one sacrament, cannot be done without great
sacrilege," &c. So that this decree of Pope Gelasius being
contradictory to the council of Constance, it must follow, that
either the pope did err, or else the council of Constance must needs
be a sacrilegious council; as no doubt it was.

     The like testimony also appeareth in the council of Toledo,
that the laity did then communicate in both kinds, beside divers
other old precedents remaining yet in the churches both of Germany
and also of France, declaring likewise the same.

     And thus it standeth certain and demonstrable, by manifold
probations, how far this new-found custom differeth from all
antiquity and prescription of use and time. Again, although the
custom thereof were ever so ancient, yet no custom may be of that
strength to gainstand or countermand the open and express commandment
of God, which saith to all men, Drink ye all of it.

     Again, seeing the cup is called the blood of the new testament,
who is he that dare or can alter the testament of the Lord, when none
may be so hardy to alter the testament of a man, being once approved
or ratified?

     Further, as concerning those places of Scripture before
alleged, Of breaking of bread; whereupon they think themselves so
sure that the sacrament was then administered but in one kind:  to
answer thereunto, first, we say, it may be doubted whether all those
places in Scripture are to be referred to the sacrament. Secondly,
the same being given unto them, yet can they not infer thereby,
because one part is mentioned, that the full sacrament therefore was
not ministered. The common manner of the Hebrew phrase is, under
breaking of bread, to signify generally the whole feast or supper:  as
in the prophet Isaiah, these words, Break thy bread to the hungry, do
signify as well giving drink, as bread, &c. And thirdly, howsoever
those places, concerning the breaking of bread, be taken, yet it
maketh little for them, but rather against them. For, if the
sacrament were administered among them in fractione panis, that is,
in breaking of bread, then must they needs grant, that if bread was
there broken, ergo there was bread, forasmuch as neither the
accidents of bread without bread can be broken, neither can the
natural body of Christ be subject to any fraction or breaking by the
Scripture, which saith, And ye shall break no bone of him, &c.
Wherefore take away the substance of bread, and there can be no
fraction. And take away fraction, how then do they make a sacrament
of this breaking, whereas neither the substance of Christ's body,
neither yet the accidents without their substance, can be broken,
neither again will they admit any bread there remaining to be
broken?. And what then was it, in this their breaking of bread, that
they did break, if it were not bread, that is, the substance of
bread, which was broken? To conclude:  if they say that this fraction
of bread was a sacramental breaking of Christ's body, so by the like
figure let them say that the being of Christ's natural body in the
sacrament is a sacramental being, and we are agreed.

     Item, They object further, and say, that the church, upon due
consideration, may alter as they see cause, in rites, ceremonies, and
sacraments.

     Answer:  -- The institution of this sacrament standeth upon the
order, example, and commandment of Christ. This order he took:  first,
he devided the bread severally from the cup; and afterwards, the cup
severally from the bread. Secondly, this he did not for any need on
his behalf, but only to give us example how to do the same after him,
in remembrance of his death, to the world's end. Thirdly, besides
this order taken, and example left, he added also an express.
commandment, Do this:  Drink ye all of this, &c. Against this order,
example, and commandment of the gospel, no church, nor council of
men, nor angel in heaven, hath any power or authority to change or
alter; according as we are warned:  If any bring unto you any other
gospel beside that ye have received, hold him accursed, &c.

     Item, Another objection:  And why may not the church (say they)
as well alter the form of this sacrament, as the apostles did the
form of baptism? where, in the Acts, St. Peter saith, Let every one
be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, &c.

     Answer:  -- This text saith not that the apostles used this form
of baptizing, "I baptize thee in the name of Christ," &c.; but they
used many times this manner of speech, "to be baptized in the name of
Christ," not as expressing thereby the formal words of baptizing, but
as meaning this:  That they would have them to become members of
Christ, and to be baptized as Christians, entering into his baptism,
and not only to the baptism of John:  and therefore, although the
apostles thus spake to the people, yet, notwithstanding, when they
baptized any themselves, they used, no doubt, the form of Christ
prescribed, and no other.

     Item, Among many other objections, they allege certain perils
and causes of weight and importance, as spilling, shedding, or
shaking the blood out of the cup, or souring, or else sticking upon
men's beards, &c.; for the which, they say, it is well provided the
half communion to suffice.

     Whereunto it is soon answered, that as these causes were no let
to Christ, to the apostles, to the Corinthians, and to the brethren
of the primitive church, but that in the public assemblies they
received all the whole communion, as well in the one part as in the
other; so neither be the said causes so important now, to annul and
evacuate the necessary commandment of the gospel, if we were as
careful to obey the Lord, as we are curious to magnify our own
devices, to strain at gnats, to stumble at straws, and to seek knots
in rushes, which rather are in our own fantasies growing, than there,
where they are sought.

     In summa:  Divers other objections and cavillations are in
popish books to be found, as in Gabriel, the difference made between
the laity and priests; also the distinction used to be made between
the priests' communion and the laical communion:  where is to be
understood, that when priests were bid to use the laical communion,
thereby was meant, not receiving under one kind, as laymen do now,
but to abstain from consecrating, and only to receive as the laymen
then did. Some also allege certain special or particular examples, as
of the cup only serving for the bread, or of the bread only sent to
certain sick folk for the cup. And here they do infer the story of
Sozomenus, touching the woman in whose mouth the sacrament of bread,
which she only received without the cup, was turned to a stone, &c.
Others allege other private examples likewise of infants, aged men,
sick persons, men excommunicated, frantics, and madmen, or men
dwelling far off from churches, in mountains or wildernesses, &c. All
which private examples neither make any instance against the ancient
custom of public congregations frequented from the apostles' time;
and much less ought they to derogate from the express and necessary
precept of the gospel, which saith to all men without exception, This
do ye, and, Drink ye all of it.

The third article:  of private masses, trental masses, and dirige
masses.

     Private masses, trental masses, and dirige masses, as they were
never used before the time of Gregory, six hundred years after
Christ, so the same do fight directly against our Christian doctrine,
as by the definition thereof may well appear. The mass is a work or
action of the priest, applied unto men for meriting of grace, ex
opere operato; in the which action the sacrament is first worshipped,
and then offered up for a sacrifice for remission of sins, a pœna et
culpa, for the quick and the dead. Of this definition, as there is no
part but it agreeth with their own teaching, so there is no part
thereof which disagreeth not from the rules of Christian doctrine;
especially these, as follow: 

     I. The first rule is, Sacraments be instituted for some
principal end and use, out of which use they are no sacraments:  as
the sacrament of baptism is a sacrament of regeneration and
forgiveness of sins to the person that is baptized; but if it be
carried about to be worshipped and showed to others, as meritorious
for their remission and regeneration, to them it is no sacrament.

     II. No sacrament or ceremony doth profit or conduce but to them
only who take and use the same.

     III. Only the death of Christ, and the work of his sacrifice
upon the cross, is to be applied to every man by faith, for salvation
and health of his soul. Besides this work alone, to apply any action
or work of priest or any other person, as meritorious of itself, and
conducible to salvation, to souls' health, or to remission of sins,
it is idolatry, and derogatory to the testament of God, and to the
blood of Christ prejudicial.

     IV. To make idols of sacraments, and to worship dumb things for
the living God, it is idolatry.

     V. Every good work, whatsoever it be, that a man doth,
profiteth only himself, and cannot be applied to other men, ex opere
operato, to profit them unto merit or remissions; only the actions of
Christ excepted.

     VI. No man can apply to another the sacrifice of Christ's death
by any work-doing, but every man must apply it to himself by his own
believing.

     VII. The sacrifice of Christ's death doth save us freely by
itself, and not by the means of any man's working for us.

     VIII. The passion of Christ once done, and no more, is a full
and a perfect oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, both original and actual:  by the virtue of which passion the
wrath of God is pacified towards mankind for ever. Amen.

     IX. The passion of Christ once done, is only the object of that
faith of ours which justifieth us, and nothing else. And therefore,
whosoever setteth up any other object beside that passion once done,
for our faith to apprehend and behold the same, teacheth damnable
doctrine, and leadeth to idolatry.

     Against all these rules private masses directly do repugn. For
first, besides that they transgress the order, example, and
commandment of Christ, (who divided the bread and cup to them all,)
they also bring the sacrament out of the right use whereunto,
principally, it was ordained. For whereas the use of that sacrament
is principally instituted for a testimonial and remembrance of
Christ's death, the private mass transferreth the same to another
purpose, either to make of it a gazing idol, or a work of application
meritorious, or a sacrifice propitiatory for remission of sins, or a
commemoration for souls departed in purgatory:  according as it is
written in their mass book, Pro quorum memoria corpus Christi,
sumitur; pro quorum memoria sanguis Christi sumitur, That in
remembrance of whom the body and blood of Christ are taken, whereas
Christ saith contrary, This do ye in remembrance of me.

     Furthermore, the institution of Christ is broken in this, that
whereas the communion was given in common, the private mass suffereth
the priest alone to eat and drink up all; and when he hath done, to
bless the people with the empty cup.

     Secondly, whereas sacraments properly profit none but them that
use the same, in the private mass the sacrament is received in the
behoof not only of him that executeth, but of them also that stand
looking on, and of them also which be far off, or dead and in
purgatory.

     Thirdly, when by the Scripture nothing is to be applied for
remission of our sins, but only the death of Christ, cometh in the
private mass, as a work meritorious done by the priest; which being
applied to others, is available both to him that doth it, and to them
for whom it is done.

     Fourthly, private masses, and all other masses now used, of the
sacrament make an idol; of commemoration make adoration; instead of
receiving, make a deceiving; in place of showing forth Christ's
death, make new oblations of his death; and of a communion make a
single sole supping, &c.

     Fifthly, whereas, in this general frailty of man's nature, no
man can merit by any worthiness of working for himself, the priest,
in his private mass, taketh upon him to merit both for himself, and
for many others.

     Sixthly, it standeth against Scripture, that the sacrifice and
death of Christ can be applied any otherwise to our benefit and
justification, than by faith:  wherefore it is false that the action
of the mass can apply the benefit of Christ's death unto us, ex opere
operato, sine bono motu utentis vel sacrificantis.

     Seventhly, whereas the benefit of our salvation and justifying
standeth by the free gift and grace of God, through our faith in
Christ; contrarily, the application of these popish masses stoppeth
the freeness of God's grace, and maketh that this benefit must first
come through the priest's hands, and his opus operatum, unto us.

     The eighth contrariety between private mass and God's word is
in this; that where the Scripture saith, With one oblation he hath
made perfect them that be sanctified for ever:  against this rule the
private mass proceedeth in a contrary doctrine, making of one
oblation a daily oblation, and that which is perfectly done and
finished, anew to be done again:  and finally, that which was
instituted only for eating, and for a remembrance of that oblation of
Christ once done, the popish mass maketh an oblation, and a new
satisfaction daily to be done for the quick and the dead.

     To conclude, these both private and public masses of priests,
turn away the object of our faith from the body of Christ sacrificed,
to the body of Christ in their masses. And whereas God annexeth no
promise of justification, but only to our faith in the body of Christ
crucified, they do annex promise of remission a pœna et culpa, to the
body in their masses sacrificed, by their application; besides divers
other horrible and intolerable corruptions which spring of their
private and public masses, which here I leave to others at their
leisure further to conceive and to consider. Now let us proceed to
the other articles following.

The fourth and fifth articles; of vows and priests' marriage.

     As we have discoursed before, by stories and order of time, the
antiquity of the three former articles above mentioned, to wit, of
transubstantiation, of the half communion, and of private masses; so
now, coming to the article of vows, and that of priests' marriage,
the reader will look, perchance, to be satisfied in this likewise, as
in the other before, and to be certified from what continuance of
time these vows and unmarried life of priests have continued;
wherein, although sufficient hath been said before in the former
process of this history, as in the life of Anselm, also of Pope
Hildebrand, &c., yet, for the better establishing of the reader's
mind against this wicked article of priests' marriage, it shall be no
great labour lost, here briefly to recapitulate in the tractation of
this matter, either what before hath been said, or what is more to be
added. And to the intent that the world may see and judge the said
law and decree of priests' single sole life, to be a doctrine of no
ancient standing here within this realm, but only since the time of
Anselm, I will first allege for me the words of Henry of Huntingdon,
here following: 

     "The same year, at the feast of St. Michael, Anselm, the
archbishop of Canterbury, held a synod at London; in the which synod
he forefended priests here in England to have wives, which they were
not inhibited before to have:  which constitution seemed to some
persons very pure and chaste. To others again it seemed very
dangerous, lest while that men should take upon them such chastity,
more than they should be able to bear, by that occasion they might 
haply fall into horrible filthiness, which should redound to the
exceeding slander of Christian profession," &c.

     Albeit I deny not but before the time also of Anselm, both Odo,
and after him Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, and Ethelwold,
bishop of Winchester, and Oswald, bishop of Worcester, in the days of
King Edgar, A.D. 959, as they were all monks themselves, so were they
great doers against the marriage of priests, placing monks in
churches and colleges, and putting out the married priests, as ye may
read before; yet, notwithstanding, neither was that in many churches,
and also the priests then married were not constrained to leave their
wives, or their rooms, but only at their own choice. For so writeth
Malmesbury, "Therefore divers and sundry clerks of many churches,
being put to their choice, whether to change their weed, or to part
from their places, went their ways," &c. So also Elfric, after them,
(of whom mention was made before,) was somewhat busy in setting
forward the single life of priests, and Lanfranc likewise. But yet
this restraint of priests' lawful marriage was never publicly
established for a law here, in the church of England, before the
coming of Anselm, in the days of William Rufus and King Henry the
First, writing in these words:  "Boldly I command, by the authority
which I have by my archbishopric, not only within my archbishopric,
but also throughout England, that all priests that keep women, shall
be deprived of their churches, and all ecclesiastical benefices,"
&c.; as ye may read more at large before:  which was much about the
same time when Hildebrand also, at Rome, began to attempt the same
matter, as before hath been showed; and also besides him were other
popes more, as Pope Innocent the Third, Nicholas the Second, and
Calixtus the Second, by whom the act against priests' marriage was
brought at length to its full perfection, and so hath continued ever
since.

     Long it were, and tedious, to recite here all such
constitutions of councils provincial and general, namely, of the
council of Carthage and of Toledo, which seemed to work something in
that behalf against the matrimony of priests.

     Again, longer it were to number up the names of all such
bishops and priests, which, notwithstanding, have been married since
that time in divers countries, as more amply shall be showed (the
Lord willing) in the sequel hereof. In the mean season, as touching
the age and time of this devilish prohibition for priests to have
their wives, this is to be found by credible proofs and conferring of
histories, that about the year of our Saviour 1067, at what time Pope
Hildebrand began first to occupy the papal chair, this oath began
first to be taken of archbishops and bishops, that they should suffer
none to enter into the ministry, or into any ecclesiastical function,
having a wife; and likewise the clergy to be bound to promise the
same.

     And this was, as I said, about A.D. 1067, well approved and
testified by course of histories:  whereby appeareth the prophecy of
St. Paul truly to be verified, speaking of these latter times, 1 Tim.
iv., where he writeth in these words:  The Spirit speaketh plainly,
that in the latter times there shall some depart from the faith,
hearkening unto spirits of error, and to doctrines of devils,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which the
Lord hath created to be taken with thanksgiving, &c.

     In this prophecy of St. Paul two things are to be observed;
first, the matter which he prophesieth of, that is, the forbidding of
marriage, and forbidding of meats, which God generally hath left free
to all men. The second thing in this prophecy to be noted is, the
time when this prophecy shall fall, that is, in the latter times of
the world. So that this concurreth right well with these years of
Pope Hildebrand aforesaid, being a thousand years complete after the
ascension of our Saviour; so that they may well be called the latter
times.

     This prophecy of St. Paul, thus standing, as it doth, firm and
certain, that is, that forbidding of marriage must happen in the
latter times of the world, then must it needs consequently follow
thereby, that the married life of priests is more ancient in the
church than is the single life; than the law, I mean, commanding the
single life of priests:  which may soon be proved to be true, by the
true count of times, and search of histories.

     I. For first, at the council of Nice, A.D. 325, it is notorious
that this devilish law of marriage to be restrained, was stopped by
Paphnutius.

     II. Before this council of Nice, we read of Polycrates, bishop
of Ephesus, who, about A.D. 193, dissenting from Pope Victor about a
certain controversy of Easter-day, allegeth for himself how his
progenitors before him, seven together, one after another, succeeded
in that see, and he now, the eighth after them, was placed in the
same, using this his descent of his parents not only as a defence of
his cause, but also as a glory to himself.

     III. Pope Syricius, about A.D. 390, wrote to the priests of
Spain, about the same matter of putting their wives from them; if his
epistle be not counterfeit. These Spanish priests had then with them
a bishop of Tarragona, who, answering to Syricius in this behalf,
alleged the testimonies of St. Paul, that priests might lawfully
retain their wives, &c. To this Syricius replied again (if his
writing be not forged) most arrogantly, and no less ignorantly,
reproving the priests that were married; and, for the defence of his
cause, alleged this sentence of St. Paul, If ye shall live after the
flesh, ye shall die, &c. Whereby may appear, not only how they in
Spain then had wives, but also how blind these men were in the
Scriptures, which showed themselves such and so great adversaries
against priests' marriages.

     IV. To be short, the further we go, and the nearer to the
ancient time of the church, the less ancient we shall find the
deprivation of lawful matrimony amongst Christian ministers,
beginning, if ye will, with the apostles, their examples and canons,
who, although they were not all married, yet divers of them were, and
the rest had power and liberty to have and keep their wives,
witnessing St. Paul, where he writeth of himself, Have we not power
to lead about a sister to wife, as also the other apostles have?
Whereby is to be seen, both what he might do, and what the other
apostles did. Albeit Clement of Alexandria, who was two hundred years
after Christ, denieth not but that Paul was married, being an
apostle, as well as Peter and Philip. And as the said apostles, in
their doctrine, admonish all men to marry that cannot otherwise do,
saying unto every one being in danger of temptation, Let every man
have his own wife, lest Satan tempt you, &c., so likewise the same
apostles, in their canons, (as in the pope's decrees is cited,) do
precisely charge, that no bishop or priest should sequester from him
his wife for any matter or pretence of religion, saying, "If any
shall teach that a priest, for religion's sake, ought to contemn his
own wife, let him be accursed," &c.

     As for the gloss there in the margin, which expoundeth this
word "contemning "for exhibiting things necessary for her sustenance,
all the world may see that to he a gloss of mere sophistry. And
because I have here made mention of Clement of Alexandria, it shall
not be to our purpose impertinent, to infer the words of this worthy
writer, wherewith he doth defend priests' lawful matrimony against
certain vain boasters of virginity in his time:  "These glorious
braggers do vaunt themselves to be the followers of the Lord, who
neither had wife, nor yet possessed any thing here in the world," &c.
And it followeth, "To these the Scripture maketh answer, God
withstandeth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Again, they
consider not the cause why the Lord took no wife. First, he had his
own peculiar spouse, which is the church. Moreover, neither was he as
a common man, that he should stand in such need of a helper after the
flesh," &c. And in the same book a little after, alleging against
them that abhor matrimony, he inferreth the words of St. Paul, how
that in the latter days, some shall fall from the faith, attending to
spirits of error, and to doctrine of devils, forbidding to marry, and
bidding to abstain from meats, &c. Which place of St. Paul, Clement
here applieth not against the Novatians, and them that condemn
matrimony in general in all men as naught; but he applieth it only
against such as forbid marriage in part, and namely in priests, &c.
This Clement wrote after Christ two hundred years, and yet if we come
downward to lower times, we shall find both by the council of Gangra
three hundred years, and also by the council of Nice four hundred
years, after Christ, the same liberty of priests' marriage
established and enacted as a thing both good and godly. The words of
the council of Gangra be these:  "If any do judge that a priest, for
his marriage' sake, ought not to minister, and therefore doth abstain
from the same, let him be accursed."

     Moreover, proceeding yet in times and chronicles of the church,
we shall come to the sixth council, called the Synod of
Constantinople, almost seven hundred years after Christ; the words of
which council be alleged in the Decrees, and be these:  "Because, in
the order of the Roman canon we know it so to be received, that such
as be deacons and priests shall profess themselves to have no more
connexion with their wives; we, following the ancient canon of the
diligent apostles and constitutions of holy men, enact that such
lawful marriage, from henceforth, shall stand in force, in no case
dissolving their conjunction with their wives, neither depriving them
of their mutual society and familiarity together, in such time as
they shall think convenient," &c. Hitherto ye have heard the decree: 
hear now the penalty in the same decree and distinction contained.
"If any man, therefore, shall presume, against the canons of the
apostles, to deprive either priest or deacon from the touching and
company of his lawful wife, let him be deprived. And likewise this
priest and deacon, whosoever, for religion's sake, shall put away his
wife, let him be excommunicated," &c. (and the council of Gangra
saith:  "let him be accursed.") By these words of the council recited,
six things are to be noted: 

     I. First, how this council calleth the marriage of priests
lawful, contrary to these six articles, and to a certain late English
writer of our country, entitling his book Against the Unlawful
Marriage of Priests.

     II. In that this council so followeth "the canons of the
apostles, and constitutions of holy men," we have to understand what
the censures both of the apostles, and determination of other holy
men, were therein.

     III. If the injunction of this council, agreeing thus with the
apostles and holy men, stood with truth, the contrary canon of the
Romans, and also of these six English articles, must needs be
condemned of error.

     IV. By this council appeareth, that so long time, almost seven
hundred years after Christ, this prohibition of priests' marriage was
not yet entered into the Orient church, but stoutly was holden out.

     V. By the Roman canon here mentioned, which began with Gregory,
six hundred years after Christ, a little before this council, it
cannot be denied but that the Church of Rome began then to dissever,
not only from the verity, but also from the unity of all other
churches following the apostolic doctrine; albeit the said Roman
canon at that time stood not long, but was shortly disannulled by the
said Gregory again, by the occasion of infants' heads found in the
fish pond; whereof (Christ willing) more shall be spoken hereafter.

     VI. Sixthly, here is to be noted and remembered the crafty
false packing and fraud of the Romans, who, in the Latin book of
Councils, in divers new impressions, have suppressed this canon,
because belike it maketh little with their purpose:  playing much like
with this, as Pope Sosimus, Boniface, and Celestine played with the
sixth council at Carthage, who, for their supremacy, would have
forged a false canon of Nice, had not the council sent to
Constantinople for the true exemplar thereof, and so proved them open
liars to their faces. So likewise this canon above mentioned,
although it be omitted in some books, yet, being found in the ancient
and true written copies, being alleged of Nilus, a Greek bishop of
Thessalonica, two hundred years ago; and moreover being found and
alleged in the pope's own book of Decrees, dist. 31, must needs
convince them of manifest theft and falsehood.

     Thus it may stand sufficiently proved, that the deprivation of
priests' lawful marriage, all this space, was not entered into the
church, neither Greek nor Latin, at least took no full possession,
before Pope Hildebrand's time, A.D. 1067, and especially Pope
Calixtus' time, A.D. 1119, which were the first open extorters of
priest's marriage. Aventine, a faithful writer of his time, writing
of the council of Hildebrand, hath these words: 

     "In those days priests commonly had wives, as other Christian
men had, and had children also, as may appear by ancient instruments,
and deeds of gift, which were then given to churches, to the clergy,
and to religious houses; in which instruments, both the priests and
their wives, also, with them, (who there be called presbyterissæ,) I
find to be alleged for witnesses. It happened, moreover, at the same
time, (saith Aventine,) that the emperor had the investing of divers
archbishoprics, bishoprics, abbeys, and nunneries, within his
dominions; Pope Hildebrand disdaining against both these sorts
aforesaid, (that is, both against them that were invested by the
emperor, and also against all those priests that had wives,) provided
so in his council at Rome, that they who were promoted by the emperor
into livings of the church, were counted to come in by simony:  the
others, who were married priests, were counted for Nicolaitans.
Whereupon Pope Hildebrand, writing his letters to the emperor, to
dukes, princes, and other great prelates and potentates; namely, to
Berthold of Zaringia, to Rodulph of Suevia, to Welphon of Bavaria, to
Adelberon, and to their ladies, and to divers others to whom he
thought good, also to bishops; namely, to Otto, bishop of Constance,
with other priests and lay people, willeth them, in his letters, to
refuse and to keep no company with those simoniacs and those
Nicolaitan priests, (for so were they termed then,) which had either
any ecclesiastical living by the emperor, or else who had wives:  to
avoid their masses; neither to talk, neither to eat or drink with
them, nor once to speak to them, or to salute them; but utterly to
shun them, as men execrable and wicked, no otherwise than they would
eschew the plague or pestilence.

     "By reason hereof ensued a mighty schism and affliction among
the flock of Christ, such as lightly the like hath not been seen:  for
the priests went against their bishops, the people against the
priests, the laity against the clergy:  briefly, all ran together in
heaps and in confusion. Men and women, as every one was set upon
mischief, wickedness, contention, and avarice, took thereby occasion,
upon every light suspicion, to resist their minister, to spoil the
goods of the church. The vulgar people contemned the priests which
had married wives, despised their religion, and all things that they
did; yea, and in many places would purge the place where they had
been with holy water, and burned their tithes. Also, such was the
mischief of them, that they would take the holy mysteries which those
married priests had consecrated, and cast them in the dirt, and tread
them under their feet:  for so then had Hildebrand taught them, that
those were no priests, neither that they were sacraments which they
did consecrate. So that by this occasion many false prophets rose,
seducing the people from the truth of Christ by forged fables, and
false miracles, and feigned glosses, wresting the Scriptures as
served best for their own purposes:  of whom few there were, that kept
any true chastity. Many could make glorious boasts and brags thereof;
but the greatest part, under the show and pretence of honesty and
pureness of life, committed incest, fornication, adultery, every
where almost, and no punishment was for the same," &c.

     To this testimony of Aventine above mentioned, we will also
adjoin the record of Gebuilerus, a writer of this our latter time,
and one also of their own crew, who doth testify, that in the time of
the emperor Henry the Fourth, A.D. 1057, the number of twenty-four
bishops, both in Germany, Spain, and in France, were married, with
the clergy also of their diocese. Of which Spanish bishops we read
also in Isidore, who wrote more than six hundred years after Christ,
(and the place is also cited in the pope's distinctions,) in his book
De Clericorum Vita, how they ought either to lead an honest, chaste
life, or else to keep themselves within the band of matrimony, &c.
Whereby is declared the single life of priests either to be then
voluntary, or else their marriage not to be restrained as yet by any
law.

     Moreover, such Calixtian priests as be nowadays, counting
priests' marriage as a new device, and not standing with ancient
times, let them look upon the decree of Pope Symmachus, and answer
thereof to the Gloss, dist. 81; where it is written, "Let priests be
all restrained from the conversation of all women, except it be their
mother, sister, or their own wife," &c.

     Thus, if either the voice of Scripture might take place with
these men which be so rigorous against priests' marriage; or if the
examples of the apostles might move them, (whom St. Ambrose
witnesseth to have been all married, except only Paul and John,) or
else if the multitude of married bishops and priests might prevail
with them, here might be rehearsed, that Tertullian was a married
priest; as witnesseth Jerome; Spiridion, bishop of Cyprus, had wife
and children; Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, was also married; Gregory,
bishop of Nissa; Gregory, bishop of Nazianzum; Prosper, bishop of
Rheggio; Cheremon, bishop of Nilopolis:  all these were married
bishops. Of Polycrates, and his seven ancestors, bishops and married
men, we spake before. Epiphanius, bishop of Constantinople in
Justinian's time, was the more commended, because his father and
ancestors before him were priests and bishops married. Jerome saith,
that in his time, "many priests were then married men."

     Pope Damasus reciteth up a great number of bishops of Rome, who
were priests' sons; as, Sylverius, A.D. 536; Deodatus, about the year
614; Adrian the Second, about the year 867; Felix the Third, about
the year 483; Osius; Agapetus, A.D. 535; Gelasius, A.D. 492;
Boniface, A.D. 418; Theodore, (whose father was bishop of Jerusalem,)
about the year 642; John the Tenth, A.D. 914 John the Fifteenth, the
son of Leo, a priest, about the year 985; Richard, archdeacon of
Coventry:  Henry, archdeacon of Huntingdon; Volusianus, bishop of
Carthage; Thomas. archbishop of York, son of Sampson, bishop of
Worcester. And bow many other bishops and priests in other countries,
besides these bishops of Rome, might be annexed to this catalogue, if
our leisure were such as to make a whole bead-roll of them all!

     In the mean time the words of Cardinal Sylvius, afterwards
bishop of Rome, are not to be forgotten, which he wrote to a certain
friend of his, which, after his orders taken, was disposed to
marriage. To whom the aforesaid Sylvius answereth again in these
words following:  "We believe that you, in so doing, follow no
sinister counsel, in that you choose to be married, when otherwise
you are not able to live chaste. Albeit this counsel should have come
into your head before that you entered into ecclesiastical orders: 
but we are not all gods, to foresee before what shall happen
hereafter. Now, forasmuch as the matter and case standeth so, that
you are not able to resist the law, better it is to marry than to
burn," &c.

     All these premises well considered, it shall suffice, I trust,
though no more were said, to prove that this general law and
prohibition of priests' marriage, pretended to be so ancient, is of
no such great time, nor long continuance of years, as they make it,
but rather to be a late devised doctrine, gendered by the monks, and
grounded upon no reason, law, or Scripture; but that certain which be
repiners against the truth, do rack and wrest a few places out of the
doctors, and two or three councils, for their pretended purpose: 
whose objections and blind cavillations, I, as professing here but to
write stories,refer to the further discussion of divines, in whose
books this matter is more at large to be sought and searched. In the
mean season, so much as appertaineth to the searching of times and
antiquity, and to the conservation of such acts and monuments as are
behovable for the church, there is a certain epistle learned and
ancient, of Volusianus, bishop some time of Carthage, tending to the
defence of priests' lawful wedlock, which Æneas Sylvius, in
Descriptione Germaniæ; also Illyricus in Catalogo; and Melancthon,
Lib. de Conjugio, do father upon Hulderic, bishop of Augsburg, in the
time of Pope Nicholas the Second. But as I find it in an old written
example, sent by John Bale to Matthew, archbishop of Canterbury, as
it is joined in the same book, so it beareth also the same title and
name of Volusianus, bishop of Carthage.

     As touching the antiquity of the first epistle, it appeareth by
the copy which I have seen and received, of the above-named Matthew,
archbishop of Canterbury, to be of an old and ancient writing, both
by the form of the characters, and by the wearing of the parchment,
almost consumed by length of years and time.

     And as concerning the author thereof, the superscription (if it
be true) plainly declareth it to be the epistle of Volusianus, bishop
of Carthage:  albeit, heretofore, it hath commonly been taken and
alleged by the name of Hulderic, bishop of Augsburg, and partly
appeareth to be so, both by the testimony of Æneas Sylvius, in
Descriptione Germaniæ, who, in the said treatise, affirmeth that
Hulderic, bishop of Augsburg, did constantly resist the pope,
abolishing the marriage of priests, &c.:  and also by the record of
Illyricus, testifying that the said epistle not only remaineth yet to
this day in old monuments, but also that he himself did see two
exemplars of the same, both pretending the name of the said Hulderic
to be the author, notwithstanding this copy I have seen, beareth the
title, not of Hulderic, bishop of Augsburg, but of Volusianus, bishop
of Carthage in Africa; as ye may see by the words of the preamble,
saying, "This is the rescript of Volusianus, bishop of Carthage, unto
Pope Nicholas, concerning priests not to be restrained from lawful
marriage," &c.

     Furthermore, which Pope Nicholas this was, to whom these
epistles were written, it is not plainly showed in the same; but that
by probable conjecture it may be guessed rather to be Pope Nicholas
the Second, forasmuch as in his time priests' marriage began somewhat
earnestly to be called in, more than at other times before.

     These two epistles, written to Pope Nicholas under the title of
Volusianus, give us to understand by the contents thereof, first,
that he himself was then a married bishop:  secondly, that the liberty
of priests' marriage ought not to be restrained by any general law of
compulsion, but to be left to every man's free choice, and voluntary
devotion:  thirdly, the said epistles, being written to Pope Nicholas,
(if the title be true,) declare, that this law, prohibiting the
lawful matrimony of churchmen, began first in this pope's time
generally to be enacted.

     And although it be not here expressed which Pope Nicholas this
was, yet by the circumstance of time, and especially by the words of
Pope Alexander, it may probably be esteemed to be Nicholas the
Second, and not Nicholas the First, as some do suppose; amongst whom
is Illyricus, and also John Bale, with certain others:  from whose
judgments, although I am loth to dissent, yet, notwithstanding,
modestly and freely to utter herein my opinion, this I suppose, that
if the truth of this matter were throughly tried, it might,
peradventure, be found that they be herein deceived, and all by
mistaking a certain place of Gratian:  for the better explanation
hereof it is to be understood, that amongst the distinctions of
Gratian, there is a constitution, the tenor whereof is this, "No man
shall hear mass of any priest whom he knoweth undoubtedly to have a
concubine, or a woman privily resorting to him," &c.

     This decree, forasmuch as Gratian doth allege under the name
and title of Pope Nicholas, not naming what Nicholas he was,
therefore John Bale, and Illyricus, one following the other, and they
both following Volateran, do vouch this constitution upon Nicholas
the First. The words of Volateran be these, writing of Nicholas the
First; "He determined on many useful measures, such as that none
should be present at the sacrifice of a priest who kept a concubine."

     In like effect follow also the words of Illyricus aforesaid;
and he allegeth, as Volateran doth, the said distinction of Gratian,
in alleging whereof they both seem to be deceived, in mistaking
belike one Nicholas for another:  as may be proved and made good by
three or four reasons.

     First, by the words of Pope Alexander the Second, in the next
chapter following, who, being the successor of Leo, and of Nicholas
the Second, useth the same words in his synod of Mantua, (which
Gratian referreth unto Nicholas,) and prosecuteth the same more amply
and fully, alleging, moreover, the former constitution of both his
predecessors, Popes Leo and Nicholas, who, by all stories, are known
to be Leo the Ninth and Nicholas the Second, which both were next
before him. The words of Alexander the Second be these; "Beside this,
we command that none hear mass from a priest known to be privately
married. Hence the holy synod has determined this under pain of
excommunication, saying, Whosoever of the priesthood, after the
constitution of our predecessors of blessed memory, the most holy
Popes Leo and Nicholas, shall openly marry a wife, or if married,
shall not leave her," &c., &c. By which words, speaking of Nicholas
his predecessor, it is evident to understand this to be Pope Nicholas
the Second, which was his next predecessor, and not Pope Nicholas the
First, who was about two hundred years before him.

     The second reason, I take out of the chapter of Gratian next
going before, where he allegeth again the same Nicholas, writing to
Otho archbishop; which Otho was then, in the time of this Nicholas
the Second, archbishop of Cologne, and was afterwards in the council
of Mantua, under Pope Alexander the Second, as witnesseth Johannes
Quintius, the lawyer. Whereby it must needs be granted, that this was
Nicholas the Second, and not Nicholas the First.

     The third conjecture or reason is this, for that Pope Nicholas
the First never made any such act or decree, that neither priests
that were entangled with a concubine, should sing mass, nor that any
should resort to hear the mass of such, &c.; but rather to the
contrary. For so we read in the history of Antoninus.

     And yet more plainly also afterwards he saith, "Where ye demand
concerning the priest that hath a wife, whether ye ought to sustain
him, and honour him, or reject him from you:  we answer, that albeit
they be very much blameworthy; yet ye ought to be followers of God,
who maketh his sun to rise both upon the good, and upon the bad. And
therefore ye ought not to reject such away from you," &c.

     And this Nicholas, Antoninus confesseth plainly to be Nicholas
the First; whereby it is not only not unlikely, but also most
certain, that Nicholas the First was not the author of this
constitution, either to exterminate married priests from their
churches, or to excommunicate the people from receiving their 
communion; much less then from hearing their service.

     Fourthly:  forasmuch then as it is undoubted that Nicholas the
Second, and Alexander the Second, through the instigation of
Hildebrand, were the authors of that constitution whereof Gratian
speaketh, it remaineth plain by the words of Volusianus, in the
latter end of his letter, (wherein he maketh mention both of
discharging the priest from singing mass, and the people from
hearing,) that the said epistle was written, not to Pope Nicholas the
First, but to Pope Nicholas the Second, because both these were
decreed against married priests under Nicholas the Second, and
Alexander the Second, as is before declared.

     And further, lest my judgment herein should seem to stand alone
and singular, without some to take my part, I will here produce for
me a Parisian doctor, and a famous lawyer, Johannes Quintius, above
mentioned, who in his book De Clericorum Moribus plainly accordeth
with mine opinion touching this Nicholas, author of the decree
aforesaid, where he writeth in these words; "Pope Nicholas, writing
to Otho, archbishop of Cologne, &c. Gloss:  There have been, in all,
five popes called by the name of Nicholas; of which five, this
Nicholas, the writer hereof, must be either the first or second:  the
one a Roman, in the year 860; the other a Burgundian, in the year
1059, or 1060. The other Nicholases lived after Gratian, who wrote in
the year 1151. In my judgment I suppose this to be Nicholas the
Second, which, in the third Book of the Laws, called Pannomia, tit.
De Lapsis, is named Nicholas the younger:  which Nicholas, also, is
author of the next decree that followeth," &c.

     Wherefore if any man shall object hereafter, that, because
Gratian, in the distinction aforesaid, nameth Pope Nicholas
absolutely, without any addition, he is therefore to be taken for
Nicholas the First, unto this objection I set here these two lawyers
to answer. Unto whose answer this I add also, that the common manner
of Gratian lightly in all his distinctions is, that when he speaketh
of popes, as of Innocent, Gregory, Leo, Lucius, and such others, very
seldom he expresseth the difference of their names:  so in the
eighteenth distinction, Presbyteris, where he bringeth in the decree
of Pope Calixtus in like manner, against the matrimony of priests,
deacons, and sub-deacons, he addeth thereto no discrepance of his
name; and yet all the world knoweth that this was Calixtus the
Second, and not Calixtus the First, &c. But whether he were or no,
the matter forceth not much. The letters, no doubt, by their title
appear to be written by Volusianus. Most certain this is, by
whomsoever they were written, fruitful epistles they are, and
effectual to the purpose.

     But lest we should seem too much to digress from our purpose,
let us return to the story and time of Nicholas the Second again, who
was about the year, as is said, 1059, a little before Hildebrand was
pope. This Hildebrand, albeit he was then but a cardinal, yet was he
the whole doer of all things, and concluded what him listed in the
church of Rome, and also made popes whom he would, asappeareth both
by this Nicholas, and also Pope Alexander, who followed him. So that
this dissolution of priests' marriage began somewhat to kindle under
this Pope Nicholas, through the pestilent means of Hildebrand, and
after him increased more under Pope Alexander, as appeareth by the
synod holden at Milan, in the year 1067. But most of all it burst out
under the said Hildebrand himself, being pope in the year, as is
said, 1076.

     Although, as touching this prohibition of priests to be
married, I am not ignorant that certain of the contrary faction, in
searching out the reach and antiquity of this tradition, for priests
to abstain from wives, do refer the same to the time of the second
council of Carthage, which was about the time of Pope Syricius, a
great enemy to ministers' wives, as appeareth in the eighty-fourth
distinction, Cum in præterito; yet, notwithstanding, to the same may
be answered,

     First, That this was no universal or general council, but some
particular synod, and, therefore, of no such great forcible
authority.

     Secondly, The same synod being about the time of Pope Syricius,
who was a capital enemy against priests' marriage, may seem to draw
some corruption of the time then present.

     Thirdly, Neither is it impossible, but as divers bastard
epistles have been falsely fathered upon certain ancient bishops of
the primitive church, and divers canons also, as of the council of
Nice, have been corrupted by bishops of Rome, so some falsehood,
likewise, or forgery, might be used in this second council of
Carthage.

     Fourthly, Although no false conveyance had been used therein,
yet, forasmuch as the said canon of this second council of Carthage
doth misreport and falsify the canons of the apostles, in so doing it
doth justly diminish its own credit.

     Fifthly, Seeing the aforesaid canon of this second council of
Carthage tendeth clean contrary to the canons of the apostles, to the
council of Gangra, and other councils more, and commandeth that which
they do accurse, the authority thereof ought to have no great force,
but rather may be rejected.

     Sixthly and finally, Though this constitution of the council of
Carthage were perfectly sound without all corruption, yet plain and
evident it is, by this Volusianus, bishop also of Carthage, that the
same constitution took no great hold in the church, forasmuch as we
see that both this Volusianus was married, after that, in Carthage
himself, and also, besides him, many hundred years after, marriage
was a common matter through most churches of Christendom, amongst
bishops and priests; as partly before hath been declared, and more
may be seen in histories, what great tumults and business was long
after that, in Hildebrand's time, and after him also amongst the
clergymen, both in Italy, Spain, France, and in all quarters of
Christendom, for separating priests from their liberty of marrying.

     And again, if this tradition concerning the unmarried life of
priests had stood upon such an old foundation from the second council
of Carthage, (as they pretend,) what needed then, in the time of Pope
Nicholas the Second, Pope Alexander the Second, Pope Gregory the
Seventh, and other popes after them, so much labour to be taken, so
many laws and decrees to be devised  and enacted, for the abolishing
of priests' marriage, if the same had been of such a long antiquity
as they would make men believe

     By these things considered it may appear, that this detraction
of priests' marriage, by public law compelling them to single life,
was never received for a full law, generally to be observed in the
Church of Rome, but only since the beginning of Hildebrand; that is,
since these five hundred years. About which time first is to be
noted, that under Pope Leo, and this Pope Nicholas, Cranzius and
certain German chroniclers do say, that simony and priests' marriage
were prohibited. This Pope Leo the Ninth was A.D. 1049.

     After him Pope Nicholas (to whom the aforesaid letter of
Volusianus seemeth to be written) made this ordinance:  "Let no one
hear mass by a presbyter who, he knows without doubt, keeps a
concubine or woman in secret." And presently, "Whatsoever priest,
deacon, or sub-deacon, according to the constitution of Pope Leo our
predecessor, concerning the chastity of clerks, shall openly marry a
concubine, or shall not put her away being married:  in the behalf of
Almighty God," &c., "we utterly charge and forbid the same, that he
sing no mass, nor read the gospel or epistle at mass, nor execute any
Divine service," &c. And this was about A.D. 1059. Although, in this
constitution of Pope Nicholas, this word "concubine" may be
understood for no wife, but so as Gratian understandeth it in the
seventeenth canon of the apostles, in these words, "For one besides a
man's wife."

     Then, after this Pope Nicholas, cometh Pope Alexander, and
especially Pope Hildebrand, who do expound this concubine forbidden,
for a wife; and such priests as be married, they expound them for
Nicolaitanes; for so we read in the synod of Milan, under Pope
Alexander the Second:  "Those clergy are called Nicolaitanes, who,
contrary to the rules of ecclesiastical chastity, mingle with women."
And further it followeth in the same synod, "We no less condemn the
heresy of the Nicolaitanes; and, in virtue of the same testimony, we
promise to separate from the vile company of their wives, not merely
priests, but also deacons and sub-deacons, to the utmost of our
power."

     And moreover it followeth upon the same, "I do accurse all
heresies extolling themselves against the holy catholic and apostolic
church; but especially and namely, the heresy of simony:  and in like
manner the abominable heresy of the Nicolaitanes, which impudently
barketh, that the ministers of the holy altar may and ought to use
wives lawfully, as well as laymen," &c. And thus much concerning the
synod of Milan, under Pope Alexander the Second, A.D. 1067.

     Next after this Alexander rose up Pope Hildebrand, of all
others the chiefest and most principal enemy against priests'
marriage. For whereas all other approved canons and councils were
contented that any clergyman, having a wife before his entering into
his ministry, might enjoy the liberty of his marriage, so that he
married not a widow, or a known harlot, or kept a concubine, or were
twice married; now cometh in Pope Hildebrand, making priests'
marriage to be heresy, and further enacting, that "whatsoever clerk,
deacon, or minister had a wife, whatsoever she was, maid or other,
either before his orders, or after, should utterly put her from him,
or else forsake his ministry," &c.

     Although, notwithstanding, the greatest part of ecclesiastical
ministers, seeing this strange doctrine and proceedings, (which St.
Paul expressly calleth the doctrine of devils,) did what they could
to withstand the same:  of whom Lambert of Aschaffenburg thus writeth: 
"Against this decree, the whole number of the clergy did vehemently
storm and grudge, crying out upon him as a pernicious heretic, and
one that maintained fantastical doctrine:  who, forgetting what the
Lord saith, All men cannot take this word; he that can take it, let
him take it; and also what the apostle saith, Whoso cannot otherwise
contain, let him marry; better it is to marry than to burn; yet,
notwithstanding, would he bind men to live like angels:  who, if he
continued as he began, they would (they said) sooner forsake the
order of priesthood, than their order of matrimony," &c.

     This Hildebrand, all this notwithstanding, yet ceased not still
to call upon them, and to send to the bishops every where to execute
his commandment with all severity; threatening to lay the apostolical
censure upon them, if otherwise they showed not their diligence
therein to the uttermost. This was A.D. 1074. Of the same Hildebrand,
Ra- dulph also writing, hath these words:  "Pope Gregory the Seventh,
called Hildebrand, holding a synod, accursed such as committed
simony, and removed married priests from saying service; forbidding
also the laymen to hear their mass, after a new and strange example;
and, as many thought, after an inconsiderate prejudice, against the
sentence of holy fathers."

     And thus much for the antiquity of bringing in the single life
of priests, which, first springing from the time of Pope Nicholas and
Alexander the Second, began first with a custom, and afterwards was
brought into a law, chiefly by Pope Hildebrand, and so spread from
Italy into other countries, and at length into England also; albeit
not without much ado, as ye shall hear, the Lord willing.

     In the mean while, as Pope Nicholas and Hildebrand were busy at
Rome, so Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, likewise, was doing here
in England about the same matter; although he began not altogether so
roughly as Pope Hildebrand did, for so it appeared by his council
holden at Winchester; where, though he inhibited such as were
prebendaries of cathedral churches to have wives, yet did he permit,
in his decree, that such priests as dwelt in towns and villages,
having wives, should retain them still, and not be compelled to be
separate from them; and they that had none, should be inhibited to
have:  enjoining, moreover, the bishops thus to foresee hereafter,
that they presumed not to admit into orders any priests or deacons,
unless they should first make a solemn profession to have no wives.

     And here, to note by the way of the said Lanfranc, for all his
glorious gay show of his monkish virginity and single life, yet he
escaped not altogether so unspotted for his part, but that the story
of Matthew Paris, writing of Paul of Caen, whom Lanfranc preferred so
gladly to be abbot of St. Alban's, thus reporteth of him:  "Paul, a
monk of Caen, and nephew of the archbishop Lanfranc, yea, as some say
further, more near in blood to him than so," &c.

     Then, after Lanfranc, came Anselm into the see of Canterbury,
who, taking to him a stouter stomach, more fiercely and eagerly
laboured this matter, in abrogating utterly the marriage of priests,
deacons, sub-deacons, and of the universal clergy; not permitting (as
Lanfranc did) priests that had wives in villages and towns to keep
them still, but utterly commanding, and that under great pain, not
only priests and deacons, but sub-deacons also, (which is against the
council of Lateran,) who were already married, to be separated, and
that none should be received into orders hereafter, without
profession of perpetual chastity.

     And yet notwithstanding, for all this great blustering and
thundering of this Romish µ???????? [Greek: misogamos] ,the priests,
yet still holding their own as well as they could, gave not much
place to his unlawful injunction, but kept still their wives almost
two hundred years after; refusing and resisting of long time the yoke
of that servile bondage, to keep still their freedom from such
vowing, professing, and promising, as may well appear by those
priests of York, of whom Gerard, archbishop of York, speaketh,
writing to Anselm in these words

     "I much desire the purity of my clergymen:  howbeit, except it
be in very few, I find in them the deafness of the serpent, aspis,
and the inconstancy of Proteus, that the poet's fable spake of. With
their stinging tongues they cast out some-while threats, somewhile
taunts and rebukes. But this grieveth me less in them that be further
off. This grieveth me most of all, that they that be of mine own
church, as in mine own bosom, and prebendaries of mine own see,
contemn our canons, and argue, like sophistical disputers, against
the statutes of our council. The prebendaries who inordinately have
been taken into orders heretofore, without making vow or profession,
refuse utterly to make any profession to me. And they that be priests
or deacons, having married before openly wives or concubines, will
not be removed, for any reverence, from the altar. And when I call
upon any to receive order, stiffly they deny to profess chastity in
their ordering," &c.

     Thus, for all the rigorous austerity of this Anselm, enforcing
his decree made at London against the marriage of priests, yet the
same had no great success, either in his lifetime, or after his life.
For although sundry priests, during his lifetime, were compelled by
his extremity to renounce their wives, yet many denied to obey him.

     Divers were contented rather to leave their benefices than
their wives. A great number were permitted by King Henry, for money,
to enjoy their wives; which was so chargeable unto them, saith
Eadmer, in his fourth book, that at length two hundred priests, in
their albes and priestly vestments, came barefoot to the king's
palace, crying to him for mercy; and especially making their suit to
the queen, who, using much compassion towards them, yet durst not
make any intercession for them.

     Anselm, at this time, was over the sea, making his voyage to
the pope; who, hearing hereof, writeth to the king, declaring that
such forfeitures appertained nothing to him, but only unto bishops,
and in their default, to the archbishops:  whereof read more before.
So wilful was the blind zeal of this prelate, against all reason,
against nature itself, against the example of his fore-elders,
against public custom of his own time, against the doctrine of the
apostles, the constitution of councils, against all honesty, and all
God's forebode, that he, neither at the commiseration of the king,
nor at the crying out and public dolour of so many priests, nor yet
moved with the letters of Pope Paschal himself, who, putting him in
remembrance of so many priests' sons, willed him to consider the
necessity of the time, would yet nothing relent from his stubborn
purpose unto his latter end:  in whom, as many great crimes may justly
be noted, so of all others this is most principally in him to be
reprehended, for that he, seeing and perceiving what sodomitical
fedity and abomination, with other inconveniences, did spring
incontinently upon this his diabolical doctrine, yet, for all that,
would not give over his pestilent purpose. For so the story
recordeth, that when Anselm had established his synodal constitution,
in separating priests from their wives, (which was A.D. 1103,) not
long after, rumours and complaints were brought to him, of the
execrable vice of sodomitry, which then began especially to reign in
the clergy, after this inhibition of matrimony. Whereupon Anselm was
constrained to call another council at Paul's, within London, to
provide for this mischief; in which council this was made:  "All them
that commit the ungracious sin of sodomitry, and them also that
assist them in their wicked purpose, with grievous curse we do
condemn, till such time as they shall deserve absolution by penance
and confession," &c.

     Thus ye have heard what abominable wickedness ensued after
priests were debarred from marriage, and what sore punishment was
devised, by this maidenly prelate, for extirpating that sinful
wickedness; in the abolishing whereof, more wisely he should have
removed away the occasion whereof he was the author himself, than by
penalty to suppress it; which he could never do.

     Now let us hear further, what followed in that worthy council: 
"It is enacted, that whosoever shall be publicly known to be guilty
hereof, if he be a religious person, he shall from henceforth be
promoted to no degree of honour, and that degree which he hath
already, shall be taken from him. If he be a lay person, he shall be
deprived of all his freedom within the whole realm of England, and
that none under a bishop shall presume to assoil such as have been
monks professed, of that trespass. It is also enacted, that every
Sunday in the year, and in every parish church in England, this
general curse aforesaid shall be published and renewed."

     Is not here, trow you, good division of justice, that lawful
wedlock of priests can find no grace or pardon, yea, is made now
heresy, whereas adultery and horrible sodomitry are washed away with
a little confession? And see yet what followeth more. After that this
penal curse had now gone abroad, and been published in churches, the
monks, perceiving this matter to touch them somewhat near, whispered
in Anselm's ear, persuading him that the publication of that act
might grow to great danger and inconvenience, in opening the vice
which before was not known; in such sort, that in short time after
that curse was called in again.

     And so cursed sodomitry and adultery passed free without
punishment, or word spoken against it; where, contrarily, godly
matrimony could find no mercy.

     Now, what reasons and arguments this Anselm sucked out of the
court of Rome, to prove the matrimony of priests unlawful, were it
not for cumbering the reader with tediousness, here would be showed.
Briefly, the chief grounds of all his long long disputation in his
book entitled, Offendiculum Sacerdotum, between the master and
scholar, come to this effect.

     Argument. Priests of the old law, during the time of their
ministration, abstained from their wives: 

     Ergo, Priests in the time of the gospel, which every day
minister at the altar, must never have any wives.

     Argument. Moses, when he should sanctify the people, going up
to the hill, commanded them to sequester themselves from their wives 
three days: 

     Ergo, Priests that must be sanctified to the Lord always, ought
to live chastely always without wives. Argument. David, before he
should eat of the shew-bread, was asked whether he and his company
had been without the company of their wives three days: 

     Ergo, Priests that be continually attending upon the table and
sacraments of the Lord, ought never to have company with any such.

     Argument. Uzzah, which put his hand to the ark, was slain
therefore, as it is thought, because he lay with his wife the night
before: 

     Ergo, Priests whose hands be always occupied about the Lord's
service, must be pure from the company of wife, or any woman.

     Argument. Nadab and Abihu, which sacrificed with strange fire,
were devoured therefore, because they companied with their wives the
same night: 

     Ergo, Priests and sacrificers must have no wives to company
withal.

     Argument. The priests of the Gentiles in old time, when they
sacrificed to their idols, are said to lie from their wives: 

     Ergo, Much more the priests that sacrifice to the living God,
ought so to do.

     Argument. Christ was born of a virgin, Christ lived ever a
virgin, and commandeth them that will serve him to follow him: 

     Ergo, Priests that have wives, are not meet to serve him.

     Text. 1 Cor. vii. 2. Let every man have his own wife, for
avoiding of fornication.

     Exposition. "That is meant and granted of the apostle only to
laymen."

     Text. 1 Cor. vii. 9. It is better to marry than to burn.

     Exposition. "It is a lighter fault to marry one lawful wife,
than to be consumed with concupiscence of strange women."

     Text. 1 Tim. iii. 2. A bishop ought to be un-reprovable, the
husband of one wife, &c.

     Exposition. "The apostle here commandeth, that none should
presume to be priest, but he who, being a layman before, hath had no
more but one wife:  and after he be made priest, not to couple himself
any more with her, but only to minister to her things necessary for
her living," &c.

     And finally, after these things thus disputed and alleged, the
said Anselm concludeth the matter with this final censure and
determination, as followeth:  "In that these men (he speaketh of
married priests) do put on the holy vestments, or do touch the holy
vessels, they do lay violent hands upon Christ. And in that they
presume impudently to offer, they do in a manner visibly crucify
Christ upon the altar. The ministry of such is read to be a
persecution, or rather a crucifying of Christ," &c.

     Lo! here, the mighty reasons, and strong-timbered arguments,
and the deep divinity, wherewith this Anselm, and all others that
draw after his string, go about to impugn the lawfulness of priests'
marriage. Because the Israelites, when they should appear before the
Lord at Mount Sinai, were commanded to keep from their wives three
days; and because the priests of the old law in doing their function,
as their turn came about, refrained the company of their wives for
that present time; ergo, priests of the new law must at no time have
any wives, but live always single, &c.

     And why might not Anselm as well argue thus:  The people of
Israel, approaching to the mount, were commanded in like sort to wash
their garments:  ergo, priests of the new law, which are occupied
every day about the altar, ought every day to wash all their
garments.

     Moses, approaching to the presence of the Lord in the bush, was
commanded to put off his shoes:  ergo, priests of the new law, which
are ever approaching to the presence of their God, should never wear
shoes.

     Of King David and his company, which but once in all their life
did eat of the shew-bread, it was demanded by the high priest,
whether they had kept them from their wives three days before:  ergo,
kings and the people of the New Testament, which every year eat the
bread of the Lord's board, more precious than ever was that panis
propositionis, should abide all their life wifeless and unspoused.

     But here Anselm should have considered how by these scriptures
we are taught not to put away our wives, but wisely to distinguish
times, when and how to have them. For, as Solomon teacheth that there
is a time for all things, so is there a time to marry, and a time not
to marry; a time to resort, a time to withdraw; a time of company, a
time of abstinence and prayer, which St. Paul calleth, ??????????
[Greek: proskairon]; and as he speaketh of a time of prayer and
abstinence, so he speaketh also of a time of resorting together, and
addeth the cause why:  Lest Satan, saith he, tempt you for your
incontinency.

     And thus should Anselm, with Solomon and Paul, have considered
the order and distinction of times. Oftentimes in Scripture, that is
commanded to some, and at some time, which extendeth not to others;
and that which for a time is convenient, is not, by and by, always
convenient:  neither that which for a time is forbidden in Scripture,
is therefore forbidden for ever:  neither ought special examples to
break general orders:  neither again do extraordinary prohibitions
make a universal rule.

     They were then commanded to sequester themselves from their
wives at the coming of the Lord:  not that the coming of the Lord did
break wedlock, but his commandment did bind obedience; and therefore 
obeyed they, because they were commanded. And yet were they not
commanded to put away their wives, but only to separate themselves
for a time; and that not for months and years, but only for three
days:  which abstinence also was enjoined them, not in the presence,
nor at the appearing, of the Lord, but three days before his
descending to them on the hill. Whereby it appeareth that the use of
their wedlock neither displeased God, being present, nor yet did
drive his presence away, when he was come; for he remained there
present amongst them, on the hill, forty days notwithstanding.

     Furthermore, this time of separation from their wives, as it
was expressly commanded to them of God, so was it not long nor
tedious, but such as was neither hard for them, nor inconvenient for
the time:  giving us thereby to understand, how to use separation in
wedlock wisely, that is, neither at every time, nor yet too long.

     For as they do not well, who never follow the time of St. Paul,
called ?????????? [Greek: proskairon], for abstinence and prayer; so
do thby worse, which fall into that ?????????? [Greek: parakairon],
whereof St. Paul again giveth us warning. But worst of all do they,
who so separate their wives clean from them, and so abjure all
matrimony, that they fall headlong into the devil's pitfall of
fornication and all filthy abomination. And therefore the Lord,
foreseeing the peril thereof, said unto the people, Be ye ready by
the third day, and approach not your wives; appointing indeed a
separation from their wives; but yet, knowing the infirmity of man,
he limiteth the time withal, adding, by the third day, and goeth no
further. He saith not, as Anselm said in the council of Winchester,
Jurabunt presbyteri, diaconi, et subdiaconi, uxores suas omnino
abjurare, nec ullam deinceps cum iis conversationem habere, sub
restrictione censuræ, &c.

     The like order also was taken by the Lord with the priests of
the Old Testament, who, although they were enjoined to withdraw
themselves from their wives during the times of their priestly
service, yet, for avoiding fornication, they were permitted to have
their wives notwithstanding. So that both their absenting from their
wives served to sanctification, and their resorting again unto them
served to avoid adultery and fornication.

     But here our priestly prelates will object, that because they
be continually conversant about the priestly function, therefore a
perpetual sanctification is of them specially required. Whereunto I
answer, First, The priestly function of those high priests,
sacrificing for the people in the old law, representeth only the
function of Christ, the High Priest, sacrificing for the sins of the
world, who truly and only performed that pure chastity in his
sanctified body, which the law then in those priests prefigured.

     Secondly, Speaking now of the priests of the New Testament,
(and speaking properly,) the Scripture neither knoweth nor admitteth
any priest to sacrifice to God for the sins of man, but only the High
King and Priest, Christ Jesus.

     Thirdly, Unto that Priest all others be but servants and
ministers; of whom some be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists,
some preachers having the gift of utterance, some interpreters and
doctors having the gift of understanding, some deacons serving the
Lord's board. The office of all whom chiefly consisteth in
ministering the word, next in administering the sacraments.

     Fourthly, Forasmuch as in these, principally above all others,
pureness and sanctification of life is required, as much as, and more
too, than was in the priests of the old law, from whom all
fornication, adultery, incest, and uncleanness of life ought most to
be banished; therefore, in these especially,above the priests of the
old law, matrimony and spousage is most requisite and convenient,
whosoever he be, which otherwise cannot contain; according to the
apostle, saying, Let every one have his own wife.

     Fifthly, Neither is this matrimony in these, any hinderance to
their sanctification before God, but rather furthereth and helpeth
their sanctification; forasmuch as where matrimony is not, there
commonly reigneth adultery, fornication, and all kinds of filthiness;
according to the true saying of Bernard, "Take from the church
honourable marriage and the bed undefiled, shalt thou not replenish
it with concubinaries, with incestuous persons, sodomitical vices,
and finally with all kinds of beastly filthiness?"

     The truth of which saying lacketh no kind of examples for
confirmation, if we list here to ransack the lives of these glorious
despisers of matrimony, even from Lanfranc, the first ringleader of
this dance here in England, with Paulus, monk of Caen, his nephew,
whom Matthew Paris misdoubted to be his own son, even to Stephen
Gardiner with his gold locks, the author and work-master of these six
articles. But to the reasons of Anselm hitherto sufficient; which, of
themselves, be so frivolous and gross, that only to recite them is
enough to confute the same.

     Permitting therefore the rest to the discussing of divines, it
shall suffice for our purpose, professing here to write stories, to
declare and make manifest, by process of times and histories, that
this cruel law, compelling ministers of the church to abjure
matrimony, entered not into this land before Lanfranc, A.D. 1076, and
Anselm his successor, as both may appear by the multitude of priests'
sons lawfully begotten in matrimony, and succeeding in the churches
here in England, testified by the epistle of Pope Paschal to Anselm
before, and also may appear likewise by the council of Anselm, holden
at Winchester, which partly was touched before, and now the full act
we have more largely expressed, to be read and seen of all posterity.

     And yet this unreasonable statute of Anselm, so diligently
defended with sharp censures and penalties, had no such great speed,
neither in the lifetime of the said Anselm, nor long after his death;
but that divers priests notwithstanding still kept their wives, or
after his death they returned to their wives again, through the
sufferance of the then famous and learned king, named Henry
Beauclerk, who something stayed the importunity of this monkish
prelate, and willed the priests should keep both their wives and
their churches, as they did before in Lanfranc's days.

     Then, after Anselm, followed Radulph, archbishop of Canterbury,
in whose time was no great stir against the priests that were
married. About the time of this archbishop, King Henry the First
called a council at London, where he obtained of the spiritualty a
grant to have the punishment of married priests (which the
spiritualty afterwards did much repent); whereby the priests, paying
a certain sum to the king, were suffered to retain their wives still,
as is above storied.

     Next after this Radulph, then succeeded William Corbeil,
surnamed De Turbine, who renewed again the constitution of Anselm
against married priests, especially by the help of Johannes, priest,
and cardinal of Crema, the pope's legate, sent the same time into
England, A.D. 1125. Of which cardinal of Crema, because enough hath
been before declared, how, after his stout replying, in the council
of London, against the married state of priests, exclaiming what a
shameful thing it was to rise from a polluted bed, to make Christ's
body, the night following he was shamefully taken with a notable
whore, &c., as is apparent before.

     I will therefore pass over that matter, returning again to
William the archbishop, who, with the cardinal legate aforesaid,
although he busily occupied himself in reproving the matrimony of
priests, insomuch that he would give them no longer respite to put
away their wives but from Michaelmas to St. Andrew's day following,
yet could he not bring his purpose to pass, but that the priests
still continued with their wives by the king's leave, as the Saxon
story plainly recordeth in these words:  "This William, the archbishop
of Canterbury, and the bishops who were in England, did command, and
yet all these decrees and biddings stood not:  all held their wives by
the king's leave, even so as they before did." So hard was this cause
to be won, that the archbishop at length gave it over, and left the
controversy wholly unto the king. Whereupon he decreed that the
priests should remain with their wives still. And so continued they
after that, in the time of Theobald after him, of Thomas Becket,
Richard Baldwin, Stephen Langton, Richard, Edmund, Boniface, Peckham,
and others, during well-near the time, after Anselm, of two hundred
years.

     And, lest the quarrelling adversaries, being peradventure
disposed here to cavil, should object and say that such marriage
amongst the spiritual men might be private and secret, but not openly
known, nor quietly suffered by any law of this realm:  to avoid,
therefore, what may be by them objected, I thought it good, and as a
thing neither impertinent nor unprofitable to this story, and for the
further satisfying of the reader's mind herein, to infer and make
known, by good record, not only that the liberty of marriage, amongst
spiritual men, hath continued within this realm during the time
aforesaid, to wit, two hundred years, or thereabouts, after Anselm;
and that not in secret wise, but also openly; and being known, the
same to be suffered, and lawfully allowed of, in such sort as both
they, their wives, children, and assigns, might inherit and enjoy
lands, tenements, and other hereditaments, by way of feoffment, deed
of gift, or any other assurance, in such sort, manner, and form, as
laymen, their heirs and assigns, at this day lawfully may do:  as by
divers writings and instruments, showed to us at the writing hereof,
by divers men whose names hereafter follow, (some to this day
remaining fair sealed, some by antiquity and long keeping much worn,
and their seals mouldered and wasted,) is very evident and manifest
to be seen.

     First, about the year of our Lord 944, the profession of single
life, and displacing of marriage, began to come into example here in
England by reason of St. Benedict's monks, which then began to
increase; and also about the time of King Edgar, especially by the
means of Oswald, archbishop of York, Odo and Dunstan, archbishops of
Canterbury, and Ethelwold, bishop of Winchester:  so that in divers
cathedral churches and bishops' sees, monks, with their professed
singleness of life, crept in, and married ministers, (who were then
called secular priests,) with their wives, out of sundry churches
were dispossessed, not from wives, but only from their places:  and
yet not in all churches, but only in certain, whereof read before.

     Not long after that, about the time of Pope Nicholas the
Second, A.D. 1059, of Alexander, and Hildebrand, came into the see of
Canterbury another monk, called Lanfranc, who also, being a promoter
of this professed chastity, made the decree more general, that all
prebendaries being married, in any churches, should be displaced; yet
the priests in towns and villages should not be compelled to leave
their married wives, unless they would.

     Last of all followed monkish Anselm, A.D. 1104; by whom was
made this law at Winchester aforesaid, that priests, archdeacons,
deacons, and subdeacons, which had wives and spiritual living, should
be put from them both; and also that none after should be admitted to
their orders, but should first profess single life, that is, to live
without wives. And thus much concerning priests' marriage forbidden.

The sixth article; touching auricular confession.

     Of confession, three kinds we find in the Scriptures expressed
and approved. The first is our confession privately or publicly made
unto God alone; and this confession is necessary for all men at all
times. Wherefore St. John speaketh, If we confess our sins, he is
faithful to forgive, &c.

     The second is the confession which is openly made in the face
of the congregation. And this confession, also, hath place when any
such thing is committed, whereof riseth a public offence and slander
to the church of God; as examples there be of penitentiaries in the
primitive church, as Melchiades and others, &c.

     The third kind of confession is that which we make privately to
our brother. And this confession is requisite, when either we have
injured or by any way damnified our neighbour, whether he be rich or
poor; whereof speaketh the Gospel, Go and reconcile thyself first
unto thy neighbour, &c. Also St. James, Confess yourselves one to
another. Or else this confession may also have place, when any such
thing lieth in our conscience, in the opening whereof we stand in
need of the counsel and comfort of some faithful brother. But herein
must we use discretion in avoiding these points of blind
superstition:  first, that we put therein no necessity for remission
of our sins, but that we use therein our own voluntary discretion,
according as we see it expedient for the better satisfying of our
troubled mind. The second is, that we be not bound to any enumeration
of our sins. The third, that we tie not ourselves to any one person,
more than to another, but that we use therein our free choice, who we
think can give us the best spiritual counsel in the Lord.

     But as there is nothing in the church so good and so ghostly,
which, through peevish superstition either hath not, or may not be
perverted, so this confession, also, hath not lacked its abuses.
First, the secret confession to God alone, as it hath been counted
insufficient, so hath it been but lightly esteemed by many. The
public confession to the congregation hath been turned to a standing
in a sheet, or else hath been bought out for money. Furthermore, the
secret breaking of a man's mind to some faithful or spiritual
brother, in disclosing his infirmity or temptations, for counsel and
godly comfort, hath been turned into auricular confession in a
priest's ear, for assoiling of his sins. In which auricular
confession, first, of the free liberty of the penitent in uttering
his griefs, they have made a mere necessity, and that unto salvation
and remission of sins. Secondly, they require withal an enumeration
and a full recital of all sins whatsoever, both great and small. Also
besides the necessity of this ear-confession, they add thereto a
prescription of time, at least once in the year, for all men, whether
they repent or no, to be confessed; making, moreover, of the same a
sacrament. And lastly, whereas before it stood in the voluntary
choice of a man, to open his heart to what spiritual brother he
thought best, for an easement of his grief, and for ghostly
consolation, they bind him to a priest, (unless some friar come by
the way to be his ghostly father,) to whom he must needs confess all,
whatsoever he hath done; and though he lack the key of knowledge,
and, peradventure, of good discretion, yet none must have power to
assoil him, but he, through the authority of his keys.

     And this manner of confession, they say, was instituted by
Christ and his apostles, and hath been used in the church ever since
to this present day:  which is a most manifest untruth, and easy by
stories to be convinced.

     For Socrates, lib. v. c. 19, and Zozimus, lib. vii. c. 16, in
the Book of Ecclesiastical History, do give us plainly to understand,
that this auricular confession never came of Christ, but only of men.

     Item, In the time of Tertullian, Beatus Rhenanus testifieth,
that there was no mention made of this auricular confession:  which
may well be gathered hereof, for that Tertullian, writing upon
repentance, maketh no mention at all thereof.

     Item, In the time of Chrysostom, it appeareth there was no such
assoiling at the priest's hands, by these words, where he saith, "I
require thee not that thou shouldest confess thy sins to thy fellow
servant. Tell them unto God, who careth for them."

     Item, The said Chrysostom, in another place, writing upon
repentance and confession, "Let the examination of thy sins and thy
judgment," saith he, "be secret and close without witness; let God
only see and hear thy confession," &c.

     Item, In the time of Ambrose, the gloss of the pope's own
decrees reporteth, that "this institution of penance was not then
begun, which now, in our days, is in use."

     Item, It is truly said, therefore, of the gloss in another
place, where he testifieth that "this institution of penance began
rather of some tradition of the universal church, than of any
authority of the New Testament, or of the Old," &c.

     The like also testifieth Erasmus, writing upon Jerome, in these
words, "It appeareth that in the time of Jerome, this secret
confession of sins was not yet ordained, which the church afterwards
did institute wholesomely, if our priests and laymen would use it
rightly. But herein, divines, not considering advisedly what the old
doctors do say, are much deceived. That which they say of general and
open confession, they wrest, by and by, to this privy and secret kind
of confession, which is far diverse, and of another sort," &c.

     The like testimony may also be taken of Gratian himself, who,
speaking of confession used then in his time, leaveth the matter in
doubtful suspense, neither pronouncing on the one side nor on the
other, but referreth the matter to the free judgment of the readers,
which the Act of these Six Articles here enjoineth as necessary,
under pain of death.

     Briefly, in few words to search out and notify the very certain
time when this article of ear-confession first crept into the church,
and what antiquity it hath, in following the judgment of Johannes
Scotus and of Antoninus, it may well be supposed that the institution
thereof took its first origin by Pope Innocent the Third, in his
council of Lateran, A.D. 1215; for so we read in Johannes Scotus: 
Præcipua autem specificatio hujus præcepti invenitur in illo capite,
Extrav. de Pœnit. et Remiss. Omnis utriusque sexes, &c. And after, in
the same article, it followeth, For at the first institution of the
church it does not appear that there were distinctive priests. By
which words it appeared that there was no institution of any such
confession specified before the constitution of Pope Innocent the
Third.

     But more plainly the same may appear by the words of Antoninus.
"Pope Innocent the Third, in his general council aforesaid, touching
the sacraments of confession and the communion, made this
constitution, as followeth:  'That every faithful person, both man and
woman, after they come to the years of discretion, shall confess all
their sins by themselves alone, at least once a year, to their own
ordinary priest; and shall endeavour to fulfil, by their own
strength, their penance to them enjoined, &c.; or else, who so doth
not, shall neither have entrance into the church, being alive, nor,
being dead, shall enjoy Christian burial. Wherefore this wholesome
constitution we will to be published often in the churches, lest any
men, through the blindness of ignorance, may make to themselves a
cloak of excuse,"' &c. And thus much hitherto we have alleged, by
occasion incident, of these six articles, for some part of
confutation of the same, referring the reader, for the rest, to the
more exquisite tractation of divines, who professedly write upon
those matters.

     In the mean time, forasmuch as there is extant in Latin a
certain learned epistle of Philip Melancthon, written to King Henry
the Eighth, against these six wicked articles above specified, I
thought not to defraud the reader of the fruit thereof, for his
better understanding and instruction. The tenor and effect of his
epistle translated into English thus followeth: 

     "Most famous and noble prince! there were certain emperors of
Rome, as Adrian, Pius, and afterwards the two brethren, Verus and
Marcus, which did receive gently the apologies and defences of the
Christians; which so prevailed with those moderate princes, that they
assuaged their wrath against the Christians, and obtained mitigation
of their cruel decrees:  even so, forasmuch as there is a decree set
forth of late in your realm, against that doctrine which we profess
as both godly and necessary for the church, I beseech your most
honourable Majesty favourably both to read and consider this our
complaint; especially seeing I have not only for our own cause, but
much rather for the common safeguard of the church, directed this my
writing unto you. For, seeing those heathen princes did both admit
and allow the defences of the Christians, how much more is it
beseeming for a king of Christian profession, and such a one as is
occupied in the studies of holy histories, to hear the complaints and
admonitions of the godly in the church! And so much the more
willingly I write unto you, for that you have so favourably
heretofore received my letters with a singular declaration of your
benevolence towards me. This also giveth me some hope, that you will
not unwillingly read these things, forasmuch as I see that the very
phrase and manner of writing do plainly declare, not yourself, but
only the bishops to be the authors of those articles and decrees
there set forth:  albeit, through their wily and subtle
sophistications, they have induced you (as it happened to many other
worthy princes besides you) to condescend and assent unto them; as
the rulers persuaded Darius, being otherwise a wise and just prince,
to cast Daniel unto the lions.

     "It was never unseemly for a good prince to correct and reform
cruel and rigorous laws, to have (as it is commonly said) a second
view and oversight of things before passed and decreed.

     "The wise Athenians made a decree, when the city of Mitylene
was recovered, (which before had forsaken them,) that all the
citizens there should be slain, and the city utterly destroyed: 
whereupon there was a ship sent forth with the same commandment to
the army. On the next morrow, the matter was brought again before the
same judges, and, after better advice taken, there was a contrary
decree made, that the whole multitude should not be put to the sword,
but a few of the chief authors of their rebellion should be punished,
and the city saved. There was, therefore, another ship sent forth
with a countermand in all haste to overtake and prevent their former
ship, as also it happened:  neither was that noble city, which then
ruled and reigned far and wide, ashamed to alter and reform their
former decree. Many such examples there be, the most part whereof I
am sure are well known unto you. But in the church especially,
princes have many times altered and reformed their decrees, as
Nebuchadnezzar and Darius. There was a decree set forth in the name
of Ahasuerus, concerning the killing of the Jews; that decree was
afterwards called in again. So did Adrian and Antoninus, also,
correct and reform their decrees.

     "Therefore, although there be a decree set forth in England,
which threateneth strange punishments and penalties, disagreeing from
the custom of the true church, and swerving from the rules and canons
hereof; yet I thought it not unseemly for us to become petitioners
unto you, for the mitigation of these your sharp and severe
proceedings; the which, when I consider it, grieve my mind, not only
for the peril and danger of them that profess the same doctrine that
we do, but, also, I do lament for your cause, that they should make
you an instrument and a minister of their bloody tyranny and impiety.
And partly, also, I lament to see the course of Christian doctrine
perverted, superstitious rites confirmed, whoredom and lecherous
lusts maintained.

     "Besides all this, I hear of divers good men, excelling both in
doctrine and virtue, to be there detained in prison, as Latimer,
Cromer, Shaxton, and others, to whom I wish strength, patience, and
consolation in the Lord. Unto whom, albeit there can nothing happen
more luckily or more gloriously, than to give their lives in the
confession of the manifest truth and verity; yet would I wish that
you should not distain your hands with the blood of such men; neither
would I wish such lanthorns of light in your church to be
extinguished; neither these spiteful and malicious Pharisees, the
enemies of Christ, to have their wills so much fulfilled. Neither
again would I wish that you should so much serve the will and desire
of that Romish antichrist, which laugheth in his sleeve to see you
now to take part with him against us, hoping well, by the help of his
bishops, to recover again his former possession, which of late, by
your virtues and godly means, he lost. He seeth your bishops, for the
time, loyal unto you, and obsequious to obey your will; but, in
heart, he seeth them linked unto him, in a perpetual bond of fidelity
and obedience. In all these feats and practices the Romish bishops
are not to seek. They see what great storms and blasts heretofore
they have passed by bearing and suffering:  they see that great things
be brought to pass in time.

     "Many good and learned men in Germany conceived of you great
hope, that, by your authority and example, other princes also would
be provoked to surcease, likewise, from their unjust cruelty, and
better to advise themselves for the reformation of errors crept into
the church; trusting that you would be as a guide and captain of that
godly purpose and enterprise. But now, seeing these your contrary
proceedings, we are utterly discouraged; the indignation of other
princes is confirmed; the stubbornness of the wicked is augmented;
and old and great errors are thereby established.

     "But here your bishops will say again, no doubt, that they
defend no errors, but the very truth of God's holy word. And although
they be not ignorant that they strive in very deed both against the
true word of God, and the apostolic church, yet, like crafty
sophisters, they can find out fair glosses, pretending a goodly show
outwardly, to colour their errors and abuses.

     "And this sophistication not only now in England is had in
great admiration, and esteemed for great wisdom; neither in Rome only
reigneth, where the Cardinals Contarini, Sadolet, and Cardinal Pole,
go about to paint out abuses with new colours and goodly glosses; but
also in Germany, divers noblemen are likewise corrupted and seduced
with the like sophistication:  and therefore I nothing marvel that so
many there, with you, be deceived with these crafty jugglings. And
although you, for your part, lack neither learning nor judgment, yet
sometimes we see it so happen, that wise men also be carried away, by
fair and colourable persuasions, from the verity. The saying of
Simonides is praiseworthy:  'Opinion,' saith he, 'many times
perverteth verity.' And many times false opinion hath outwardly a
fairer show than simple truth; and especially it so happeneth in
cases of religion, where the devil transformeth himself into an angel
of light, setting forth, with all colourable and goodly shows, false
opinions. How fair seemeth the gloss of Samosatenus, upon the Gospel
of St. John, In the beginning was the Word, &c.! and yet is it full
of impiety. But I omit foreign examples.

     "In these articles of yours, how many things are craftily and
deceitfully devised! 'Confession,' saith the article, 'is necessary,
and ought to be retained.' And why say they not plainly, that the
rehearsing and . numbering up of sins, is necessary by God's word?
This the bishops  knew well to be very false, and therefore, in the
article, they placed their words generally, to blear the eyes of the
simple people; that when they hear confession to be necessary, they
should thereby think the enumeration of sins to be necessary by God's
word.

     "The like legerdemain, also, they use in the article of private
masses, albeit the beginning of the said article containeth a
manifest untruth, where they say that it is necessary to retain
private masses. What man in all the primitive church, more than four
hundred years after the apostles' time, did ever so say or think, at
what time there were no such private masses used? But afterwards, in
the process of the article, follow other blind sophistications, to
make the people believe that they should receive by them divine
consolations and benefits. And why do they not plainly declare what
consolations and benefits those be? The bishops here do name no
application and merit, for they know that they cannot be defended.
Yet they daily, with glossing words, whereby they may wind out and
escape, if any should improve their application. And yet,
notwithstanding, they would have this their application to be
understood and believed of the people. They would have this
idolatrous persuasion confirmed, to wit, that this sacrifice doth
merit unto others remission a pœna et culpa; release of all
calamities, and also gain and lucre in common traffic; and, to
conclude, whatsoever else the careful heart of man doth desire.

     "The like sophistication they use also, where they say that
priests' marriage is against the law of God. They are not ignorant
what St. Paul saith, A bishop ought to be the husband of one wife: 
and therefore they know right well that marriage is permitted to
priests by the law of God. But, because now they say, they have made
a vow, they go craftily to work, and do not say that priests for
their vows' sake cannot marry, but plainly give out the article after
this sort, that marriage of priests is utterly against the law of
God. Again, what impudency and tyranny do they show moreover, when
they compel marriages to be dissolved, and command those to be put to
death, which will not put away their wives, and renounce their
matrimony! whereas the vow of priests, if it had any force at all,
should extend no further, but only to put them from the ministry, if
they would marry. And this, no doubt, is the true meaning of the
councils and canons.

     "O cursed bishops! O impudent and wicked Winchester! who, under
these colourable fetches, thinkest to deceive the eyes of Christ, and
the judgments of all the godly in the whole world. These things have
I written, that you may understand the crafty sleights, and so judge
of the purpose and policy, of these bishops. For if they would simply
and heartily search for the truth, they would not use these crafty
collusions and deceitful jugglings.

     "This sophistication, as it is in all other affairs pernicious
and odious, so, above all things, most specially it is to be avoided
in matters of religion; wherein it is a heinous impiety to corrupt or
pervert the pure word of God. And hereof the devil, which is called
Diabolus, specially taketh his name, because he wresteth the word of
God out of men's hearts by such false juggling and sophistical
cavillations. And why do not these bishops, as well, plainly utter
and confess, that they will abide no reformation of doctrine and
religion in the church, for that it shall make against their dignity,
pomp, and pleasure? Why do not their adherents also, and such as take
their part, plainly say that they will retain still the present state
of the church, for their own profit, tranquillity, and maintenance?
Thus to confess, were true and plain dealing.

     "Now, while they pretend, hypocritically, a false zeal and love
to the truth and sincere religion, they come in with their blind
sophistications, wherewith they cover their errors. For their
articles set forth in this act be erroneous, false, and impious, how
glorious soever they seem outwardly. Wherefore it were to be wished,
that these bishops would remember God's terrible threatening in the
prophet Isaiah:  Woe to you, saith he, which make wicked laws! What
will you do in the day of visitation and calamity to come? &c. Woe
unto you that call evil good! &c.

     "Now, to come more near to the matter which we have in hand,
this cannot be denied, but that long and horrible darkness hath been
in the church of Christ. Men's traditions not only have been a yoke
to good men's consciences, but also (which is much worse) they have
been reputed for God's holy service, to the great disworship of God.
There were vows, things bequeathed to churches, diversity of
garments, choice of meats, long babbling prayers, pardons, image-
worship, manifest idolatry committed to saints, the true worship of
God and true good works not known. Briefly, little difference there
was betwixt the Christian and heathen religion, as still is yet at
Rome to this present day to be seen. The true doctrine of repentance,
of remission of sins which cometh by the faith of Christ, of
justification, of faith, of the difference between the law and the
gospel, of the right use of the sacraments, was hid and unknown. The
keys were abused to the maintenance of the pope's usurped tyranny.
Ceremonies of men's invention were much preferred before civil
obedience and duties done in the commonwealth.

     "Unto these errors, moreover, was joined a corrupt life, full
of all lecherous and filthy lusts, by reason of the law forbidding
priests to marry. Out of this miserable darkness, God something hath
begun to deliver his church, through the restoring again of true
doctrine. For so we must needs acknowledge, that these so great and
long-festered errors have not been disclosed and brought to light by
the industry of man; but this light of the gospel is only the gift of
God, who now again hath appeared unto the church. For so doth the
Holy Ghost prophesy before, how in the latter times the godly should
sustain sore and perilous conflicts with antichrist, fore-showing
that he should come, environed with a mighty and strong army of
bishops, hypocrites, and princes; that he should fight against the
truth, and slay the godly.

     "And that now all these things are so come to pass it is most
evident, and cannot be denied. The tyranny of the bishop of Rome hath
partly brought errors into the church, partly hath confirmed them,
and now maintaineth the same with force and violence, as Daniel well
foreshowed; and much we rejoice to see you divided from him, hoping
and trusting well, that the Church of England would now flourish. But
your bishops be not divided from the Romish antichrist:  his idolatry,
errors, and vices they defend and maintain with tooth and nail; for
the articles now passed are craftily picked out. They confirm all
human traditions, in that they establish solemn vows, single life,
and auricular confession. They uphold and advance not only their
pride and authority, but all errors withal, in retaining the private
mass.

     "Thus have they craftily provided that no reformation can take
any place, that their dignity and wealth may still be upholden. And
this to be the purpose of the bishops, experience itself doth plainly
teach us. Now what man will not lament to see the glory of Christ
thus to be defaced? for, as I said before, this matter concerneth not
only these articles which be there enacted, but all other articles of
sound doctrine are likewise overthrown, if such traditions of men
shall be reputed as necessary, and to be retained. For why doth
Christ say, For they worship me in vain with the precepts of men? or
why doth St. Paul so oft detest men's traditions?

     It is no light offence to set up new kinds of worshipping and
serving of God without his word, or to defend the same:  such
presumption God doth horribly detest, which will be known in his word
only. He will have none other religions invented by man's device; for
else all sorts of religions, of all nations, might be approved and
allowed. Lean not, saith he, to thine own wisdom. But he sent Christ,
and commanded us to hear him, and not the invention of subtle and
politic heads, which apply religion to their own lucre and commodity.

     "Furthermore, private masses, vows, the single life of priests,
numbering up of sins to the priest, with other things more, being but
mere ordinances of men, are used for God's true service and worship.
For although the supper of the Lord was truly instituted by Christ,
yet the private mass is a wicked profanation of the Lord's supper: 
for in the canon, what a corruption is contained in this, where it is
said, that Christ is offered, and that the work itself is a
sacrifice, which redeemeth the quick and the dead? These things were
never ordained of Christ; yea, manifold ways they are repugnant to
the gospel. Christ willeth not himself to be offered up of priests,
neither can the work of the offerer, or of the receiver, by any means
be a sacrifice. This is manifest idolatry, and overthroweth the true
doctrine of faith, and the true use of the sacraments. By faith in
Christ we are justified, and not by any work of the priests. And the
supper is ordained that the minister should distribute to others, to
the intent that they, repenting for their sins, should be admonished
firmly to believe the promises of the gospel to pertain unto them.
Here is set a plain testimony before us, that we are made the members
of Christ, and washed by his blood. And this is the true use of that
supper which is ordained in the gospel, and was observed in the
primitive church three hundred years and more, from the which we
ought not to be removed:  for it is plain impiety to transfer the
Lord's institution to any other use, as we are taught by the second
commandment. Wherefore these private masses, forasmuch as they swerve
from the right institution of Christ manifold ways, as by oblation,
sacrifice, application, and many other ways besides, they are not to
be retained, but to be abolished. Flee, saith St. Paul, from all
idolatry. In these private masses much idolatry is committed, which
we see our bishops now so stoutly to defend; and no marvel for, in
the latter times, the Scripture plainly showeth that great idolatry
shall reign in the church of God; as Christ himself also signifieth,
saying, When ye shall see the abomination of desolation, which is
foretold of the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place, he that
readeth, let him understand. And Daniel saith, And he shall worship
the God Mauzzim in his place, and shall adore the God whom his
fathers knew not, with gold, silver, and precious stones. Both these
places do speak of mass.

     "This kind of worship and horrible profanation of the
sacrament, God abhorreth:  for how many and sundry kinds of manifest
impiety are here committed in this one action of the mass! First, it
is set forth to sale. Secondly, they that are unworthy are compelled
to receive, whether they will or no. Thirdly, it is applied as
meritorious and satisfactory for the quick and the dead. Fourthly,
many things are promised thereby, as prosperous navigation, remedies
against diseases both for man and beast, with other infinite more.
These be most manifest and notorious abominations. But besides these,
there be others, also, no less to be reprehended, which the simple
people do not so plainly see. Such worshipping and serving of God is
not to be set up after the fantasy of man.

     "Wherefore they do wickedly, when they offer sacrifice to God
without his commandment:  for when of this work they make a sacrifice,
they imagine that private masses are to be done, because God would be
worshipped after this sort. And we see that masses are bought with
gold and silver, great riches, and sumptuous charges:  also that the
sacrament is carried about in gold and silver to be worshipped;
whereas the sacrament was never ordained for any such purpose.
Wherefore, seeing the commandment of God biddeth to flee from
idolatry, private masses are not to be maintained. And I marvel that
they say that such private masses are necessary to be retained, when
it is evident that, in the old time, there were none such. Shall we
think that things pertaining to the necessary worship of God, could
so long be lacking in the primitive church, three hundred years after
the apostles and more? What can be more absurd and against all
reason?

     "We see these private masses to be defended with great labour
and much ado:  of some, for fear lest their gain should decay; of
some, because they would serve the affection of the vulgar people,
(which think to have great succour thereby, and therefore are loth to
leave it,) rather than for any just cause or reason to leave them.
But, howsoever they do, a most manifest and evident cause there is,
why these private masses ought to be abolished. For first, their
application undoubtedly is wicked; neither doth the work of the
priest merit any grace to any person, but every one is justified by
his own faith. Neither again would God have any man to trust upon any
ceremony, but only to the benefit of Christ:  and most certain it is,
that the application of these masses for the dead, is full of great
error and impiety.

     "But here come in blind glosses (albeit to no purpose) to
excuse this application. For universally, among all the people, who
is he that thinketh otherwise, but that this work is available for
the whole church? yea, the canon of the mass itself declareth no
less. And why then do some of these crafty sophisters dally out the
matter with their glossing words, denying that they make any
application of their masses, when they know full well, that the error
of the people is confirmed by this their doing; although they
themselves do think otherwise? Albeit, how few be there, in very
deed, which do otherwise think!

     "We ought not to dissemble in God's matters. Let us use them as
the Holy Scripture teacheth, and as the ancient custom of the
primitive church doth lead us. Why should any man be so presumptuous
as to swerve from ancient custom? Why now do they defend the errors
of others which have perverted the institution of Christ?

     "Now, although some perhaps will pretend and say, that he
maketh no application of his masses, yet, notwithstanding, he so
dealeth in handling the ceremony privately by himself, that he
thinketh this his oblation to be high service done to God, and such
as God requireth:  which is also erroneous and to be reproved. For
why? No service or worship pertaining unto God ought to be set up by
man's device, without the commandment of God.

     "Wherefore, I beseech you, for the glory of Christ, that you
will not defend the article of this act concerning these private
masses, but that you will suffer the matter to be well examined by
virtuous and learned men. All things that we here with us do, we do
them by evident and substantial testimony of the primitive church;
which testimony I dare be bold to set against the judgments of all
that have since followed, such as have corrupted the ancient and old
rites, with manifold errors.

     "As touching the other articles, they have no need of any long
disputation. Vows that be wicked, feigned, and impossible, are not to
be kept. There is no doubt but this is the common persuasion of all
men touching vows, that all these will-works devised by man, are the
true service and worship of God; and so think they, also, which speak
most indifferently of them. Others add thereunto more gross errors,
saying, that these works bring with them perfection, and merit
everlasting life. Now all these opinions the Scripture in many places
doth reprove. Christ saith, They worship me in vain with the precepts
of men; and Paul saith, that these observations be the doctrine of
devils, for they ascribe to the power and strength of man false
honour, because they are taken for the service of God:  they obscure
faith and the true worshipping of God. Item, the said Paul to the
Colossians saith, Let no man deceive you by feigned humility, &c. Why
make you decrees, &c.? Wherefore these corrupt traditions of men are
indeed a wicked and detestable service of God.

     "Unto these also are annexed many other corrupt and wicked
abuses. The whole order of monkery, what superstition doth it
contain! What profanations of masses, invocation of saints, colours
and fashions of apparel, choice of meats, superstitious prayers
without all measure! of which causes every one were sufficient, why
these vows ought to be broken. Besides this, a great part of men are
drawn to this kind of life chiefly for the belly's sake, and then,
afterwards, they pretend the holiness of their vow and profession.

     "Furthermore, this vow of single life is not to all men
possible to be kept, as Christ himself saith, All men do not receive
this. Such vows, therefore, which without sin cannot be performed,
are to be undone:  but these things I have discussed sufficiently in
other of my works.

     "But this causeth me much to marvel, that this vow of priests,
in your English decree, is more strait and hard than is the vow of
monks, whereas the canons themselves do bind a priest no further to
single life, but only for the time that he remaineth in the ministry.
And certainly it made my heart to tremble, when I read this article
which so forbiddeth matrimony, and dissolveth the same, being
contracted, and appointeth, moreover, the punishment of death for the
same. Although there have been divers godly priests, who, in certain
places, have been put to death for their marriage, yet hath never man
hitherto been so bold as to establish any such law. For every man in
a manner well perceived, that all well-disposed and reasonable
persons would abhor that cruelty; and also they feared lest posterity
would think evil thereof. Who would ever think that in the church of
Christ, wherein all lenity toward the godly ought most principally to
be showed, such cruelties and tyranny could take place, to set forth
bloody laws, to be executed upon the godly for lawful matrimony?

     "'But they brake their vows,' will the bishops say. First, as I
said, that vow ought not to stand, seeing it is turned to a false
worship of God, and is impossible to be kept. Again, although it
stood in force, yet it should not extend to them that forsake the
ministry. Finally, if the bishops, here, would have a care and regard
to men's consciences, they should then ordain priests without any
such profession or vow-making; as appeareth by the old canons, how
that many were admitted to the ministry without professing of any
vow; and the same afterwards, when they had married their wives,
remained in the ministry, as is testified in the Distinctions.

     "Certainly, of what I may here complain, I cannot tell. First,
in this article I cannot impute it to ignorance, which they do; for
no man is ignorant of the commandment of God, which saith, Let every
man have his wife, for avoiding of fornication.

     Again, who is so blind but he seeth what a life these unmarried
priests do live? The complaints of good men are well known. The
filthiness of the wicked is too, too manifest. But, peradventure,
your bishops, holding with the sect of epicures, do think God is not
offended with filthy lusts:  which if they so think, then do we
sustain doubtless a hard cause, where such must be judges.

     "I am not ignorant that this single life is very fit to set out
the glory and bravery of bishops, and colleges of priests, and to
maintain their wealth and portly state; and this I suppose to be the
cause why some do abhor so much that priests should be married. But,
O lamentable state of the church! if laws should be so forced to
serve, not the verity and the will of God, but the private gain and
commodity of men! They err which think it lawful for them to make
laws repugnant to the commandment of God, and to the law of nature,
so that they be profitable to attain wealth and riches. And, of
truth, from my very heart I do mourn and lament, right noble prince,
both for your sake, and also for the cause of Christ's church. You
pretend to impugn and gainstand the tyranny of the Romish bishop, and
truly do call him antichrist, as indeed he is; and, in the mean time,
you defend and maintain those laws of that Romish antichrist, which
be the strength and sinews of all his power, as private masses,
single life of priests, and other superstitions. You threaten
horrible punishments to good men, and to the members of Christ; you
violently oppress and bear down the verity of the gospel, beginning
to shine in your churches. This is not to abolish antichrist, but to
establish him.

     "I beseech you, therefore, for our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
defile not your conscience in defending those articles which your
bishops have devised and set forth, touching private masses,
auricular confession, vows, single life of priests, and prohibition
of the one half of the sacrament. It is no light offence to establish
idolatry, errors, cruelty, the filthy lusts of antichrist. If the
Roman bishop should now call a council, what other articles chiefly
would he devise and publish unto the world, but the very same which
your bishops have here enacted?

     "Understand and consider, I pray you, the subtle trains and
deceits of the devil, who is wont first to set upon, and assail, the
chief governors. And as he is the enemy of Christ from the beginning
of the world, so his chiefest purpose is, by all crafty and subtle
means, to work contumely against Christ, by sparsing abroad wicked
opinions, and setting up idolatry; and also in polluting mankind with
bloody murders and fleshly lusts:  in the working whereof he abuseth
the policies and wits of hypocrites, also the power and strength of
mighty princes; as stories of all times bear witness, what great
kingdoms and empires have set themselves, with all might and main,
against the poor church of Christ.

     "And yet, notwithstanding, God hath reserved some good princes
at all times out of the great multitude of such giants, and hath
brought them to his church, to embrace true doctrine, and to defend
his true worship; as Abraham taught Abimelech, Joseph the Egyptian
kings:  and after them came David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
excelling in true godliness. Daniel converted to the knowledge of God
the kings of Chaldea and Persia:  also Brittany brought forth unto the
world the godly prince Constantine. In this number I wish you rather
to be, than amongst the enemies of Christ, defiled  with idolatry,
and spotted with the blood of the godly; of whom God will take
punishment, as he doth many times forewarn, and many examples do
teach.

     "Yet again therefore, I pray and beseech you, for our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you will correct and mitigate this decree of the
bishops; in doing which you shall advance the glory of Christ, and
provide as well for the wealth of your own soul, as for the safeguard
of your churches.

     "Let the hearty desires of so many godly men through the whole
world move you, so earnestly wishing that some good kings would
extend their authority to the true reformation of the church of God,
to the abolishing of all idolatrous worship, and the furthering of
the course of the gospel. Regard also, and consider, I beseech you,
those godly persons who are with you in bands for the gospel's sake,
being the true members of Christ.

     "And if that cruel decree be not altered, the bishops will
never cease to rage against the church of Christ, without mercy or
pity:  for them the devil useth as instruments and ministers of his
fury and malice against Christ. These he stirreth up to slay and kill
the members of Christ:  whose wicked and cruel proceedings, and subtle
sophistications, that you will not prefer before our true and most
righteous request, all the godly most humbly and heartily do pray and
beseech you. Which if they shall obtain, no doubt but God shall
recompense to you great rewards for your piety; and your excellent
virtue shall be renowned both by pen and voice of all the godly,
while the world standeth. For Christ shall judge all them that shall
deserve either well or evil of his church:  and while letters shall
remain, the memorial worthy of such noble deserts shall never die or
be forgotten with the posterity to come. And seeing we seek the glory
of Christ, and that our churches are the churches of Christ, there
shall never be wanting such as both shall defend the righteous cause,
and magnify, with due commendation, such as have well deserved, and
likewise shall condemn the unjust cruelty of the enemies.

     "Christ goeth about hungry, thirsty, naked, imprisoned,
complaining of the raging fury of the bishops, and of the wrongful
oppression and cruelty of divers kings and princes, entreating that
the members of his body be not rent in pieces, but that true churches
may be defended, and his gospel advanced. This request of Christ to
hear, to receive, and to embrace, is the office of a godly king, and
service most acceptable unto God."

     Treating a little before, of certain old instruments for proof
of priests' lawful marriage in times past, I gave a little touch of a
certain record taken out of an old martyrology of the church of
Canterbury, touching Livingus a priest, and his wife, in the time of
Lanfranc:  wherein I touched, also, of certain lands and houses
restored again by the said Lanfranc to the church of St. Andrew. Now,
forasmuch as the perfect note thereof is more fully come to my hands;
and partly considering the restoring of the said lands to be to
Christ's church in Canterbury, and not to St. Andrew's in Rochester;
and, also, for that I have found some other precedents approving the
lawful marriage of priests, and legitimation of their children, I
thought good, for the more full satisfying of the reader, to enter
the same, as followeth: 

A note out of an old martyrology of Canterbury.

     "After the death of William king of England, the said Lanfranc
restored again to Christ's church in Canterbury all the lands which
from ancient memory unto these latter days have been taken away from
the right of the said church. The names of which lands be these:  in
Kent, Reculver, Sandwich, Richborow, Wootton, the abbey of Lyming,
with the lands and customs unto the same monastery belonging,
Saltwood, &c., (Stoke and Denentum, because they belonged of old time
to the church of St. Andrew, them he restored to the same church,) in
Surrey, Mortlake; the abbey of St. Mary in London, with the lands and
houses which Livingus, priest, and his wife, had in London. All these
Lanfranc restored again for the health of his own soul, freely, and
without money," &c.

A note, for the legitimation of priest's children.

     "Note, that in the nineteenth year of this king, in an assize
at Warwick, before Sir Guy Fairfax, and Sir John Vavasour, it was
found, by verdict, that the father of the tenant had taken the order
of deacon, and after married a wife, and had issue; the tenant died,
and the issue of the tenant did enter. Upon whom the plaintiff did
enter, as next heir collateral to the father of the tenant; Upon whom
he did re-enter, &c.; and, for difficulty, the justices did adjourn
the assize. And it was debated in the exchequer chamber:  'If the
tenant shall be a bastard,' &c. And here, by advice, it was adjudged 
that he shall not be a bastard, &c. Frowick, chief justice, said to
me, in the nineteenth year of Henry the Seventh, in the Common Pleas,
that he was of counsel in this matter, and that it was adjudged as
before; which Vavasour did grant. And Frowick said, that if a priest
marry a wife, and hath issue and dieth, his issue shall inherit; for
that the espousals be not void, but voidable. Vavasour:  If a man take
a nun to wife, this espousal is void."'

     Note, that in the latter impression of Henry the Seventh's
Years of the Law, this word "priest," in this case aforesaid, in some
books is left out; whether of purpose or by negligence, I leave it to
the reader to judge.

     Concerning these six articles passed in this Act aforesaid, in
the twenty-first year of this King Henry the Eighth, sufficiently
hitherto hath been declared; first, what these articles were: 
secondly, by whom, and from whom chiefly they proceeded:  thirdly, how
erroneous, pernicious, repugnant, and contrarious to true doctrine,
Christian religion, and the word of God, to nature also itself, all
reason and honesty, and finally to the ancient laws, customs, and
examples of our fore-elders, during the days of a thousand years
after Christ, they were. Fourthly, ye have heard also what
unreasonable and extreme penalty was set upon the same, that a man
may deem these laws to be written not with the ink of Stephen
Gardiner, but with the blood of a dragon, or rather the claws of the
devil; the breach whereof was made no less than treason and felony,
and no less punishment assigned thereto than death.

     Besides all this, the words of the Act were so curious and
subtle, that no man could speak, write, or cipher against them,
without present danger; yea, scarcely a man might speak any word of
Christ and his religion, but he was in peril of these six articles.
Over and besides, the papists began so finely to interpret the Act,
that they spared not to indict men for abusing their countenance and
behaviour in the church:  so great was the power of darkness in those
days. And thus much concerning this Act.

     Besides these six articles in this aforesaid Act concluded,
there was also another constitution annexed withal, not without the
advice (as may seem) of the Lord Cromwell, which was this:  that
priests and ministers of the church, seeing now they would needs
themselves be bound from all matrimony, should therefore, by law, be
likewise bound to such honesty and continency of life, that carnally
they should use and accustom no manner of woman, married or single,
by way of advoutry, or fornication; the breach whereof for the first
time, was to forfeit goods, and to suffer imprisonment at the king's
pleasure:  and for the second time, being duly convicted, it was made
felony, as the others were.

     In this constitution, if the Lord Cromwell, and other good men
of the parliament, might have had their will, there is no doubt but
the first crime of these concubinary priests, as well as the second,
had had the same penalty as the other six articles had, and should
have been punished with death. But Stephen Gardiner, with his fellow
bishops, who then ruled all the roost, so boasted this extraordinary
article with their accustomed shifts, that if they were taken and
duly convicted for their not catès, nor cautè, at first time it was
but forfeit of goods. Also, for the second conviction or attainder
they so provided that, the next year following, that punishment and
pain of death, by act of parliament was clean wiped away and
repealed. And why so? "Because," saith the statute, "that punishment
by pain of death is very sore, and much extreme; therefore it
pleaseth the king, with the assent of the lords, that that clause
above written, concerning felony, and pains of death, and other
penalties and forfeitures, for and upon the first and second
conviction or attainder of any priest or woman for any such offences
aforesaid, shall be from henceforth void, and of none effect," &c. So
that by this statute it was provided, for all such votaries as lived
in whoredom and adultery, for the first offence to lose his goods,
and all his spiritual promotions, except one; for the second, to
forfeit all that he had to the king; for the third conviction, to
sustain continual imprisonment.

     In these ungodly proceedings of the pope's catholic clergy, two
things we have to note.

     First, The horrible impiety of their doctrine, directly
fighting against the express authority of God and his word, forasmuch
as that which God permitteth, they restrain; that which he bids they
forbid. Let a man have, saith he; Let him not have, say they; taking
exceptions against the word of the Lord. That which he calleth
honourable and undefiled, they call heresy; that which he commandeth
and instituteth, they punish with pains of death. Not only the
priests that marry, but them also that say or cipher that a priest
may marry, at the first they kill as felons; neither can any miserere
take place for chaste and lawful wedlock; whereas, contrariwise, a
spiritual man may thrice defile his neighbour's wife, or thrice his
brother's daughter, and no felony at all be laid to his charge. What
is this in plain words to say, but that it is less sin thrice to
commit advoutry, than once to marry?

     The second to be noted is, how these painted hypocrites do
bewray their false dissembled dealings unawares, with whom a man
might thus reason Tell us, you priests and votaries! which so
precisely flee the state of matrimony, intend you to live chaste, and
are you able so to do without wives? Do you keep yourselves chaste
and honest without them, and without burning, or not? If you be not
able, why then marry you not? why take you not the remedy appointed
of God? why make you those vows, which you cannot perform? or why do
you not break them being made, falling thereby in danger of breaking
God's commandment, for keeping your own? If you be able, and so do
intend, to continue an honest and a continent conversation without
wives, then shall I ask of you according as Dr. Turner gravely and
truly layeth to your charge:  "Why do you so carefully provide a
remedy by your laws beforehand, for a mischief to come, which you may
avoid if you list? unless either ye listed not to stand, though you
might; or else saw your own infirmity, that you could not, though ye
would:  and therefore, fearing your own weak fragility, you provide
wisely for yourselves aforehand, that, where others shall suffer
pains of death at the first for well doing, you may fall thrice in
abominable adultery, and yet, by the law, have your lives pardoned."

     And here cometh out your own hypocrisy, by yourselves bewrayed;
for whereas you all confess, that you are able to live chaste if ye
will, without wives, this moderation of the law, provided before
against your adulterous incontinency, plainly declareth that either
ye purpose willingly to fall, or, at least, ye fear and stand in
doubt not to be able to stand. And why then do you so confidently
take such vows upon you, standing in such doubt and fear for the
performance thereof?

     And be it to you admitted, that all do not fall, but that some
keep their vow, though some viciously run to other men's wives and
daughters:  then herein again ask I you, seeing these vicious whore-
hunters and adulterous persons among you do live viciously, (as you
cannot not deny,) and may do otherwise, if they list, as you confess: 
what punishment then are they worthy to have, which may live
continent, and will not, neither yet will take the remedy provided by
God, but refuse it? Which being so, then what iniquity is this in
you, or, rather, impiety inexcusable against God and man, to procure
a moderation of laws for such, and to show such compassion and
clemency to these so heinous adulterers, whore-hunters, and beastly
fornicators, that, if they adulterate other men's wives never so oft,
yet there is no death for them; and to show no compassion at all, nor
to find out any moderation for such, but at the very first to kill
them as felons and heretics, which honestly do marry in the fear of
God, or once say, that a priest may marry? How can ye here be
excused, O you children of iniquity? What reason is in your doing, or
what truth in your doctrine, or what fear of God in your hearts? You
that neither are able to avoid burning and pollution without wedlock,
nor yet will receive that remedy that the Lord hath given you, how
will you stand in his face, when he shall reveal your operations and
cogitations to your perpetual confusion, unless by time ye convert
and repent? And thus, being ashamed of your execrable doings, I cease
to defile my pen any further in this so stinking matter of yours,
leaving you to the Lord.

     It was declared before, that what time these six articles were
in hand in the parliament house, Cranmer, then being archbishop of
Canterbury only, withstood the same, disputing three days against
them; whose reasons and arguments I wish were extant and remaining.
After these articles were thus passed and concluded, the king, who
always bare especial favour unto Cranmer, perceiving him to be not a
little discomforted therewith, sent all the lords of the parliament,
and with them the Lord Cromwell, to dine with him at Lambeth (as is
before declared); and, within few days also upon the same, required
that he would give a note of all his doings and reasonings in the
said parliament:  which the said Cranmer eftsoons accomplished
accordingly, drawing out his reasons and allegations; the copy
whereof, being fair written out by his secretary, was sent and
delivered unto the king, and there remained.

     Now, after these things thus discussed, as touching the six
wicked articles, it followeth next, in returning to the order of our
story again, to declare those things which, after the setting out of
these articles, ensued, which otherwise for the  wicked cruelty
thereof, are called The Whip with Six Strings, set forth after the
death of Queen Anne and of good John Lambert, devised by the cruelty
of the bishops, but specially by the bishop of Winchester, and at
length also subscribed by King Henry. But therein, as in many other
things, the crafty policy of Winchester appeared, who if he had not
watche his time, and taken the king, coming out where it did, it is
thought he had not got the matter so easily to be subscribed. We come
now to the time and story of the Lord Cromwell, a man whose worthy
fame and deeds are worthy to live renowned in perpetual memory.



195. THOMAS CROMWELL

The history concerning the life, acts, and death of the famous and
worthy councillor, Lord Thomas Cromwell, earl of Essex.
 THOMAS Cromwell although born of a simple
parentage, and house obscure, through the singular excellency of
wisdom, and dexterity of wit wrought in him by God, coupled with like
industry of mind, and deserts of life, rose to high preferment and
authority; insomuch that by steps and stairs of office and honour, he
ascended at length to that, that not only he was made earl of Essex,
but also most secret and dear councillor to King Henry, and
vicegerent unto his person; which office hath not commonly been
supplied, at least not so fruitfully discharged within this realm.

     First, as touching his birth, he was born at Putney or
thereabouts, being a smith's son, whose mother married afterwards to
a shearman. In the simple estate and rude beginnings of this man, as
of divers others before him, we may see and learn, that the
excellency of noble virtues and heroical prowesses which advance to
fame and honour, stand not only upon birth and blood, as privileges
only entailed and appropriate to noble houses; but are disposed
indifferently, and proceed of the gift of God, who raiseth up the
poor abject many times out of the dunghill, and matcheth him in
throne with peers and princes.

     As touching the order and manner of his coming up, it would be
superfluous to discourse what may be said at large; only, by way of
story, it may suffice to give a touch of certain particulars, and so
to proceed. Although the humble condition and poverty of this man was
at the beginning (as it is to many others) a great let and hinderance
for virtue to show herself; yet, such was the activity and forward
ripeness of nature in him, so pregnant in wit, and so ready he was,
in judgment discreet, in tongue eloquent, in service faithful, in
stomach courageous, in his pen active, that being conversant in the
sight of men, he could not be long unespied, nor yet unprovided of
favour and help of friends to set him forward in place and office;
neither was any place or office put unto him, whereunto he was not
apt and fit. Nothing was so hard which with wit and industry he could
not compass:  neither was his capacity so good, but his memory was as
great in retaining whatsoever he had attained. This well appeared in
canning the text of the whole New Testament of Erasmus' translation
without book, in his journey going and coming from Rome, whereof ye
shall hear anon.

     Thus, in his growing years, as he shot up in age and ripeness,
a great delight came in his mind to stray into foreign countries, to
see the world abroad, and to learn experience; whereby he learned
such tongues and languages as might better serve for his use
hereafter.

     And thus, passing over his youth, being at Antwerp he was there
retained of the English merchants to be their clerk or secretary, or
in some such-like condition placed, pertaining to their affairs.

     It happened, the same time, that the town of Boston thought
good to send up to Rome, for renewing of their two pardons, one
called the greater pardon, the other the lesser pardon. Which thing
although it should stand them in great expenses of money, (for the
pope's merchandise is always dear ware,) yet, notwithstanding, such
sweetness they had felt thereof, and such gain to come to their town
by that Romish merchandise, (as all superstition is commonly
gainful,) that they, like good catholic merchants, and the pope's
good customers, thought to spare for no cost, to have their leases
again of their pardons renewed, whatsoever they paid for the fine.
And yet was all this good religion then, such was the lamentable
blindness of that time.

     This then being so determined and decreed among my countrymen
of Boston, to have their pardons' needs repaired and renewed from
Rome, one Geffery Chambers, and another companion, were sent for the
messengers, with writings and money no small quantity, well
furnished, and with all other things appointed, necessary for so
chargeable and costly exploit. Chambers, coming in his journey to
Antwerp, and misdoubting himself to be too weak for the compassing of
such a weighty piece of work, conferred and persuaded with Thomas
Cromwell to associate him in that legacy, and to assist him in the
contriving thereof. Cromwell, although perceiving the enterprise to
be of no small difficulty, to traverse the pope's court, for the
unreasonable expenses amongst those greedy cormorants, yet, having
some skill of the Italian tongue, and as yet not grounded in judgment
of religion in those his youthful day was at length obtained and
content to give the adventure, and so took his journey towards Rome.
Cromwell, loth to spend much time, and more loth to spend his money;
and again, perceiving that the pope's greedy humour must needs be
served with some present or other, (for without rewards there is no
doing at Rome,) began to cast with himself, what thing best to
devise, wherein he might best serve the pope's devotion.

     At length, having knowledge how that the pope's holy tooth
greatly delighted in newfangled strange delicates, and dainty dishes,
it came into his mind to prepare certain fine dishes of jelly, after
the best fashion, made after our country manner here in England;
which, to them of Rome, was not known nor seen before.

     This done, Cromwell, observing his time accordingly, as the
pope was newly come from hunting into his pavilion, he, with his
companions, approached with his English presents, brought in with "a
three man's song" (as we call it) in the English tongue, and all
after the English fashion. The pope, suddenly marvelling at the
strangeness of the song, and understanding that they were Englishmen,
and that they came not empty-handed, willed them to be called in.
Cromwell there, showing his obedience, and offering his jolly
junkets, "such as kings and princes only," said he, "in the realm of
England use to feed upon," desired the same to be accepted in
benevolent part, which he and his companions, as poor suitors unto
his Holiness, had there brought and presented, as novelties meet for
his recreation, &c.

     Pope Julius, seeing the strangeness of the dishes, commanded by
and by his cardinal to take the assay; who, in tasting thereof, liked
it so well, and so likewise the pope after him, that, knowing of them
what their suits were, and requiring them to make known the making of
that meat, he, incontinent, without any more ado, stamped both their
pardons, as well the greater as the lesser.

     And thus were the jolly pardons of the town of Boston obtained,
as you have heard, for the maintenance of their decayed port. The
copy of these pardons, (which I have in my hands,) briefly
comprehended, cometh to this effect: 

     "That all the brethren and sisters of the Guild of our Lady in
St. Botolph's church at Boston, should have free licence to choose
for their confessor or ghostly father whom they would, either secular
priest or religious person, to assoil them plenarily from all. their
sins, except only in cases reserved to the pope.

     "Also, should have licence to carry about with them an altar-
stone, whereby they might have a priest to say them mass, or other
divine service,where they would, without prejudice of any other
church or chapel, though it were also before day, yea, and at three
o'clock after midnight in the summer time.

     "Furthermore, that all such brethren and sisters of the said
guild, which should resort to the chapel of our Lady in St. Botolph's
church, at the feast of Easter, Whitsuntide, Corpus Christi, the
Nativity, or the Assumption of our Lady, or in the octaves of them,
the feast of St. Michael, and the first Sunday in Lent, should have
pardon no less than if they themselves personally had visited the
stations of Rome.

     "Provided that every such person, man or woman, entering into
the same guild, at his first entrance should give to the finding of
seven priests, twelve choristers, and thirteen beadsmen, and to the
lights of the same brotherhood and a grammar school, six shillings
and eight pence; and for every year after, twelve pence.

     "And these premises, being before granted by Pope Innocent and
Pope Julius the Second, this Pope Clement also confirmed; granting
moreover, that whatsoever brother or sister of the same guild,
through poverty, sickness, or any other let, could not resort
personally to the said chapel, notwithstanding, he should be
dispensed withal, as well for that, as for all other vows,
irregularities, censures canonical whatsoever; only the vow of going
the stations of Rome, and going to St. James of Compostella,
excepted, &c.

     "He also granted unto them power to receive full remission,
from the penalty and crime, once in their life, or in the hour of
death.

     "Item, that having their altar-stone, they might have mass said
in any place, though it were unhallowed. Also in the time of
interdict, to have mass or any sacrament ministered; and also, being
departed, that they might be buried in Christian burial,
notwithstanding the interdict.

     "Extending, moreover, his grant, that all such brethren and
sisters, in resorting to the aforesaid chapel of our Lady upon the
Nativity, or upon the Assumption of our Lady, giving supportation to
the aforesaid chapel, at every such festival day should have full
remission of all their sins. Or if they, for any impediment, could
not be present at the chapel aforesaid, yet, if they came unto their
own parish church, and there said one Pater-noster, and Ave Maria,
they should enjoy the same remission above specified; or whosoever
came every Friday to the same chapel, should have as much remission,
as if he went to the chapel of Our Lady called Scala Cœli.

     "Furthermore, that whatsoever Christian people, of what estate
or condition soever, either spiritual or temporal, would aid and
support the chamberlains or substitutes of the aforesaid guild,
should have five hundred years of pardon.

     "Item, To all brothers and sisters of the same guild was
granted free liberty to eat in time of Lent, or other fasting days,
eggs, milk, butter, cheese, and also flesh, by the counsel of their
ghostly father and physician, without any scruple of conscience.

     "Item, That all partakers of the same guild, and being
supporters thereof, which, once a quarter, or every Friday or
Saturday, either in the said chapel in St. Botolph's church, or any
other chapel, of their devotion, shall say a Pater-noster, Ave Maria,
and Creed, or shall say, or cause to be said, masses for souls
departed in pains of purgatory, shall not only have the full
remission due to them which visit the chapel of Scala Cœli, or of St.
John Lateran, but also, the souls in purgatory shall enjoy full
remission, and be released of all their pains.

     "Item, That all the souls departed of the brothers and sisters
of the said guild, also the souls of their fathers and mothers, shall
be partakers of all the prayers, suffrages, almoses, fastings,
masses, and matins, pilgrimages, and all other good deeds of all the
holy church militant for ever," &c.

     These indulgencies, pardons, grants, and relaxations, were
given and granted by Pope Nicholas the Fifth, Pope Pius the Second,
Pope Sixtus the Fourth, and Pope Julius the Second, of which Pope
Julius it seemeth that Cromwell obtained this pardon aforesaid about
the year of our Lord 1510:  which pardon again afterwards, through the
request of King Henry, A.D. 1526, was confirmed by Pope Clement the
Seventh. And thus much concerning the pardons of Boston, renewed by
means of Thomas Cromwell, of Pope Julius the Second.

     All this while it appeareth that Cromwell had yet no sound
taste nor judgment of religion, but was wild and youthful, without
sense or regard of God and his word, as he himself was wont ofttimes
to declare unto Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury; showing what a
ruffian he was in his young days, and how he was in the wars of the
duke of Bourbon at the siege of Rome; also what a great doer he was
with Geffery Chambers in publishing and setting forth the pardons of
Boston every where in churches as he went; and so continued, till, at
length, by learning without book the text of the New Testament of
Erasmus's translation, in his going and coming from Rome, (as is
aforesaid,) he began to be touched, and called to better
understanding.

     In this mean time Thomas Wolsey, cardinal of York, began to
bear a great port in England, and almost to rule all under the king,
or rather with the king; so that the freshest wits, and of best
towardness, most commonly sought unto him; among whom was also Thomas
Cromwell to his service advanced, where he continued a certain space
of years, growing up in office and authority, till at length he was
preferred to be solicitor to the cardinal.

     There were also, about the same time, or not much different, in
the household of the said cardinal, Thomas More, afterward knight and
chancellor of England, and Stephen Gardiner, afterwards bishop of
Winchester and of the king's council. All these three were brought up
in one household, and all of one standing almost together:  whose ages
as they were not greatly discrepant, nor their wits much unequal; so
neither were their fortune and advancements greatly diverse, albeit
their dispositions and studies were most contrary. And though,
peradventure, in More and in Gardiner, there was more art of the
letters, and skill of learning, yet, notwithstanding, there was in
this man a more heavenly light of mind, and more prompt and perfect
judgment, eloquence equal, and, as may be supposed in this man, more
pregnant, and, finally, in him was wrought a more heroical and
princely disposition, born to greater affairs in the commonwealth,
and to the singular help of many.

     It happened that in this mean season, as Cromwell was placed in
this office to be solicitor to the cardinal, the said cardinal had
then in hand the building of certain of the colleges, namely, his
college in Oxford, called then Frideswide's, now Christ's Church. By
reason whereof, certain small monasteries and priors, in divers
places of the realm, were, by the said cardinal, suppressed, and the
lands seised to the cardinal's hands; the doing whereof was committed
to the charge of Thomas Cromwell:  in the expedition whereof he showed
himself very forward and industrious, in such sort as in the handling
thereof he procured to himself much grudge with divers of the
superstitious sort, and with some also of noble calling about the
king. And thus was Cromwell first set to work by the cardinal, to
suppress religious houses:  which was about the year of our Lord 1525.

     As this passed on, it was not long but the cardinal, who had
gotten up so high, began to come down as fast, first from the
chancellorship (in which room was placed Sir Thomas More, as is
before said); then he fell into a præmunire; so that his household
being dissolved, Thomas Cromwell, amongst others, laboured also to be
retained into the king's service.

     There was at the same time one Sir Christopher Hales, knight,
master of the rolls, who, notwithstanding, was then a mighty papist;
yet bare he such favour and good liking to Cromwell, that he
commended him to the king, as a man most fit for his purpose, having
then to do against the pope. But here before is to be understood,
that Cromwell had greatly been complained of and defamed, by certain
of authority about the king, for his rude manner and homely dealing,
in defacing the monks' houses, and in handling of their altars, &c.
Wherefore the king, hearing of the name of Cromwell, began to detest
the mention of him; neither lacked there some standers-by, who, with
reviling words, ceased not to increase and inflame the king's hatred
against him:  what their names were it shall not need here to recite.
Among others, there present at the same hearing, was the Lord
Russell, earl of Bedford; whose life Cromwell before had preserved at
Bologna, through politic conveyance, at what time the said earl,
coming secretly in the king's affairs, was there espied, and
therefore being in great danger to be taken, through the means and
policy of Cromwell escaped.

     This Lord Russell therefore, not forgetting the old benefits
past, and with like gratuity willing again to requite what he had
received, in a vehement boldness stood forth, to take upon him the
defence of Thomas Cromwell, uttering before the king many commendable
words in the behalf of him, and declaring withal how, by his singular
device and policy, he had done for him at Bologna, being there in the
king's affairs in extreme peril. And forasmuch as now his Majesty had
to do with the pope, his great enemy, there was (he thought) in all
England none so apt for the king's purpose, who could say or do more
in that matter, than could Thomas Cromwell:  and partly gave the king
to understand wherein. The king hearing this, and specially marking
the latter end of his talk, was contented and willing to talk with
him, to hear and know what he could say.

     This was not so privily done, but Cromwell had knowledge,
incontinent, that the king would talk with him, and whereupon; and
therefore, providing beforehand for the matter, he had in a readiness
the copy of the bishops' oath, which they use commonly to make to the
pope at their consecration:  and so being called for, he was brought
to the king in his garden at Westminster; which was about the year of
our Lord 1530.

     Cromwell, after most loyal obeisance, doing his duty to the
king, according as be was demanded, made his declaration in all
points; this especially making manifest unto his Highness:  how his
princely authority was abused within his own realm by the pope and
his clergy, who, being sworn unto him, were afterwards dispensed from
the same, and sworn anew unto the pope; so that he was but as half a
king, and they but half his subjects in his own land:  which (said he)
was derogatory to his crown, and utterly prejudicial to the common
laws of his realm. Declaring, thereupon, how his Majesty might
accumulate to himself great riches, as much as all the clergy in his
realm were worth, if it so pleased him to take the occasion now
offered. The king, giving good ear to this, and liking right well his
advice, required if he could avouch that which he spake. All this he
could (he said) avouch to be certain so well, as that he had the copy
of their own oath to the pope there present to show; and that no
less, also, he could manifestly prove, if his Highness would give him
leave:  and therewith showed the bishops' oath unto the king.

     The king, following the vein of his counsel, took his ring off
his finger, and first, admitting him into his service, sent him
therewith to the convocation-house, among the bishops. Cromwell,
coming with the king's signet boldly into the clergy-house, and there
placing himself among the bishops, (William Warham being then
archbishop,) began to make his oration, declaring unto them the
authority of a king, and the office of subjects, and especially the
obedience of bishops and churchmen under public laws, necessarily
provided for the profit and quiet of the commonwealth. Which laws,
notwithstanding, they had all transgressed, and highly offended in
derogation of the king's royal estate, falling in the law of
præmunire, in that not only they had consented to the power legative
of the cardinal; but also, in that they had all sworn to the pope,
contrary to the fealty of their sovereign lord the king; and
therefore had forfeited to the king all their goods, chattels, lands,
possessions, and whatsoever livings they had. The bishops, hearing
this, were not a little amazed, and first began to excuse and deny
the fact. But after that Cromwell had showed them the very copy of
their oath made to the pope at their consecration, and the matter was
so plain that they could not deny it, they began to shrink and to
fall to entreaty, desiring respite to pause upon the matter.
Notwithstanding, the end thereof so fell out, that to be quit of that
præmunire by act of parliament, it cost them to the king, for both
the provinces, Canterbury and York, no less than one hundred and
eighteen thousand eight hundred and forty pounds; which was about the
year of our Lord 1530, whereof before you may read more at large.

     After this, A.D. 1531, Sir Thomas Cromwell, growing in great
favour with the king, was made knight, and master of the king's
jewel-house, and shortly after was admitted also into the king's
council, which was about the coming in of Queen Anne Bullen.
Furthermore, within three years after the same, A.D. 1534, he was
made master of the rolls, Dr. Taylor being discharged.

     Thus Cromwell, springing up in favour and honour, after this,
in the year 1537, a little before the birth of King Edward, was made
knight of the garter, and not long after was advanced to the earldom
of Essex, and made great chamberlain of England:  over and besides all
which honours, he was constituted also vicegerent to the king,
representing his person; which office, although it standeth well by
the law, yet seldom hath there been seen any besides this Cromwell
alone, either to have sustained it, or else to have so furnished the
same with counsel and wisdom, as Cromwell did. And thus much
hitherto, concerning the steps and degrees of the Lord Cromwell,
rising up to dignity and high estate.

     Now somewhat would be said, likewise, of the noble acts, the
memorable examples, and the worthy virtues, not drowned by ease of
honour in him, but increased rather, and quickened by advancement of
authority and place, to work more abundantly in the commonwealth: 
among the which his worthy acts and other manifold virtues, in this
one chiefly, above all others, riseth his commendation, for his
singular zeal and laborious travail bestowed in restoring the true
church of Christ, and subverting the synagogue of antichrist:  the
abbeys, I mean, and religious houses of friars and monks. For so it
pleased Almighty God, by means of the said Lord Cromwell, to induce
the king to suppress first the chantries, then the friars' houses and
small monasteries, till at length, all the abbeys in England, both
great and less, were utterly overthrown and plucked up by the roots.
This act and enterprise of his, as it may give a precedent of
singular zeal to all realms christened, which no prince yet to this
day scarce dare follow; so, to this realm of England, it wrought such
benefit and commodity, as the fruit thereof yet remaineth, and will
remain still in the realm of England, though we seem little to feel
it. Rudely and simply I speak what I suppose, without prejudice of
others who can infer any better reason. In the mean time my reason is
this, that if God had not raised up this Cromwell as he did, to be
the instrument of rooting out these abbeys and cells of strange
religion, what other men see I know not for my part, I never yet saw
in this realm any such Cromwell since Cromwell's time, whose heart
and courage might not sooner have been subverted with the money and
bribes of abbots, than he to have subverted any abbey in all England.

     Of how great laud and praise this man was worthy, and what
courage and stoutness was in him, it may hereby evidently appear unto
all men, that he alone, through the singular dexterity of his wit and
counsel, brought to pass that which, even unto this day, no prince or
king, throughout all Europe, dare or can bring to pass. For whereas
Britannia alone, of all other nations, is and hath been, of her own
proper nature, most superstitious; this Cromwell, being born of a
common or base stock, through a divine method or policy of wit and
reason received, suffered, deluded, brake off, and repressed, all the
policies, trains, malice, and hatred, of friars, monks, religious
men, and priests, of which sort there was a great rabble in England.
Their houses he subverted throughout all the realm. Afterwards he
brought the bishops and archbishops, and the bishop of Winchester
himself, although he was the king's chief counsellor, to an order;
frustrating and preventing all his enterprises and complaints by a
marvellous providence, but, especially, in those things which did
tend to the ruin and decay of good men, and such as favoured the
gospel; unto whom Cromwell was always as a shield, against the
pestiferous enterprises of Winchester.

     Briefly, there was continual emulation and mortal dissension
between them two, such as Flaccius writeth happened between the
wolves and the lambs:  for both of them being greatly in the king's
favour, the one being much more feared, the other was much better
beloved. Either of them excelling in dexterity of wit, howbeit the
virtues in the one far exceeded the other; for whereas the bishop of
Winchester seemed such a man, to be born for no other purpose but
only for the destruction of the good, this man, contrariwise, the
Divine Providence had appointed as a remedy to help and preserve
many, and to withstand the fury of the bishops; even like as we do
see the same ground which bringeth forth most pestiferous poison, the
same again also doth bring forth most wholesome and healthful
remedies.

     It were too long and tedious a declaration here to declare, how
many good men, through this man's help and defence, have been
relieved and delivered out of danger; of whom a great number after
his fall, being deprived of their patron, (as it were,) did shortly
after perish:  there are many of them, however, yet alive at this 
present day, who are witnesses of these things which we report, and
greater things also than these. In this manner the Omnipotent God
hath always accustomed, in all commonwealths, to moderate adversity
with prosperity, and things hurtful with others more wholesome and
healthful; whereby it happeneth, that as oftentimes good and
fortunate planets are joined with the hurtful and noisome, they do
either utterly dissipate their mad furies, or at least somewhat keep
them back; whereby, if they be not utterly prohibited, yet they do
less hurt than otherwise they would:  which thing, if it were to be
conferred with the histories of our old fathers, Jehu, the sharp
punisher of superstitious idolatry in the sacred commonwealth, was
not much unlike this man. Likewise, in profane commonwealths,
Camillus, and Cicero, who, through his singular prudence, joined with
eloquence, withstood and put off the wicked enterprises of Catiline.
Albeit that the terror conceived upon the conspiracy of Catiline, was
not so noisome unto the commonwealth of Rome, as the bloody and
insatiable cruelty and slaughter of these our bishops, conspiracies
which do every where vex and trouble the Christian commonwealth:  for,
albeit that Catiline, through his wicked enterprise, went about the
death of all good men, and the destruction of the commonwealth, yet
did he rather put it in fear, than wound the commonwealth. But all
the life and doings of these men are nothing else but a conspiracy,
according to the prophecy of Isaiah; so that they do seem twice worse
than any Catiline:  for whatsoever he went about, by any privy
pretence of his mind, that these men do perform openly:  neither was
it to be doubted but that he, albeit he were ever so cruel or fierce
of nature, yet if he had had the upper hand, he would at once have
made an end of murdering and killing. But these men, although they
daily, in every place, kill Christ in his holy members, yet they
never appoint or ordain any end or measure of their slaughter:  which
kind of men, (albeit there be nothing in a manner by nature more
cruel,) besides their natural cruelty, they are endued with craft and
subtlety, which is far worse, not being so hurtful by the one, as
detestable for the other:  for an open enemy, be he ever so mighty or
fierce, yet if he cannot be vanquished, he may be taken heed of. And
it happeneth oftentimes that violence, which is foreseen, may easily,
or with like violence, be repulsed; or at least the wound that is
received by another man's violence, is less grievous than that which
cometh by fraud or deceit. But these men do not kill with armour and
weapon, but, going a privier way to work, yet do the same:  being so
much the more to be blamed, forasmuch as they themselves, being the
authors of the murder, do so put off the matter from themselves to
others, as though they were free from all suspicion of cruelty. But
here a man may the more perceive the inveterate subtleties of the old
serpent, besides that, the more to provoke cruelty, there are added
most plausible and honest titles, whereby the better all mercy and
pity might be excluded; and also that they, even in their greatest
tyranny, when they have committed or done any thing most cruel or
horrible, yet they might deserve praise of the common people, as for
a most holy work, done ex officio, as they call it. So, under the
name of Christ, they daily persecute Christ, and under the pretence
and cloak of peace, they kill more than any murderers; and, while
they do take upon them the name and title of the church, they do
violently invade the church of Christ.

     In foreign wars it happeneth oftentimes that truces are taken;
and where towns are yielded, the mercy of the conqueror spareth many;
kindred and age hath his respect, and many are set at liberty either
by entreaties or ransom. But these do so much exceed all measure of
nature, humanity, and reason; they are so addicted to their
pleasures, dignity, and ease, that they have no consideration or
regard of any life, estate, or condition. The cruel times of Queen
Mary, and of the bishops, did of late sufficiently declare the same,
when nature would in a manner set forth unto all men in this realm,
as it were by a perfect example, what extreme cruelty, joined with
superstition, may do in any realm; so that if all empires should be
governed or ruled after that example, it were better that there were
no society of commonwealths; yea, it were better for men to wander in
the wilderness, and to lead a rude and savage life amongst the wild
beasts. For upon what wild beast, upon what libard, wolf, or panther,
were it not better for a man to fall, than upon such bishops? if at
least the bishops of other nations were like unto our Bonner. They
boast themselves, upon the name of Christ, to be Christians; neither
do I deny them that title. But why, in their manners and living, doth
there no spark of his nature appear, whose denomination they bear? In
all their titles and profession, they pretend nothing else but peace: 
and whereupon happen so many complaints, so many suspicions, so great
hatred and prodition? so many articles, censures, condemnation, and
peremptory sentences, in so quiet and peaceable a people?

     They object also often, unto us the catholic church, that they
are the true spouse, and the only dove of Christ. I hear them well,
but that meek dove of Christ is without any gall, bile, or claws;
that is to say, lacketh all kind of wrath, suspicion, prodition, and
tyranny. Where, then, is the simplicity of that dove, whereupon hath
happened so great bloodshed and slaughter in the meek spouse of the
Lord? Who ever heard tell, that a dove did kill or devour either
kites or hawks? But, if they think they do Christ so great and
acceptable service through this their raging slaughter, surely they
must show us another manner of Christ, than him whom the evangelists
describe unto us, whom the apostles show forth in their writings.

     But they cry out and say, as "They are heretics!" "they are
worthy to die!" Let them bring forth one article out of the Apostles'
Creed which these heretics do deny. They do, indeed, deny the blessed
body of Christ to be in the sacrament naturally; but again, they
confess him to be in heaven, and there do reverence and worship him.
Why have the apostles, then, left out that article of their creed, if
it be so necessary as they teach it to be? Albeit they do not, by and
by, take away Christ out of the sacrament, who confess the bread to
be in the sacrament. And again, it is no contumely unto Christ, if a
man do rather judge him to be worshipped in the heaven, than in the
sacrament:  for he who denieth the emperor to be at Brussels, doth not 
derogate any thing from the emperor's authority, as I think, but only
contendeth upon the place. What grievous cause or quarrel is this,
then, that should move and stir up the peaceable mind of this simple
dove, to such rage and fury, that, notwithstanding the great
slaughter of Christians which hath been already made, they can yet
find no beginning to show favour, or make any end of their murder!

     But, go to, let us feign with ourselves (which thing,
notwithstanding, I would that all men should think it spoken by me,
not to the reproof or contumely of any man:  for here I declare no
man's name, neither show any man's person; but only set it forth for
an example):  let us, as I say, freely think and feign, that Satan
dwelleth upon earth amongst men, and leadeth a manly life. Thou
sayest, "It cannot be by nature;" but yet it may so be supposed. Now
I will ask of some of these papists, (but of such a one as is of an
equal judgment,) or of the bishop of Rome himself, that he would
clearly and distinctly answer me, by what means he doth think that he
would rule and order his life:  whether he would not, first, direct
all his doings, according to his insatiable ambition, violently to
get unto himself the dominion of the whole world; placing himself in
the highest degree and dignity; distributing all other promotions
according to his own will; he himself being subject unto no power,
but exalting himself, if he might, even as high as God. Would he not
convert all men's goods and substance, by what means soever he may
lay hold of it, upon most extreme riot and filthy pleasure? Moreover,
would he not foresee to lead a life wholly in idleness, without all
sorrow, care, or trouble?

     Furthermore, I do not think him so holy, that in this delicate
life he would also live chaste; neither yet that he will be troubled
with the care or charge of a wife, but rather choose a middle or mean
way, which, through wanton lust, hath more delectation, less charge,
but no true holiness in it at all. Then, he, who from the beginning
hath been a murderer and liar, and the father thereof, retaineth so
the same nature still, that he rejoiceth in nothing more than in the
continual slaughter and destruction of men:  neither is it to be 
doubted but that, when he cannot be suffered openly to rage, he will,
by all crafty means and ways, at last satisfy his cruel mind. And
what way would Satan himself, if be were present, gentle reader! (if
I may by your licence speak the truth,) find more crafty or subtle
than the bishop of Rome hath now found; who, under the person and
vicarage of the most meek and gentle Christ, under the beautiful
shadow of the church and peace, doth practise his extreme cruelty and
madness, mixing and confounding all things with blood? And, albeit
that daily, with greater outrage, he exerciseth the same throughout
all Christendom, yet the Christian princes and noble counsellors are
so blind and void of judgment, that they do not see what difference
is between Christ and antichrist, light and darkness, truth and
falsehood. They do little regard it, and nothing at all seek to help
it:  so that either we may seem to be fallen on Isaiah's times, or
those days to have come upon us. The just man, saith he, perisheth,
and there is no man that taketh any care for him. This great rage and
tempest of cruelty, required a public reformation of all good
princes. Now, forasmuch as their power and authority do sleep in such
necessary and weighty matters, by whom it were convenient the
Christian commonwealth should be restored, I may not prognosticate
that which my mind doth foreshow unto me. This only I do wish, that
God do not bring that to pass by the Turk, which Christian princes
ought to have done.

     But now, to return to our Christian Camillus, being such a one
as if the courts of princes had but a few such counsellors, the
Christian commonwealths would, at this day, be in a far better
estate. This Cromwell (as I have said) was but of a base stock, but
of such virtue as, not without sorrow, we may wish for, even in the
most noble families now-a-days. He was first brought up in the
cardinal's court, where he did bear several offices, wherein he
showed such tokens and likelihood of excellent wit and fidelity,
that, in short space, he seemed more meet for the king than for the
cardinal.

     But here I must of necessity answer the complaint of certain of
our countrymen:  for so I hear of many, that the subversion of these
monasteries is to be reprehended, as evil and wicked. The buildings,
say they, might have been converted into schools and houses of
learning:  the goods and possessions might have been bestowed to much
better and more godly use of the poor, and maintaining of
hospitality. Neither do I deny but that these things are well and
godly spoken of them, and could willingly embrace their opinion with
my whole heart, if I did not consider herein a more secret and deeper
meaning of God's holy providence, than at the first blush,
peradventure, to all men doth appear.
Illustration:  A Cathedral

     And first, to omit the wicked and execrable life of these
religious orders, full of all fedity, and found out by the king's
visitors, and in their registers also recorded, so horrible to be
heard, so incredible to be believed, so stinking before the face of
God and man, that no marvel it is, if God's vengeance from heaven,
provoked, would not suffer any stone or monument of these abominable
houses to be unplucked up. But, as I said, letting these things pass
under chaste silence, which for very shame will abhor any story to
disclose, let us now come to the first institution of these orders
and houses of monkery, and consider how, and to what end, they were
first instituted and erected here among the Saxons at the first
foundation of them, about the year 666.

     In the former part of this history, declaration was made, first
by whom and at what time these monkish houses here in England among
the Saxons (flowing no doubt out of the order of St. Benedict, and
brought in by Augustine) began first to be founded:  as by Augustine
the monk, Furseus, Maidulph, Aldune, Ceadda, King Ulfer, Oswy,
Elfrida, King Oswy's daughter, Kineburga, Hilda, Botolph, Edeldrida,
King Oswald, Edgar, Erkenwald, bishop of London, Ethelwold, bishop of
Winchester, Oskitell, archbishop of York, Oswald, bishop of
Worcester, Leswine, bishop of Dorchester, Dunstan, and divers others.

     The end and final cause why they were builded, appeareth in
stories to be, for the remission of sins and redemption of sinners,
for the relief of souls, for the love of heaven, for the salvation
and repose of the spirits of our fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers,
and all our benefactors, and in honour of the glorious Virgin; as may
appear in ancient histories, in old charters and donations unto
religious houses, and in the chronicle of Ingulphus; as also all
other stories be full of the same.

     So King Athelstan, for killing his brother Edwin, builded two
monasteries, Middleton and Michaelney, for his soul:  which doctrine
and institution, forasmuch as it tendeth and soundeth directly
against the foundation of Christian religion, against the testament
of God, the gospel of Jesus Christ, the freedom of our redemption and
free justification by faith, it is then to be condemned as execrable
or horrible, as evil worse than the life of the persons; and not only
worthy to be suppressed to the foundation, but to be marvelled at
rather, that God would suffer it to stand so long. Albeit God's
mighty vengeance and scourge hath not ceased from time to time to
work against such impious foundations, from the time of their first
setting up. For besides the invasions of the Danes, (which may seem
to be stirred up of God especially for the subversion of abbeys,) Iet
old histories be searched, what monastery almost in all this realm
was either left by the Danes, or re-edified again after the Danes,
but by some notorious casualty of fire, sent by God's hand, it hath
been burned up?

     First, the monastery of Canterbury, called the house of St.
Gregory, was burned A.D. 1145, and afterwards again burned A.D.
1174..

     The abbey of Crowland was also twice burnt. The abbey of
Peterborough was twice set on fire, A.D. 1070.

     The abbey of St. Mary's in York burned, with the hospital also.

     The abbey of Norwich burned.

     The abbey of St. Edmund's Bury burned and destroyed.

     The abbey of Worcester.

     The abbey of Gloucester was also burned. The abbey of
Chichester burned.

     The abbey of Glastonbury burned.

     The abbey of St. Mary in Southwark burned.

     The church of the abbey of Beverley burned.

     The steeple of the abbey of Evesham burned.

     These, with many other monasteries more, God brought down to
the ground, so that few or none of all the monistical foundations in
all England, either before the conquest, escaped the hands of the
Danes and Scots, or else after the conquest, escaped destruction of
fire, and that not without just cause deserved; for, as the trade of
their lives was too, too wretched and bestial, so the profession of
their doctrine was intolerable, fraught with all superstition, full
of much idolatry, and utterly contrary to the grace of the gospel and
doctrine of Christ.

     Furthermore, the more these abbeys multiplied, and the longer
they continued, in time the more corruption still they drew unto
them. And albeit we read the names of monks to have continued from
the old ancient time, yet, notwithstanding, the monks of those days
were not like the monks of our time, nor their houses then like to
our abbeys now. So we read of the monks of Bangor before the coming
of Augustine:  but those monks got their living with toil and labour 
of their hands, and had no other lands or lordships to live upon.
Again, neither were they as ministers then, but as laymen, according
as Jerome describeth the monks of his time, saying, "A monk's office
is not to preach, but to mourn;" and again he saith, "The state of a
monk is one thing, and the state of a priest is another;" "Priests
feed the flock of Christ;" "I am fed," &c.

     Also in the story of Ingulph, abbot of Crowland, thus I find: 
"Being installed in the abbey of Crowland, A.D. 1076, I found there
to the number of sixty-two monks:  of which monks, four of them were
lay-brethren, besides the monks of other monasteries who were also
professed to our chapter," &c.

     The like matter also appeareth in the fourth canon of the
council of Chalcedon, where it is provided, That monks may not mix
themselves up with ecclesiastical affairs; and Leo, epist. 62,
forbids monks and laymen, especially if they glory in the name of
science, to be admitted to the office of teaching and preaching.
Whereof read more before.

     Thus it appeareth, about or before the time of Jerome, that
monks in the first persecutions of the primitive church were laymen,
and companies of Christians associating themselves together, either
for fear of persecution, or for eschewing the company of heathen
Gentiles. Afterwards, in continuance of time, when the Gentiles began
to be called to Christianity, the monks, yet keeping their name, and
growing in superstition, would not join with other Christians, but
kept still their brotherhoods, dividing themselves from other
Christians, and professing a kind of life strange and diverse from
the common trade. Upon this diversity of life and profession,
followed also like diversity of garments and attire differing from
their other brethren. After this, moreover, came in the rule of St.
Benedict, enjoining to them a prescribed form of going, of wearing,
of watching, sleeping, rising, praying; of silence, sole life, and
diet, and all things almost differing from the vulgar sort of common
Christians.

     Whereby men, seeing their austerity, began to have them in
great admiration. And thus, growing up in opinion of holiness, of
laymen and labourers they came at length to be clergymen, and
greatest doers of all others in Christ's religion; insomuch that at
last there was none reputed almost for a religious man or perfect
Christian, unless he were a monk:  neither almost was any advanced to
any dignity of the church, but either he was a monk, or afterwards he
put on a monk's weed. According as in the stories of this realm is to
be seen, how in the time of Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, of
Oswald, bishop of Worcester, and of Ethelwold, bishop of Winchester,
Pope John the Thirteenth, writing to King Edgar, willed him, in his
letters, to see in his cathedral churches none to be promoted to be
bishops, but such as were of the monastical religion; and willed him,
moreover, to exclude the secular prebendaries at Winchester, and to
place in monks; and that none of the secular clerks there should be
chosen bishop, but either be taken out of the same covent of that
church, or of some other abbey.

     So was also King Henry the Second commanded to do in the house
of Waltham, where the secular canons were removed out, and regular
canons intruded. The same did Bishop Oswald with the church of
Worcester; likewise in their sees did Dunstan, archbishop of
Canterbury, Oskitell, archbishop of York, Ethelwold, bishop of
Winchester, (who in stories is reported to be multorum fundator
monasteriorum,) Leofwine also, bishop of Dorchester; with other
bishops more, about the time and reign of King Edgar. Odo, archbishop
of Canterbury before Dunstan, after his election, A.D. 941, refused 
to take that dignity upon him, before he had received the habit of a
monk in the abbey of Fleury in France, "because," as the story
telleth, (if it be true,) "all the archbishops of Canterbury before
him had been monks," &c. In like manner Baldwin also, A.D. 1184,
after he was elected archbishop of Canterbury, took upon him the
Cistercian habit in Ford Abbey:  and so Reginald, his next successor
after him, also took the habit of a monkish order, &c.

     As concerning therefore the origin of monks, ye have heard how
first they began of laymen only, leading a straiter life from the
society of other persons; who, then following the rule of St.
Benedict, were called Regulars, and Votaries; and yet all this while
had nothing to do with any ecclesiastical ministry, till the time of
Pope Boniface the Fourth, A.D. 607; who then made a decree, that
monks might use the office of preaching, of christening, of hearing
confessions, and assoiling men of their sins; differing from priests
only in this, that they were called Regulares, and priests were
called Seculares; the monks were votaries:  the priests had free
liberty to have wives, till the time of Lanfranc and Anselm, as is
before said. Albeit, Athanasius, in his epistle Ad Dracontium, 
witnesseth .also, that he knew monks in the old time, and bishops,
who were married and had children. Furthermore, as ignorance and
superstition with time increased, so the number and swarm of monks
still more and more multiplied, in such sort as not only they thrust
out secular priests from their houses, but also out of them were made
popes, cardinals, archbishops, and bishops, to govern churches; of
which number began Augustine, the first archbishop of the see of
Canterbury, and the most part of all other archbishops after him,
until the time of the conquest, and after.

     All this while the friars were not yet come:  neither the
discipline of St. Dominic, nor the testament of St. Francis, nor the
order of the Augustine brothers, nor of the Carmelites, was yet heard
of; which, last of all, came in with their pageants, and played their
part likewise, A.D. 1240, being much more full of hypocrisy,
blindness, idolatry, and superstition, than were the monks. So that,
what with monks on the one side, and with the friars on the other
side, while all things were ruled by the rules of St. Benedict, by
the canons of the pope, by the doctrine of St. Dominic, and by the
testament of St. Francis, Christ's testament was trodden under foot,
the rule of God's word neglected, true Christian religion defaced,
faith forgotten, the right way of salvation abolished, sound doctrine
oppressed, Christ's servants persecuted, and the people's souls
uncomforted; yea, and the true church of Christ almost clean
extirpated, had not Almighty God (who cannot forget his promise)
provided remedy in time, in raising up this Cromwell his servant, and
other like champions, to cut up from the root the houses of them,
that, otherwise, would utterly have rooted up the house of the Lord,
and had subverted a great part already.

     Wherefore, whosoever findeth himself aggrieved with Cromwell's
doings, in suppressing these monasteries of monks and friars, let him
wisely consider with himself, first, the doctrine, laws, and
traditions of these men, which he shall find rebelling to the
religion of Christ, pernicious to our salvation, derogatory to
Christ's glory, full of much blasphemy and damnable idolatry.
Secondly, let him likewise well advise the horrible and execrable
lives of these cloisterers, or at least search out the rolls and
registers of matters found out by inquisition in King Henry the
Eighth's days, against them; which here is not to be spoken of,
unless we will speak as Matthew Paris speaketh of the court of Rome,
"whose filthy stench," saith he, "did breathe up a most pestiferous
fume, even unto the clouds of heaven," &c.

     All which things well considered, what marvel is it then, if
God, of his just judgment, did set up the aforesaid Lord Cromwell to
destroy these sinful houses, whom their own corruptions could suffer
no longer to stand? And as touching the dissipation of their lands
and possessions te' the hands of such as they were bestowed upon, if
it so pleased the king, in bestowing those abbey-lands upon his
nobles and gentlemen, either to restore them again unto them from
whence they came, or else to gratify his nobility by that means, of
policy, not to mislike his doings, what is that to Cromwell?"  But
they might," say you, "have been much better employed to other more
fruitful uses."

     Briefly to answer thereunto:  what may be done presently in a
commonwealth, it is not enough to say; but what may also follow must
be considered. If this throwing down of abbeys had happened in such
free and reformed cities and countries as are amongst the Germans,
where the state, governed and directed by laws, rather than by
rulers, remaineth always alike and immutable, who doubteth but such
houses there standing still, the possessions might well be transposed
to such uses above said, without any fear or peril? But, in such
realms and kingdoms as this, where laws and parliaments be not always
one, but are subject to the disposition of the prince, neither is it
certain always what princes may come; therefore the surest way to
send monkery and popery packing out of this realm, is to do with
their houses and possessions as King Henry here did, through the
motion and counsel of Cromwell. For else, who seeth not in Queen
Mary's time, if either the houses of monks had stood, or their lands
had been otherwise disposed than into the hands of such as they were,
how many of them had been restored and replenished again with monks
and friars, in as ample wise as ever they were? And if dukes, barons,
and the nobility, scarce were able to retain the lands and
possessions of abbeys distributed to them by King Henry, from the
devotion of Queen Mary seeking to build again the walls of Jericho,
what then should the meaner sort have done, let other men conjecture.
Wherefore it is not unlikely but that God's heavenly providence did
well foresee and dispose these things before by this man, in working
the destruction of these abbeys; whereupon, as often as he sent out
any men to suppress any monastery, he used most commonly to send them
with this charge:  that they should throw down those houses even to
the foundation. Which words, although they may seem, percase, to
some, to be cruelly spoken by him; yet, contrariwise, do I suppose
the doing thereof not to be without God's special providence and
secret guiding. Or else we might, peradventure, have had such swarms
of friars and monks possessed in their nests again before this day in
England, in so great a number, that ten Cromwells, afterwards,
scarcely should have sufficed to have unhoused them. Wherefore, if
the plantation, which the Lord God never planted, be plucked up by
the roots, let God alone with his working, and let the monasteries
go.

     Furthermore, as touching the godly use of the poor, schools,
and stipends of preachers, (for unto these three, diligent respect is
to be had in every commonwealth,) there are other means provided,
which, as they are alike honest, so are they also much more sure, so
that the ancient godliness do not slack in the nobility. And if the
nobility, in times past, have been so liberal in bestowing so great
costs and charges upon things wherein there is no godliness, how
uncomely would it be, for the true gospellers to be more niggardly in
preferring true godliness and the study of the gospel!

     Now that you have seen what this malleus monachorum hath done
in defacing the synagogue of the pope, let us see how the same
Cromwell again did travail, in setting up Christ's church and
congregation.

     After that the bishop of Rome's power and authority were
banished out of England, the bishops of his sect never ceased to seek
all occasion how, either to restore his head again, being broken and
wounded, or at least to keep upright those things which yet remained;
wherein although their labours were not altogether frustrated, yet
had they brought much more to pass, if Cromwell (as a mighty wall and
defence of the church) had not resisted continually their
enterprises.

     It happened that after the abolishing of the pope, certain
tumults began to rise about religion; whereupon it seemed good unto
King Henry, to appoint an assembly of learned men and bishops, who 
should soberly and modestly treat and determine those things which
pertained unto religion. Briefly, at the king's pleasure, all the
learned men, but especially the bishops, assembled, to whom this
matter seemed chiefly to belong. Cromwell thought also to be present
himself with the bishops, and, by chance, meeting with Alexander
Alesius by the way, a Scottish man, brought him with him to the
Convocation-house, where all the bishops were assembled together.
This was in the year 1537. The bishops and prelates attending upon
the coming of Cromwell, as he was come in, rose up and did obeisance
unto him as to their vicar-general, and he again saluted every one in
their degree, and sat down in the highest place at the table,
according to his degree and office; and, after him, every bishop in
his order, and doctors. First, over against him, sat the archbishop
of Canterbury; then the archbishop of York, the bishops of London,
Lincoln, Salisbury, Bath, Ely, Hereford, Chichester, Norwich,
Rochester, and Worcester, &c. There Cromwell, in the name of the
king, (whose most dear and secret counsellor at that present he was,
and lord privy seal, and vicar-general of the realm,) spake these
words in manner following: 

     "Right reverend fathers in Christ! The king's Majesty giveth
you high thanks that ye have so diligently, without any excuse,
assembled hither according to his commandment. And ye be not ignorant
that ye be called hither to determine certain controversies, which at
this time be moved concerning the Christian religion and faith, not
only in this realm, but also in all nations through the world. For
the king studieth day and night to set a quietness in the church; and
he cannot rest until all such controversies be fully debated and
ended, through the determination of you, and of his whole parliament.
For, although his special desire is to set a stay for the unlearned
people, whose consciences are in doubt what they may believe; and he
himself, by his excellent learning, knoweth these controversies well
enough, yet he will suffer no common alteration, but by the consent
of you and his whole parliament:  by which thing ye may perceive both
his high wisdom, and also his great love toward you. And he desireth
you, for Christ's sake, that all malice, obstinacy, and carnal
respect set apart, ye will friendly and lovingly dispute among
yourselves of the controversies moved in the church; and that you
will conclude all things by the word of God, without all brawling or
scolding:  neither will his Majesty suffer the Scripture to be wrested
and defaced by any glosses, any papistical laws, or by any authority
of doctors and councils; and much less will he admit any articles or
doctrine not contained in the Scripture, but approved only by
continuance of time and old custom, and by unwritten verities, as ye
were wont to do. Ye know well enough, that ye be bound to show this
service to Christ and to his church; and yet, notwithstanding, his
Majesty will give you high thanks, if ye will set and conclude a
godly and a perfect unity:  whereunto this is the only way and mean,
if ye will determine all things by the Scripture, as God commandeth
you in Deuteronomy; which thing his Majesty exhorteth and desireth
you to do."

     When Cromwell had ended this his oration, the bishops rose up
altogether, giving thanks unto the king's Majesty, not only for his
great zeal toward the church of Christ, but also for his most godly
exhortation, worthy so Christian a prince.

     Immediately they rose up to disputation, where Stokesley,
bishop of London, first of all, being the most earnest champion and
maintainer of the Romish decrees, (whom Cromwell a little before had
checked by name, for defending unwritten verities,) endeavoured
himself, with all his labour and industry, out of the old school
glosses, to maintain the seven sacraments of the church:  the
archbishop of York, and the bishops of Lincoln, Bath, Chichester,
and) Norwich, also favoured his part and sect. On the contrary part
were the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops of Salisbury, Ely,
Hereford, Worcester, with many others.

     After much communication had on either part, and when they had
long contended about the testimonies of the doctors, which, as it
seemed unto them, dissented and disagreed among themselves, the
archbishop of Canterbury at last spake, and said thus unto them: 

     "It beseemeth not men of learning and gravity to make such
babbling and brawling about bare words, so that we agree in the very
substance and effect of the matter. For to brawl about words, is the
property of sophisters, and such as mean deceit and subtlety, who
delight in the debate and dissension of the world, and in the
miserable state of the church; and not of them that should seek the
glory of Christ, and should study for the unity and quietness of the
church. There be weighty controversies now moved and put forth, not
of ceremonies and light things, but of the true understanding, and of
the right difference of the law and of the gospel; of the manner and
way how sins be forgiven; of comforting doubtful and wavering
consciences, by what means they may be certified that they please
God, seeing they feel the strength of the law accusing them of sin;
of the true use of the sacraments, whether the outward work of them
doth justify man, or whether we receive our justification by faith.
Item, which be the good works, and the true service and honour which
please God; and whether the choice of meats, the difference of
garments, the vows of monks and priests, and other traditions, which
have no word of God to confirm them; whether these, I say, be right
good works, and such as make a perfect Christian man, or no? Item,
whether vain service and false honouring of God, and man's
traditions, do bind men's consciences, or no? Finally, whether the
ceremony of confirmation, of orders, and of annoiling, and such
other, (which cannot be proved to be instituted of Christ, nor have
any word in them to certify us of remission of sins,) ought to be
called sacraments, and to be compared with baptism and the supper of
the Lord, or no?

     "These be no light matters, but even the principal points of
our Christian religion:  wherefore we contend not about words and
trifles, but about high and earnest matters. Christ saith, Blessed be
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God. And Paul,
writing unto Timothy, commanded bishops to avoid brawling and
contention about words, which be profitable to nothing, but unto the
subversion and destruction of the hearers; and admonisheth him
especially, that he should resist with the Scriptures, when any man
disputeth with him of the faith:  and he addeth a cause, whereas he
saith, Doing this thou shalt preserve both thyself, and also them
which hear thee. Now, if ye will follow these counsellors, Christ and
Paul, all contention and brawling about words must be set apart, and
ye must establish a godly and a perfect unity and concord out of the
Scripture. Wherefore, in this disputation, we must first agree of the
number of the sacraments, and what a sacrament doth signify in the
Holy Scripture; and when we call baptism and the supper of the Lord,
sacraments of the gospel, what we mean thereby. I know right well
that St. Ambrose, and other authors, call the washing of the
disciples' feet, and other things, sacraments; which I am sure you
yourselves would not suffer to be numbered among the other
sacraments."

     When he had ended his oration, Cromwell commanded Alesius,
which stood by, (whom he perceived to give attentive ear to that
which was spoken,) to show his mind and opinion, declaring to the
bishops before, that he was the king's scholar; and therefore desired
them to be contented to hear him indifferently.

     Alesius, after he had first done his duty unto the Lord
Cromwell, and to the prelates of the church, said in this wise: 

     "Right honourable and noble lord, and you most reverend fathers
and prelates of the church! although I come unprepared unto this
disputation, yet, trusting in the aid of Christ, who promiseth to
give both mouth and wisdom unto us when we be required of our faith,
I will utter my sentence and judgment of this disputation. And I
think that my lord archbishop hath given you a profitable
exhortation, that ye should first agree of the signification of a
sacrament, whether ye will call a sacrament a ceremony instituted by
Christ in the gospel, to signify a special or a singular virtue of
the gospel and of godliness, (as Paul nameth remission of sins to
be,) or whether ye mean every ceremony generally, which may be a
token or a signification of a holy thing, to be a sacrament? For
after this latter signification, I will not stick to grant you that
there be seven sacraments, and more too, if ye will. But yet Paul
seemeth to describe a sacrament after the just signification, where
he saith, that circumcision is a token and a seal of the
righteousness of faith. This definition of one particular sacrament
must be understood to appertain unto all sacraments generally:  for
the Jews had but one sacrament only, as all the scholastical writers
do grant. And he describeth baptism after the same manner, in the
Ephesians, where he saith, that Christ doth sanctify the church; that
into say, all that be baptized, through the bath of water, in the
word of life. For here, also, he addeth the word and promise of God
unto the ceremony. And Christ, also, requireth faith where he saith,
Whosoever believeth and is baptized, shall be saved.

     "And St. Augustine describeth a sacrament thus:  'The word of
God, coming unto the element, maketh the sacrament.' And, in another
place, he saith, 'A sacrament is a thing wherein the power of God,
under the form of visible things, doth work secretly salvation.' And
the Master of the Sentences doth describe a sacrament no otherwise: 
'A sacrament,' saith he, 'is an invisible grace, and hath a visible
form:  and by this invisible grace I mean,' saith he, 'remission of
sins.' Finally, St. Thomas denieth that any man hath authority to
institute a sacrament. Now, if ye agree unto this definition of a
sacrament, it is an easy thing to judge of the number of those
sacraments which have the manifest word of God, and be instituted by
Christ, to signify unto us the remission of our sins.

     "St. Augustine saith, that there be but two such sacraments;
his words be these, First, I would have thee to understand the sum
and effect of this disputation, which is this:  That our Lord Jesus
Christ (as he himself saith in the gospel) hath laden us but with a
light and easy yoke or burden. Wherefore he hath knit together the
fellowship of this new people with sacraments, very few in number,
very easy to be kept, and very excellent in signification; which be
baptism, and the supper of the Lord, and such others, if there be any
more commanded in the Holy Scripture; those except, which were
burdens for the servitude of the people in the old law, for the
hardness of their hearts,' &c. And again, in the third book of The
Learning of a Christian Man, he saith, 'The Scripture hath taught us
but few signs, as be the sacrament of baptism, and the solemn
celebration and remembrance of the body and blood of the Lord.'"

     Then the bishop of London, which could scarcely refrain himself
all this while, and now could forbear no longer, brake out in this
manner:  "First of all," saith he, "where you allege that all the
sacraments which are in the church, instituted by Christ himself,
have either some manifest ground in the Scriptures, or ought to show
forth some signification of remission of sins, it is false, and not
to be allowed."

     Then said Alesius, that he would prove it, not only by manifest
authorities of Scripture, but also by evident testimonies of ancient
doctors and school-writers.

     But the bishop of Hereford, (which was then lately returned out
of Germany, where he had been ambassador for the king to the
protestants,) being moved with the bishop of London's frowardness,
turning himself first to Alexander Alesius, willed him not to contend
with the bishop in such manner, by the testimonies of doctors and
schoolmen, forasmuch as they do not all agree in like matters,
neither are they stedfast among themselves in all points, but do
vary, and in many points are utterly repugnant. "Wherefore, if this
disputation shall be decided by their minds and verdicts, there shall 
be nothing established, neither shall appear any way of agreement to
follow. Furthermore, we be commanded by the king, that these
controversies should be determined only by the rule and judgment of
the Scripture." This he spake unto Alesius. Then, turning himself
unto the bishops, he likewise admonished them, with a grave and sharp
oration, which we thought not good to omit in this place.

     "Think ye not that we can by any sophistical subtleties steal
out of the world again the light which every man doth see. Christ
hath so lightened the world at this time, that the light of the
gospel hath put to flight all misty darkness; and it will shortly
have the higher hand of all clouds, though we resist in vain ever so
much. The lay people do now know the Holy Scripture better than many
of us; and the Germans have made the text of the Bible so plain and
easy, by the Hebrew and Greek tongues, that now many things may be
better understood without any glosses at all, than by all the
commentaries of the doctors. And, moreover, they have so opened these
controversies by their writings, that women and children may wonder
at the blindness and falsehood that have been hitherto. Wherefore ye
must consider earnestly what ye will determine of these
controversies, that ye make not yourselves to be mocked and laughed
to scorn of all the world, and that ye bring them not to have this
opinion of you, to think evermore hereafter, that ye have neither one
spark of learning, nor yet of godliness in you. And thus shall ye
lose all your estimation and authority with them, that before took
you for learned men, and profitable members unto the commonwealth of
Christendom. For that which you do hope upon, that there was never
heresy in the church so great, but that process of time, with the
power and authority of the pope, hath quenched it, is nothing to the
purpose. But ye must turn your opinion, and think this surely, that
there is nothing so feeble and weak, so that it be true, but it shall
find place, and be able to stand against a falsehood.

     "Truth is the daughter of time, and time is the mother of
truth; and whatsoever is besieged of truth, cannot long continue; and
upon whose side truth doth stand, that ought not to be thought
transitory, or that it will ever fall. All things consist not in
painted eloquence, and strength or authority:  for the truth is of so
great power, strength, and efficacy, that it can neither be defended
with words, nor be overcome with any strength, but after she hath
hidden herself long, at length she putteth up her head and appeareth,
as it is written in Esdras A king is strong; wine is strong; yet
women be more strong:  but truth excelleth all."

     To this effect, in a manner, and much more, did he speak and
utter in that convocation, both copiously and discreetly; through
whose oration Alesius, being encouraged, proceeded to urge the bishop
further with this argument.

The argument in form.

     "Sacraments be seals ascertaining us of God's good will.

     "Without the word there is no certainty of God's good will.

     "Ergo, Without the word there be no sacraments.

     "The first part of this reason is St. Paul's own saying, in the
fourth to the Romans, where he saith, that circumcision is a token
and a seal of the righteousness of faith:  ergo, it requireth faith to
certify man's heart of the will of God. But the word of God is the
foundation of faith, as St. Paul witnesseth, Faith cometh by hearing,
and hearing cometh by the word of God:  for the mind must be taught
and instructed to the will of God by the word, like as the eye is
taught and instructed by the outward ceremony. And so Paul, by that
saying, confuteth this opinion, that the sacraments should make men
righteous and just before God for the very outward work, without
faith of them that receive them.

     "And after this manner doth Paul speak unto the Ephesians:  that
Christ doth sanctify his church, through the bath of water, in the
word of life. And forasmuch as he joineth the word unto the ceremony,
and declareth the virtue and power of the word of God, that it
bringeth with it life, he doth manifestly teach that the word of God
is a principal thing, and even as it were the very substance and body
of the sacrament; and the outward ceremony to be in very deed nothing
else but a token of that lively inflammation, which we receive
through faith in the word and promise. St. Paul also, in ministering
the sacrament of the Lord's supper, doth manifestly add the words of
Christ:  He took bread, saith he, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said, Take ye this, and eat ye this, for it is my body.
Item, Do ye this in my remembrance. Besides this, he teacheth
evidently that only Christ, and none but he, had power to institute a
sacrament; and that neither have the apostles, nor hath the church,
any authority to alter, or to add any thing unto his ordinance,
whereas he saith, For I received of the Lord, that which I delivered
unto you, &c. To what purpose should he go about to move the people
to believe him, and to win their hearts with this protestation, if it
had been lawful for him to have made any sacraments, or to have
altered the form and manner of ministering the sacrament, as some men
both wickedly and shamefully do affirm, that the apostles did alter
the form of baptism."

     When he had spoken thus much, the bishop of London did
interrupt him, and said thus: 

     "Let us grant that the sacraments may be gathered out of the
word of God, yet are ye far deceived if ye think that there is none
other word of God, but that which every souter and cobbler doth read
in his mother tongue. And if ye think that nothing pertaineth unto
the Christian faith, but that only which is written in the Bible,
then err ye plainly with the Lutherans:  for St. John saith, that
Jesus did many things which be not written; and St. Paul commandeth
the Thessalonians to observe and keep certain unwritten traditions
and ceremonies. Moreover he himself did preach not the Scripture
only, but even also the traditions of the elders. Finally, we have
received many things of the doctors and councils of by-times, which,
although they be not written in the Bible, yet forasmuch as the old
doctors of the church do make mention of them, we ought to grant that
we received them of the apostles, and that they be of like authority
with the Scripture; and, finally, that they may worthily be called,
the word of God unwritten."

     Now when the right noble Lord Cromwell, the archbishop, with
the other bishops, who did defend the pure doctrine of the gospel,
heard this, they smiled a little one upon another, forasmuch as they
saw him flee, even in the very beginning of the disputation, unto his 
old rusty sophistry and unwritten verities. Then Alesius would have
proceeded further with the bishop, to have confuted this blasphemous
lie, but the Lord Cromwell bade him be content, for the time began to
go away, and it was twelve o'clock; and thus he made an end with his
protestation: 

     "Right reverend master bishop, you deny that our Christian
faith and religion doth lean only upon the word of God, which is
written in the Bible:  which thing if I can prove and declare, then
you will grant me, that there be no sacraments but those that have
the anifest word of God to confirm them."

     Unto this he d consent, and then immediately that assembly was
dissolved for that day. The next day, when the bishops were set
again, the archbishop of Canterbury, sending his archdeacon,
commanded Alesius to abstain from disputation:  whereupon he wrote his
mind, and delivered it to Cromwell, who afterward showed the same
unto the bishops. Thus, through the industry of Cromwell, the
colloquies were brought to this end, that albeit religion could not
wholly be reformed, yet at that time there was some reformation had
throughout all England.

     How desirous and studious this good Cromwell was, in the cause
of Christ's religion, examples need not to be brought. His whole life
was nothing else but a continual care and travail how to advance and
further the right knowledge of the gospel, and reform the house of
God:  as by so many proclamations above specified, by his means set
forth, may well appear, wherein first he caused the people to be
instructed in the Lord's Prayer and Creed in English. Then he
procured the Scripture also to be read and set forth in the same
language, for every Englishman to understand. After that, to rescue
the vulgar people from damnable idolatry, he caused certain of the
more gross pilgrimages to be destroyed. And further, for the more
commodity of the poor sort, who get their living with their daily
labour and work of their hands, he provided that divers idle holidays
were diminished. Item, He procured for them liberty to eat eggs and
white meat in Lent. Furthermore, it was by him also provided, for the
better instruction of the people, that beneficed men should be
resident in their cures and parishes, there to teach, and to keep
hospitality, with many other things else, most fruitfully redressed
for the reformation of religion and behoof of Christ's church:  as by
the proclamations, injunctions, and necessary articles of Christian
doctrine above specified, set forth in the king's name, by his means,
may more abundantly appear.

     Now, to adjoin withal his private benefits, in helping divers
good men and women at sundry times out of troubles and great
distresses, it would require a long discourse. Briefly, his whole
life was full of such examples, being a man to that intent ordained
of God (as his deeds well proved) to do many men good, and especially
such as were in danger of persecution for religion's sake. Amongst
other infinite stories, one or two examples shall suffice for a
testimony of his worthy doings; and first, how he helped a poor woman
with child, out of great trouble, longing for a piece of meat in time
of Lent.
 IN the year of our Lord 1538, Sir William Forman
being mayor of the city of London, three weeks before Easter, the
wife of one Thomas Frebarn, dwelling in Paternoster Row, being with
child, longed after a morsel of a pig, and told her mind unto a maid
dwelling in Abchurch Lane, desiring her, if it were possible, to help
her unto a piece. The maid, perceiving her earnest desire, showed
unto her husband what his wife had said unto her, telling him that it
might chance to cost her her life, and the child's too, which she
went withal, if she had it not. Upon this, Thomas Frebarn, her
husband, spake to a butter-wife which he knew, that dwelled at
Hornsey, named goodwife Fisher, to help him to a pig for his wife,
for she was with child, and longed sore to eat of a pig:  unto whom
the said goodwife Fisher promised, that she would bring him one the
Friday following; and so she did, being ready dressed and scalded
before. But when she had delivered him the pig, she craftily conveyed
one of the pig's feet, and carried it unto Dr. Cox's, at that time
being dean of Canterbury, dwelling in Ivy Lane, who, at the time of
his dinner, before certain guests which he had bidden, showed this
pig's foot, declaring who had the body thereof. And after that they
had talked their pleasure, and dinner was done, one of his guests,
(being landlord unto Frebarn aforesaid, called Master Garter, and by
his office, king at arms,) sent his man unto the said Frebarn,
demanding if there were nobody sick in his house:  unto whom he 
answered, that they were all in good health, he gave God thanks. Then
said he again, It was told his master, that somebody was sick, or
else they would not eat flesh in Lent:  unto whom Frebarn made answer,
that his wife was with child, and longed for a piece of a pig, and if
he could get some for her, he would. Then departed his landlord's man
home again.

     And, shortly after, his landlord sent for him. But before that
he had sent for him, he had sent for the bishop of London's sumner,
whose name was Holland, and when this Frebarn was come, he demanded
of him if he had not a pig in his house; which he denied not. Then
commanded Master Garter the said sumner called Holland, to take him,
and go home to his house, and to take the pig, and carry both him,
and the pig, unto Dr. Stokesley his master, being then bishop of
London:  and so he did. Then the bishop, being in his chamber
withdivers other of the clergy, called this Frebarn before him, and
had him in examination for this pig; laying also unto his charge,
that he had eaten in his house, that Lent, powdered beef, and calves'
heads. Unto whom Frebarn answered, "My Lord, if the heads were eaten
in my house, in whose houses were the bodies eaten? also, if there be
either man or woman that can prove, that either I, or any in my
house, hath done as your Lordship saith, let me suffer death there-
for." "You speak," said he, "against pilgrimages, and will not take
holy bread, or holy water, nor yet go on procession on Palm Sunday;
thou art no Christian man." "My Lord," said Frebarn, "I trust I am a
true Christian man, and have done nothing either against God's law or
my prince's."

     In the time of this his examination, which was during the space
of two hours, divers came unto the bishop; some to have their
children confirmed, and some for other causes:  unto whom as they
came, having the pig before him covered, he would lift up the cloth
and show it them, saying, "How think you of such a fellow as this is?
Is not this good meat, I pray you, to be eaten in this blessed time
of Lent; yea, and also powdered beef and calves' heads too, besides
this!"

     After this, the bishop called his sumner unto him, and
commanded him to go and carry this Thomas Frebarn, and the pig,
openly through the streets into the Old Bailey, unto Sir Roger
Cholmley:  for the bishop said, he had nothing to do to punish him,
for that belonged unto the civil magistrates. And so was Frebarn
carried, with the pig before him, to Sir Roger Cholmley's house in
the Old Bailey; and he being not at home at that time, Frebarn was
brought likewise back again unto the bishop's place with the pig, and
there lay in the porter's lodge till it was nine o'clock at night.
Then the bishop sent him unto the Compter in the Poultry, by the
sumner and other of his servants.

     The next day, being Saturday, he was brought before the mayor
of London and his brethren, unto Guildhall; but, before his coming,
they had the pig delivered unto them by the bishop's officer. Then
the mayor and the bench laid unto his charge, (as they were informed
from the bishop,) that he had eaten powdered beef and calves' heads
in his house the same Lent:  but no man was able to come in that would
justify it, neither could any thing be found, save only the pig,
which (as is before said) was for the preservation of his wife's
life, and that she went withal. Notwithstanding the mayor of London
said, that the Monday next following he should stand on the pillory
in Cheapside, with the one half of the pig on the one shoulder, and
the other half on the other.

     Then spake the wife of the said Frebarn unto the mayor and the
bench, desiring that she might stand there, and not he; for it was
the long of her, and not of him. After this they took a satin list,
and tied it fast about the pig's neck, and made Frebarn to carry it,
hanging on his shoulder, until he came unto the Compter of the
Poultry, from whence he came.

     After this was done, the wife of this prisoner took with her an
honest woman, the wife of one Michael Lobley, who was well acquainted
with divers in the Lord Cromwell's house, unto whom the said woman
resorted for some help for this prisoner, desiring them to speak unto
their lord and master for his deliverance out of trouble.

     It happened that the same time came in Dr. Barnes and Master
Barlow, who, understanding the matter by Lobley's wife, went up to
the Lord Cromwell, and certified him thereof; who, upon their
request, sent for the mayor of the city of London:  but what was said
unto the lord mayor is unknown, saving that in the afternoon of the
same day the wife of the person aforesaid resorted again unto the
lord mayor, suing to get her husband delivered out of prison,
declaring how that she had two small children, and had nothing to
help her and them, but only her husband, who laboured for their
livings. Unto whom the mayor answered, "What come ye to me? You are
taken up by the king's council. I supposed, that you had come to
desire me that your husband should not stand upon the pillory in
Cheapside on Monday next, with the one half of the pig on his one
shoulder and the other half on the other." Also the mayor said unto
her, that he could not deliver him, without the consent of the rest
of his brethren the aldermen:  wherefore he bade her, the next day
following, which was the sabbath day, to resort unto Paul's, to St.
Dunstan's chapel, and when he had spoken with his brethren, he would
then tell her more. Other answer could she not get at that time;
wherefore she went unto Master Wilkinson, then being sheriff of
London, desiring him to be good unto her, and that she might have her
poor husband out of prison. Unto whom Master Wilkinson answered, "O
woman, Christ hath laid a piece of his cross upon thy neck, to prove
whether thou wilt help him to bear it or no: " saying, moreover, unto
her, that if the lord mayor had sent him to his Compter, as he sent
him to his brother's, he should not of tarried there an hour:  and so
commanded her to come the next day nto him to dinner, and he would do
the best for her he could. So the next day came, and this woman
resorted again to Master Wilkinson's according as he bade her, who
also had bidden divers guests, unto whom he spake in her behalf. But
as they were set at dinner, and she also sitting at the table, when
she saw the hot fish come in, she fell down in a swoon, so that for
the space of two hours they could keep no life in her. Wherefore they
sent her home to her house in Paternoster-row, and then they sent for
the midwife, supposing that she would have been delivered incontinent
of her child that she went with, (but after that she came somewhat
again to herself,) where she lay sick, and kept her bed the space of
fifteen weeks after; being not able to help herself, but as she was
helped of others, during the time of fifteen weeks.

     Now, to show further what became of this pig, whereof we have
spoken so much, it was carried into Finsbury field by the bishop of
London's sumner, at his master's commandment, and there buried. The
Monday following, being the fourth day after that this prisoner
aforesaid was apprehended, the mayor of London, with the residue of
his brethren, being at Guildhall, sent for the prisoner aforenamed,
and demanded sureties of him for his forthcoming, whatsoever
hereafter should or might be laid unto his charge:  but for lack of
such sureties as they required, upon his own bond, which was a
recognisance of twenty pounds, he was delivered out of their hands.
But, shortly after he was delivered out of this his trouble, Master
Garter, of whom we have spoken before, being his landlord, warned him
out of his house, so that in four years after he could not get
another, but was constrained to be with other good folks, to his
great hinderance and undoing.

     Hard it were, and almost out of number, to rehearse the names
and stories of all them that felt the gentle help of this good man in
some case or other. Where might be remembered the notable deliverance
of one Gray, a smith of Bishop's Stortford, who, being accused for
denying the sacrament of the altar to be our Saviour, was sent up for
the same to London, and there should have been condemned to be
burned, but that, by the means of the Lord Cromwell, he was sent home
again and delivered. One other example, though it be somewhat long,
with the circumstances and all, I will declare:  how he helped the
secretary that then was to Dr. Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury,
which secretary is yet alive, and can bear present record of the
same.

How the Lord Cromwell helped Cranmer's secretary.

     Mention was made before, how King Henry, in the twenty-first
year of his reign, caused the Six Articles to pass, much against the
mind, and contrary to the consent, of The archbishop of Canterbury,
Thomas Cranmer, who had disputed three days against the same, in the
parliament-house, with great reasons and authorities. Which articles,
after they were granted and passed by the parliament, the king, for
the singular favour which he ever bare to Cranmer, and reverence to
his learning, being desirous to know what he had said and objected in
the parliament against these articles, or what could be alleged by
learning against the same, required a note of the archbishop of his
doings, what he had said and opposed in the parliament touching that
matter. And this word was sent to him from the king by Cromwell and
other lords of the parliament, whom the king then sent to dine with
him at Lambeth, somewhat to comfort again his grieved mind and
troubled spirits, as hath been above recited.

     Whereupon, when this dinner was finished, the next day after,
the archbishop, collecting both his arguments, authorities of
Scripture, and doctors together, caused his secretary to write a fair
book thereof for the king, after this order. First, the Scriptures
were alleged; then the doctors; thirdly, followed the arguments
deduced from those authorities. This book was written in his
secretary's chamber; where, in a by-chamber, lay the archbishop's
almoner. When this book was fair written, and while the secretary was
gone to deliver the same unto the archbishop his master, who was (as
it then chanced) ridden to Croydon, returning back to his chamber, he
found the door shut, and the key carried away to London by the
almoner.

     At this season also chanced the father of the said secretary to
come to the city, by whose occasion it so fell out, that he must
needs go to London. The book he could not lay in his chamber, neither
durst he commit it to any other person to keep, being straitly
charged, in any condition, by the archbishop his master, to be
circumspect thereof; so that he determined to go to his father, and
to keep the book about him. And so thrusting the book under his
girdle, he went over unto Westminster bridge with a sculler, where he
entered into a wherry that went to London, wherein were four of the
guard, who meant to land at Paul's wharf, and to pass by the king's
Highness, who then was in his barge, with a great number of barges
and boats about him, then baiting of bears in the water, over against
the bank.

     These aforesaid yeoman of the guard, when they came against the
king's barge, they durst not pass by towards Paul's wharf, lest they
should be espied, and therefore entreated the secretary to go with
them to the bear baiting, and they would find the means, being of the
guard, to make room, and to see all the pastime. The secretary,
perceiving no other remedy, assented thereto. When the wherry came
nigh the multitude of the boats, they, with poleaxes, got the wherry
so far, that being compassed with many other wherries and boats,
there was no refuge if the bear should break loose and come upon
them; as in very deed, within one Paternoster, the bear brake loose,
and came into the boat where the yeoman of the guard were, and the
said secretary. The guard forsook the wherry, and went into another
barge, one or two of them leaping short, and so fell into the water.
The bear and the dogs so shook the wherry wherein the secretary was,
that the boat, being full of water, sunk to the ground; and being
also, as it chanced, an ebbing tide, he there sat in the end of the
wherry up to the middle in water; to whom came the bear and all the
dogs. The bear, seeking as it were aid and succour of him, came back
with his hinder parts upon him, and so rushing upon him, the book was
loosed from his girdle, and fell into the Thames, out of his reach.

     The flying of the people after that the bear was loose, from
one boat to another, was so cumberous, that divers persons were
thrown into the Thames; the king commanding certain men that could
swim to strip themselves naked, and to help to save them that were in
danger. This pastime so displeased the king, that he bade "away, away
with the bear, and let us all go hence!"

     The secretary, perceiving his book to fleet away in the Thames,
called to the bearward to take up the book. When the bearward had the
book in his custody, being an arrant papist, far from the religion of
his mistress, (for he was the Lady Elizabeth's bearward, now the
queen's Majesty,) ere the secretary could come to land, he had
delivered the book to a priest of his own affinity in religion,
standing on the bank, who, reading in the book, and perceiving that
it was a manifest refutation of the Six Articles, made much ado, and
told the bearward, that whosoever claimed the book should surely be
hanged. Anon the secretary came to the bearward for his book. "What,"
quoth the bearward, "dare you challenge this book? Whose servant are
you?"  "I am servant to one of the council," said the secretary, "and
my lord of Canterbury is my master." "Yea marry," quoth the bearward,
"I thought as much:  you be like, I trust," quoth the bearward, "to be
both hanged for this book." "Well," said he, "it is not so evil as
you take it, and, I warrant you, my Lord will avouch the book to the
king's Majesty. But I pray you let me have my book, and I will give
you a crown to drink." "If you will give me five hundred crowns, you
shall not have it," quoth the bearward.

     With that the secretary departed from him, and understanding
the malicious frowardness of the bearward, he learned that Blage, the
grocer in Cheapside, might do much with the bearward, to whom the
secretary brake this matter, requiring him to send for the bearward
to supper, and he would pay for the whole charge therin; and besides
that, rather than he would forego his book after this sort, the
bearward should have twenty shillings to drink. The supper was
prepared; the bearward was sent for and came. After supper the matter
was treated of, and twenty shillings offered for the book. But do
what could be done, neither friendship, acquaintance, nor yet reward
of money, could obtain the book out of his hands, but that the same
should be delivered unto some of the council that would not so
slightly look on so weighty a matter, as to have it redeemed for a
supper, or a piece of money. The honest man, Master Blage, with many
good reasons, would have persuaded him not to be stiff in his own
conceit, declaring that in the end he should nothing at all prevail
of his purpose, but be laughed to scorn; getting neither penny nor
praise for his travail. He, hearing that, rushed suddenly out of the
doors from his friend Master Blage, without any manner of
thanksgiving for his supper, more like a bearward, than like an
honest man. When the secretary saw the matter so extremely to be used
against him, be then thought it expedient to fall from any further
practising of entreaty with the bearward, as with him that seemed
rather to be a bear himself, than the master of the beast;
determining the next morning to make the Lord Cromwell privy of the
chance that happened.

     So, on the next day, as the Lord Cromwell went to the court,
the secretary declared the whole matter unto him, and how he had
offered him twenty shillings for the finding thereof. "Where is the
fellow?" quoth the Lord Cromwell. "I suppose," said the secretary,
"that he is now in the court, attending to deliver the book unto some
of the council" "Well," said the Lord Cromwell, "it maketh no matter;
go with me thither, and I shall get you your book again." When the
Lord Cromwell came into the hall of the court, there stood the
bearward, with the book in his hand, waiting to have delivered the
same unto Sir Anthony Brown, or unto the bishop of Winchester, as it
was reported. To whom the Lord Cromwell said, "Come hither, fellow!
what book hast thou there in thy hand?"  and with that snatched the
book out of his hand, and looking in the book, he said, "I know this
hand well enough. This is your hand," said he to the secretary. "But
where hadst thou this book?"  quoth the Lord Cromwell to the
bearward. "This gentleman lost it two days ago in the Thames," said
the bearward. "Dost thou know whose servant he is?" said the Lord
Cromwell. "He saith," quoth the bearward, "that he is my Lord of
Canterbury's servant." "Why then didst thou not deliver to him the
book, when he required it?" said the Lord Cromwell. "Who made thee so
bold, as to detain and withhold any book or writing from a
councillor's servant, especially being his secretary? It is more meet
for thee to meddle with thy bears, than with such writing; and were
it not for thy mistress' sake, I would set thee fast by the feet, to
teach such malapert knaves to meddle with councillors' matters. Had
not money been well bestowed upon such a good fellow as this is? that
knoweth not a councillor's man from a cobbler's man! "And with those
words the Lord Cromwell went up into the king's chamber of presence,
and the archbishop's secretary with him, where he found, in the
chamber, the lord of Canterbury. To whom he said, "My lord! I have
found here good stuff for you, (showing to him the paper book that he
had in his hand,) ready to bring both you, and this good fellow your
man, to the halter; namely, if the knave bearward, now in the hall,
might have well compassed it." At these words the archbishop smiled,
and said, "He that lost the book is like to have the worst bargain,
for besides that he was well washed in the Thames, he must write the
book fair again: " and, at these words, the Lord Cromwell cast the
book unto the secretary, saying, "I pray thee, Morice! go in hand
therewith, by-and-by, with all expedition, for it must serve a turn."
"Surely, my Lord, it somewhat rejoiceth me," quoth the Lord Cromwell,
"that the varlet might have had of your man twenty shillings for the
book, and now I have discharged the matter with never a penny, and
shaken him well up for his over-much malapertness. I know the fellow
well enough," quoth he, "there is not a ranker papist within this
realm than he is, most unworthy to be a servant unto so noble a
princess." And so, after humble thanks given to the Lord Cromwell,
the said Morice departed with his book, which, when he again had fair
written it, was delivered to the king's Majesty by the said Lord
Cromwell, within four days after.

The Lord Cromwell not forgetting his old friends and benefactors.
 IT is commonly seen, that men advanced once from
base degree to ample dignities, do rise also, with fortune, into such
insolency and exaltation of mind, that not only they forget
themselves, what they were, and from whence they came, but also cast
out of remembrance all their old friends and former acquaintance,
which have been to them before beneficial. From which sort of men how
far the courteous condition of this Christian earl did differ, by
divers examples it may appear; as by a certain poor woman keeping
some time a victualling-house about Hounslow, to whom the said Lord
Cromwell remained in debt for certain old reckonings, to the sum of
forty shillings. It happened that the Lord Cromwell, with Cranmer
archbishop of Canterbury, riding through Cheapside towards the court,
in turning his eye over the way, and there espying this poor woman,
brought now in need and misery, eftsoons caused her to be called unto
him; who, being come, after certain questions, asked of her (if she
were not such a woman, and dwelling in such a place); at last, he
demanded if he were not behind for a certain payment of money between
him and her. To whom, with reverent obeisance, she confessed that he
owed her money for a certain old reckoning, which was yet unpaid;
whereof she stood now in great necessity, but never durst call upon
him, nor could come at him, to require her right. Then the Lord
Cromwell, sending the poor woman home to his house, and one of his
servants withal, that the porter should let her in, after his return
from the court not only discharged the debt which he owed, but also
gave her a yearly pension of four pounds, and a livery every year
while she lived.

     The like courtesy the said Lord Cromwell showed also to a
certain Italian, who, in the city of Florence, had showed him much
kindness in succouring and relieving his necessity, as in this story
following may appear; which story, set forth and compiled in the
Italian tongue by Bandello, and imprinted at Lucca, by Busdrago, A.
D. 1554, I thought here to insert, with the whole order and
circumstance thereof, as it is reported.

     "Not many years past," saith the author, "there was in Florence
a merchant, whose name was Francis, descended from the noble and
ancient family of the Frescobalds. This gentleman was naturally
endued with a noble and liberal mind, unto whom, also, through
prosperous success and fortunate luck in his affairs and doings, much
abundance of riches increased, so that he grew in great wealth,
having his coffers replenished with many heaps of much treasure.
Acording to the custom of merchants, he used his trade into many
countries, but chiefly into England, where long time he lived,
sojourning in London, keeping house to his great commendation and
praise.

     "It happened that Francis Frescobald, being in Florence, there
appeared before him a poor young man, asking his alms for God's sake.
Frescobald, as he earnestly beheld this ragged stripling, who was not
so disguised in his tattered attire, but that his countenance gave
signification of much towardness and virtue in him, with conformity
of manners agreeing to the same, being moved with pity, demanded of
what country he was, and where he was born. 'I am, sir,' quoth he,
'of England, and my name is Thomas Cromwell. My father is a poor man,
and by his occupation a cloth-shearer. I am strayed from my country,
and am now come into Italy, with the camp of Frenchmen that were
overthrown at Garigliano, where I was the page to a footman, carrying
after him his pike and burganet.' Frescobald, partly considering the
present state of this young man, and partly for the love he bare to
the English nation, of whom he had received, in times past, sundry
pleasures, received him into his house, and with such courtesy
entertained his guest, that at his departure, when he was in mind to
return to his country, he provided such necessaries as he in any way
needed. He gave him both horse and new apparel, and sixteen ducats of
gold in his purse, to bring him into his country. Cromwell, rendering
his hearty thanks, took leave of his host, and returned into England.
This Cromwell was a man of noble courage, and heroical spirit, given
to enterprise great matters, very liberal, and a grave councillor,
&c. But to our purpose. At what time Cromwell was so highly favoured
of his prince, and advanced to such dignity as is aforesaid, Francis
Frescobald (as it many times happeneth to merchants) was, by many
misfortunes and great losses, cast back, and become very poor. For,
according to conscience and equity, he paid whatsoever was due to any
others from himself; but such debts as were owing unto him, he could
by no means obtain:  yet, calling further to remembrance that in
England, by certain merchants, there was due to him the sum of
fifteen thousand ducats, he so purposed with himself, that if he
could recover that money, he would well content himself, and no
longer deal in his trade of merchants, but quietly pass over the rest
of his days.

     "All things prepared for his journey, he, setting forward
towards England, at last arrived at London, having utterly forgotten
what courtesy long before he had showed to Cromwell; which is the
property always of a good nature, for a man to forget what benefits
he hath showed to others, but to keep in mind continually what he
hath received of others. Frescobald, thus being now arrived at
London, and there travelling earnestly about his business, it chanced
him, by the way, to meet with this nobleman, as he was riding towards
the court; whom, as soon as the said Lord Cromwell had espied, and
had earnestly beheld, he bethought with himself that he should be the
man of Florence, at whose hands, in times past, he had received so
gentle entertainment:  and thereupon suddenly alighting, (to the great
admiration of those that were with him,) in his arms he gently
embraced the stranger, and with a broken voice, scarce able to
refrain tears, he demanded if he were not Francis Frescobald the
Florentine. 'Yea, sir,' he answered, and your humble servant.' 'My
servant?' quoth Cromwell. 'No, as you have not been my servant in
times past, so will I not now account you otherwise than my great and
especial friend; assuring you that I have just reason to be sorry,
That you, knowing what I am, (or, at least, what I should be,) will
not let me understand of your arriving in this land; which, known
unto me, truly I should have paid part of that debt, which I confess
to owe you:  but, thanked be God! I have yet time. Well, sir, in
conclusion, you are heartily welcome:  but, having now weighty affairs
in my princes cause, you must hold me excused, that I can no longer
tarry with you. Therefore, at this time I take my leave, desiring
you, with the faithful mind of a friend, that you forget not this day
to come to my house to dinner.' And then, remounting his horse, he
passed to the court.

     "Frescobald, greatly marvelling with himself who this lord
should be, at last, after some pause his remembrance better called
home, he knew him to be the same, whom long before (as you have
heard) he had relieved in Florence; and thereat he not a little
joyed, especially considering how that, by his means, he should the
better recover his due.

     "The hour of dinner drawing near, he repaired to the house of
this honourable councillor, where, walking a while in his base court,
he attended his coming. The lord shortly returned from the court, and
no sooner dismounted, but he again embraced this gentleman with so
friendly a countenance, that both the lord admiral, and all the other
noblemen of the court, being then in his company, did not a little
marvel thereat. Which thing when the Lord Cromwell perceived, he
said, turning towards them, and holding Frescobald fast by the band,
'Do ye not marvel, my Lords,' quoth he, 'that I seem so glad of this
man? This is he by whose means I have achieved the degree of this my
present calling:  and because ye shall not be ignorant of his courtesy
when I greatly needed, I shall tell it you.' And so there declared he
unto them every thing in order, according as before hath been recited
unto you. His tale finished, holding him still by the hand, he
entered his house; and coming into the chamber where his dinner was
prepared, he sat him down to the table, placing his best-welcomed
guest next unto him.

     "The dinner ended, and the lords departed, he would know what
occasion had brought Frescobald to London. Francis, in few words,
opened his cause, truly telling, that from great wealth he was fallen
into poverty, and that his only portion to maintain the rest of his
life, was fifteen thousand ducats which were owing him in England,
and two thousand in Spain. Whereunto the Lord Cromwell, answering
again, said, Touching the things, Master Frescobald! that be already
past, although it cannot now be undone by man's power, nor by policy
called again, which hath happened unto you by the unstable condition
and mutability of this world, altering to and fro; yet is not your
sorrow so peculiar to yourself alone, but that, by the bond of mutual
love, I must also bewail with you this your state and condition: 
which state and condition of yours, though it may work in you matter
of just heaviness, yet, notwithstanding, to the intent you may
receive, in this your heavy distress, some consolation for your old
courtesy, showed to me in times past, the like courtesy now requireth
of me again, that I, likewise, should repay some portion of that debt
wherein I stand bound unto you; according as the part of a thankful
man bindeth me to do, in requiting your benefits on my part
heretofore received. And this further I avouch on the word of a true
friend, that during this life and state of mine, I will never fail to
do for you, wherein my authority may prevail to supply your lack and
necessity:  and so let these few words suffice to give you knowledge
of my friendly meaning. But let me delay the time no longer.

     "Then, taking him by the hand, he led him into his chamber,
whence, after that every man by his commandment was departed, he
locked fast the door. Then, opening a coffer full heaped with
treasure, he first took out sixteen ducats, and, delivering them to
Frescobald, he said; Lo here, my friend! is your money which you lent
me at my departure from Florence, and here are other ten which you
bestowed on my apparel, with ten more that you disbursed for the
horse I rode away on. But, considering you are a merchant, it seemeth
to me not honest to return your money without some consideration for
the long detaining of it. Take you, therefore, these four bags, and
in every one of them are four hundred ducats:  these you shall receive
and enjoy from the hands of your assured friend.'

     "Frescobald, although from great wealth he was brought to a low
ebb, and almost an utter decay, yet, expressing the virtue of a
modest mind, after gentle thanks given to the Lord Cromwell for his
exceeding kindness showed, courteously would have refused that which
was offered, had not the other enforced him against his will to
receive it. This done, he caused Frescobald to give him a note of the
names of all his debtors, and the sum that from every one of them was
owing him. This schedule he delivered to one of his servants, unto
whom he gave charge diligently to search out such men whose names
were therein contained, if they were within any part of the. realm;
and then straitly to charge them to make payment of those sums within
fifteen days, or else to abide the hazard of his displeasure. The
servant so well performed his master's commandment, that in very
short time they made payment of the whole sum; and if it had liked
Frescobald so to have demanded, they should have answered to the
uttermost, such commodity as the use of his money in so many years
would have given him profit:  but he, contented with his principal,
would demand no further; by which means he got both hearty love and
great estimation, and the more, for that he was so dear to the Lord
Cromwell, and so highly esteemed of him.

     And during all this time, Frescobald continually lodged in the
house of the Lord Cromwell, who ever gave him such entertainment as
he had right well deserved, and oftentimes moved him to abide here in
England, offering him the loan of threescore thousand ducats for the
space of four years, if he would continue, and make his bank in
London. But Frescobald, who desiredto return into his country, and
there quietly to continue the rest of his life, with the great favour
of the Lord Cromwell, after many thanks for his high and noble
entertainment, departed towards his desired home, where, richly
arriving, he gave himself quietly to live. But this wealth he small
time enjoyed, for in the first year of his return he died."

     So plentiful was the life of this man in such fruits, full of
singular gratitude and courtesy, that to rehearse all it would
require too long a tractation. Yet one example amongst many others I
may not overpass, whereby we may evidently consider, or rather marvel
at, the lowly mind of such a person in so high a state and place of
honour. For as he, coming with others of the lords of the council and
commissioners, to the house of Shene, about the examination of
certain monks, which there denied the king's supremacy, after the
examination done was there sitting at dinner, it chanced him to spy
afar off a certain poor man, who there served to sweep their cells
and cloisters, and to ring the bells:  whom when the Lord Cromwell had
well advised, he sent for the poor man to come unto him, and, before
all the table, most lovingly and friendly called him by his name,
took him by the hand, and asked how he did, with many other good
words; and turning therewith to the lords, "My lords!" quoth he, "see
you this poor man? This man's father hath been a great friend to me
in my necessity, and hath given me many a meal's meat." Then said he
unto the poor man, "Come unto me, and I will provide for thee, and
thou shalt not lack so long as I live." Such as were there present,
and saw and heard the same, being alive at the second edition hereof,
report it to be true.

     In this worthy and noble person, besides divers other eminent
virtues, three things especially are to be considered, to wit,
flourishing authority, excelling wisdom, and fervent zeal to Christ
and to his gospel. First, as touching his fervent zeal in setting
forward the sincerity of Christian faith, sufficient is to be seen
before by the injunctions, proclamations, and articles above
specified, that more cannot almost be wished in a nobleman, and
scarce the like hath been seen in any.

     Secondly, with his wisdom and policy no less singular, joined
with his Christian zeal, he brought great things to pass, as well on
this side the sea, as in the other parts beyond. But especially his
working was to nourish peace abroad with foreign realms, as may be
well, by the king's letters and instructions, sent by this means to
his ambassadors resident both with the emperor, the French king, and
the king of Scots, and also with the pope, may well appear; in all
whose courts, such watch and espial he had, that nothing there was
done, nor pretended, whereof he before had not intelligence. Neither
was there any spark of mischief kindling ever so little against the
king and the realm, which he, by wit and policy, did not quench and
keep down; and where policy would not serve to obtain peace, yet by
money he bought it out; so that during all the time of Cromwell's
prosperity, the king never had war with any foreign nation: 
notwithstanding, tha both the pope, the emperor, and the kings of
France and Scotland, were mightily bent and incensed against him.

     Thus, as the prudent policy of this man was ever circumspect
abroad, to stay the realm from foreign wars; so his authority was no
less occupied in keeping good order and rule at home:  first, in
hampering the popish prelates, and disappointing their subtle
devices; secondly, in bridling and keeping other unruly subjects
under subjection and discipline of the laws; whereby as he was a
succour and refuge to all godly persons, so was he a terror to the
evildoers; so that not the presence of him only, but also the hearing
of the coming of Cromwell, brake many frays, and much evil rule, as
well appeared by a certain notorious fray or riot, appointed to be
fought by a company of ruffians in the street of London called
Paternoster Row; where carts were set on both sides, prepared on
purpose to enclose them, that none might break in to part them. It
happened that as this desperate skirmish should begin, the Lord
Cromwell, coming the same time from the court through Paul's Church-
yard, and entering into Cheap, had intelligence of the great fray
toward, and because of the carts he could not come at them, but was
forced to go about the Little Conduit, and so came upon them through
Pannier Alley. Thus, as the conflict began to wax hot, and the people
were standing by in great expectation to see them fight, suddenly, at
the noise of the Lord Cromwell's coming, the camp brake up, and the
ruffians fled, neither could the carts keep in those so courageous
campers, but well was he that first could be gone. And so ceased this
tumultuous outrage, without any other parting; only through the
authority of the Lord Cromwell's name.

     One example more of the like affinity cometh here in mind,
which ought not to be omitted, concerning a certain servingman of the
like ruffianly order; who, thinking to dissever himself from the
common usage of all other men in strange newfangleness of fashions by
himself, (as many there be whom nothing doth please which is daily
seen and received,) used to go with his hair hanging about his ears
down unto his shoulders, after a strange monstrous manner,.
(counterfeiting belike the wild Irishmen, or else Crimisus, the
Trojan, whom Virgil speaketh of,) as one weary of his own English
fashion; or else as one who, ashamed to be seen like a man, would
rather go like a woman; or like to one of the Gorgon sisters; but
most of all like to himself; that is, like to a ruffian, that could
not tell how to go.

     As this ruffian, ruffling thus with his locks, was walking in
the streets, as chance was, who shouldmeet him but the Lord Cromwell!
who, beholding the deform and unseemly manner of his disguised going,
full of much vanity and hurtful example, called the man, to question
with him whose servant he was:  which being declared, then was it
demanded whether his master or any of his fellows so to go with such
hair about their shoulders as he did, or no:  which when he denied,
and was not able to yield any reason for refuge of that his monstrous
diguising, at length he fell to this excuse, that he had made a vow.
To this the Lord Cromwell answered again, that forasmuch as he had
made himself a votary, he would not force him to break his vow, but
until his vow should be expired, he should lie the mean time in
prison:  and so sent him immediately to the Marshalsea, where he
endured; till at length this Intonsus Cato, being persuaded by his
master to cut his hair, by suit and petition of friends, he was
brought again to the Lord Cromwell, with his head polled according to
the accustomed sort of his other fellows; and so was dismissed.

     Hereunto also pertaineth the example of Friar Bartley, who,
wearing still his friar's cowl after the suppression of religious
houses, Cromwell, coming through Paul's Church-yard, and espying him
in Rheines's shop, "Yea," said he, "will not that cowl of yours he
left off yet? And if I hear, by one o'clock, that this apparel be not
changed, thou shalt be hanged immediately, for example to all
others." And so, putting his cowl away, he durst never wear it after.

     If the same Lord Cromwell, who could not abide this servingman
so disfigured in his hair, were now in these our days alive, with the
same authority which then he had, and saw these new-fangled fashions
of attire, used here amongst us both of men and women, I suppose
verily, that neither these monstrous ruffs, nor these prodigious
hose, and prodigal, or rather hyperbolical, barbarous breeches,
(which seem rather like barrels than breeches,) would have any place
in England. In which no measurable excess of vesture this I have to
marvel:  First, how these servingmen, which commonly have nothing else
but their wages, and that so slender and bare, can maintain such
slops, so huge and so sumptuous, which commonly stand them in more
than their three years' wages do come unto. Secondly, I marvel that
their masters and lords (who shall yield to God account of their
servants' doings) do not search and try out their servants' walks,
how they come by these expenses wherewith to uphold this bravery,
seeing their stipendiary wages, and all revenues else they have, will
not extend thereunto. Thirdly, this most of all is to be marvelled,
that magistrates, who have in their hands the ordering and guiding of
good laws, do not provide more severely for the needful reformation
of these enormities. But here we may well see, and truly this may
say, "that England once had a Cromwell."

     Long it were to recite what innumerable fits this worthy
councillor, by his prudent policy, his grave authority, and perfect
zeal, wrought and brought to pass in the public realm, and especially
in the church of England; what good orders he established, what
wickedness and vices he suppressed, what corruptions he reformed,
what abuses he brought to light; what crafty jugglings, what
idolatrous deceptions, and superstitious illusions, he detected and
abolished out of the church. What posterity will ever think the
church of the pope, pretending such religion, to have been so wicked,
so long to abuse the people's eyes with an old rotten stock, called
the Rood of Grace, wherein a man should stand enclosed, with a
hundred wires within the rood, to make the image goggle with the
eyes, to nod with his head, to hang the lip, to move and shake his
jaws, according as the value was of the gift which was offered? If it
were a small piece of silver, the image would hang a frowning lip; if
it were a piece of gold, then should his jaws go merrily. Thus
miserably were the people of Christ abused, their souls seduced,
their senses beguiled, and their purses spoiled, till this idolatrous
forgery, at last, by Cromwell's means, was disclosed, and the image,
with all his engines, showed openly at Paul's Cross, and there torn
in pieces by the people. The like was done by the blood of Hayles,
which, in like manner, by Cromwell was brought to Paul's Cross, and
there proved to be the blood of a duck. Who would have judged, but
that the maid of Kent had been a holy woman, and a prophetess
inspired, had not Cromwell and Cranmer tried her at Paul's Cross, to
be a strong and lewd impostor. What should I speak of Darvel
Gartheren, of the rood of Chester, of Thomas Becket, of our Lady of
Walsingham, with an infinite multitude more of the like affinity? all
which stocks and blocks of cursed idolatry, Cromwell, stirred up by
the providence of God, removed them out of the people's way, that
they might walk more safely in the sincere service of Almighty God.

     While the Lord Cromwell was thus blessedly occupied in
profiting the commonwealth, and in purging the church of Christ, it
happened to him, as commonly it doth to all good men, that where any
excellency of virtue appeareth, there envy creepeth in; and where
true piety seeketh most after Christ, there some persecution
followeth withal.

     Thus, I say, as he was labouring in the commonwealth, and doing
good to the poor afflicted saints, helping them out of trouble, the
malice of his enemies so wrought, continually hung for matter against
him, that they never ceased, till in the end, false trains and crafty
surmises, they brought him out of the king's favour.

     The chief and principal enemy against him was Stephen Gardiner,
bishop of Winchester, who, ever disdaining and envying the state and
felicity of the Lord Cromwell, and now taking his occasion by the
marriage of Lady Anne of Cleves, being a stranger and foreigner, put
in the king's ears what a perfect thing it were for the quiet of the
realm, and establishment of the king's succession, to have an English
queen, and prince that were mere English; so that, in conclusion, the
king's affection, the more it was diminished from the late married
Anne of Cleves, the less favour he bare unto Cromwell. Besides this
Gardiner, there lacked not other back friends also, and ill-willers
in the court about the king, which little made for Cromwell, both for
his religion which they maligned, and for other private grudges also,
incident by the way.
 Over and beside which, it is, moreover, supposed,
that some part of displeasure might arise against him by reason of a
certain talk which happened a little before at Lambeth; at what time
the king, after the making of. the Six Articles, sent the said Lord
Cromwell his vicegerent, with the two dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk,
with all the lords of the parliament, to Lambeth, to dine with the
archbishop, (who mightily had disputed and alleged in the parliament
against the said articles,) to cheer and comfort his daunted spirits
again.

     There the said Cromwell, with the other noble lords, sitting
with the archbishop at his table in talk, as every lord brought forth
his sentence in commendation of Cranmer, to signify what good will
both the king and they bare unto him; among the rest, one of the
company, entering into a comparison  between the said Thomas Cranmer
and Thomas Wolsey, late cardinal of York, declared that Cranmer, in
his judgment, was much to be preferred for his mild and gentle
nature, whereas the cardinal was a stubborn and a churlish prelate,
and one that could never abide any noble man. "And that," said he
"know you well enough, my Lord Cromwell! for he was your master,"
&c.:  At these words the Lord Cromwell, being somewhat touched to hear
the cardinal's service so cast in his teeth, inferred again, saying,
that he could not deny but he was servant some time to Cardinal
Wolsey, neither did repent the same; for he received of him both fee,
meat, and drink, and other commodities:  but yet he was never so far
in love with him, as to have waited upon him to Rome, if he had been
chosen pope, as he understood that he would have done, if the case
had so fallen out. Which when the other had denied to be true,
Cromwell still persisted, affirming the same, and showing, moreover,
what number of florins he should have received, to be his admiral,
and to have safely conducted him to Rome, in case he had been elected
bishop of Rome.  The party, not a little moved with these words, told
him, he lied. The other again affirmed it to be true. Upon this,
great and high words rose between them; which contention, although it
was, through entreaty of the archbishop and other nobles, somewhat
pacified for the time, yet it might be, that some fitter root of
grudge remained behind, which afterwards grew unto him to some
displeasure. And this was A. D. 1539, in the month of July.

     After this, the next year following, which was 1540, in the
month of April, was holden a parliament; which, after divers
prorogations, was continued till the month of-July. On the tenth of
June in the said year, the Lord Cromwell, being in the council-
chamber, was suddenly apprehended, and committed to the Tower of
London:  whereat as many good men, who knew nothing but truth by him,
did lament and prayed heartily for him, so more there were, on the
contrary side, that rejoiced, especially of the religious sort, and
of the clergy, such as had been in some dignity before in the church,
and now, by his means, were put from it. For indeed such was his
nature, that in all his doings he could not abide any kind of popery,
or of false religion creeping under hypocrisy; and less could he
abide the ambitious pride of popish prelacy, which, professing all
humility, was so elated in pride, that kings could not rule in their
own realms for them. These snuffing prelates as he could never abide,
so they again hated him as much, which was the cause of shortening
his days, and of bringing him to his end; so that on the seventeenth
day of the month aforesaid, he was attainted by parliament.

     In that attainder, divers and sundry crimes, surmises,
objections, and accusations, were brought against him:  but chiefly,
and above all others, he was charged and accused of heresy, for that
he was a supporter of them whom they recounted for heretics; as
Barnes, Clark, and many others, whom, by his authority, and letters
written to sheriffs and justices in divers shires, he had rescued,
and discharged out prison. Also that he did divulgate and disperse
abroad among the king's subjects great numbers of books, containing
(as they said) manifest matter of much heresy, diffidence, and
misbelief. Item, that he caused to be translated into our English
tongue, books comprising matter expressly against the sacrament of
the altar; and that after the translation thereof, he commended and
maintained the same for good and Christian doctrine. Over and besides
all this, they brought in certain witnesses, (what they were, the
attainder expresseth not,) which most especially pressed (or rather
oppressed) him with heinous words spoken against the king in the
church of St. Peter the Poor, in the month of March, in the thirtieth
year of the king's reign; which words if they be true, as the
attainder doth purport, three things I have here much to marvel at.
First, if his adversaries had so sure hold and matter against him,
then what should move them to make such hasty speed, in all post
haste to have him despatched and rid out of the way, and in no case
could abide him to come to his purgation? which if he might have
done, it is not otherwise to bethought, but he would easily have
cleared himself thereof.

     Secondly, this I marvel, that if the words had been so heinous
against the king as his enemies did pretend, why then did those
witnesses who heard those words in St. Peter's church in the
thirtieth year of the king's reign, conceal the said words of such
treason so long, the space almost of two years, and now uttered the
same in the two-and-thirtieth year of the king's reign, in the month
of July.

     Thirdly, here is again to be marvelled, if the king had known
or believed these words to be true, and that Cromwell had been indeed
such a traitor to his person, why then did the king, so shortly
after, lament his death, wishing to have his Cromwell alive again?
What prince will wish the life of him whom he suspecteth undoubtedly
to be a traitor to his life and person? Whereby it may appear what
judgment the king had of Cromwell in himself, howsoever the
parliament, by sinister information, was otherwise incensed to judge
upon him.

     Such malicious makebates about princes and parliaments never
lacked in commonweals. By such King Athelstan was incensed to kill
his brother Edwin. So was King Edward the Second deposed. So
likewise, when King Richard the Second was once brought into the
Tower, what crimes and accusations were laid against him in the
parliament! So was Humphrey, the good duke of Gloucester the king's
uncle, by Henry Beaufort, bishop of Winchester, and others, in the
parliament holden at Bury, arrested as a traitor, and falsely made
away. What great treason was in the words of him, who, dwelling in
Cheapside, at the sign of the Crown, said merrily to his son, that if
he lived, he would make him heir to the crown? and yet was he
therefore attainted and judged for a traitor. In the time of King
Henry the Eighth how was that parliament incensed, wherein both Queen
Anne was falsely condemned, and Queen Elizabeth her daughter as
falsely disherited? To omit here the attainder of the duke of
Buckingham, wrought by the cardinal of York; of the Lord Cobham
likewise, and Sir Roger Acton:  if the cause of the Lord Henry, late
earl of Surrey, were well tried out, peradventure no such heinous
purpose of any treason should be found therein, as then was made. Who
incensed the late duke of Somerset to behead his own brother, but
such makebates as these? and afterwards, when the said duke himself
was attainted for a traitor, and condemned for a felon, a briber, and
extortioner, how was the parliament then incensed? Adam Damlip
received of Cardinal Pole at Rome but a silly crown in way of alms,
and there-for, by means of Stephen Gardiner, was attainted for a
traitor. George Egles did but read sometimes in woods, and by the
said Gardiner was also condemned, and suffered as a traitor. Not that
I here speak or mean against the high courts of parliaments of this
our realm, necessarily assembled for the commonwealth, to whom I
always attribute their due reverence and authority. But, as it
happeneth sometimes in general councils, which, though they be ever
so general, yet notwithstanding sometimes they may and do err in
weighty matters of religion; so, likewise, they that say that princes
and parliaments may be misinformed sometimes, by some sinister heads,
in matters civil and politic, do not therein derogate or impair the
high estate of parliaments, but rather give wholesome admonition to
princes and parliament men, to be more circumspect and vigilant what
counsel they shall admit, and what witnesses they do credit. For
private affection, which commonly beareth a great stroke in all
societies and doings of men, creepeth sometimes into such general
councils, and into prince's courts also, either too much amplifying
things that be but small, making mountains of molehills, or else too
much extenuating things that be of themselves great and weighty,
according as it is truly said by the poet Juvenal, "As a man is
friended, so is his matter ended;" and "Where the hedge is low, a man
may lightly make large leaps;" or rather, to speak after the French
phrase, " He that is disposed  tohave his dog killed, first maketh
men believe that he is mad." And thus much having declared touching
the matter of his accusation, the rest I refer to the high parliament
of that Mighty King, who shall one day bring all things to perfect
light.

     In the mean season, howsoever the cause of the Lord Cromwell
standeth true or false, this is certain, that Stephen Gardiner lacked
not a head, nor yet assisters, which cunningly could fetch this
matter about, and watch their time, when the king, being disposed to
marry another wife, which was the Lady Katharine Howard, immediately
after the beheading of the Lord Cromwell, did repudiate Lady Anne of
Cleves, which otherwise it is to be thought, during the life of
Cromwell could not so well be brought to pass.

     But these things being now done and past, let us pass them
over, and return again from whence we digressed, that is, to the Lord
Cromwell, being now attainted and committed to the Tower; who, so
long as he went with full sail of fortune, how moderately and how
temperately he did ever bear himself in his estate, before hath been
declared. So now the said Lord Cromwell, always one man, by the
contrary wind of adversity being overblown, received the same with no
less constancy and patience of a Christian heart; neither yet was he
so unprovided of counsel and forecast, but that he did foresee this
tempest long before it fell, and also prepared for the same; for two
years before, smelling the conspiracy of his adversaries, and fearing
what might happen, he called unto him his servants, and there,
showing unto them in what a slippery state he stood, and also
perceiving some stormy weather already to gather, required them to
look diligently to their order and doings, lest, through their
default, any occasion might rise against him. And furthermore, before
the time of his apprehension, such order he took for his servants,
that many of them, especially the younger brethren, which had little
else to take unto, had honestly left for them in their friends' hands
to relieve them; whatsoever should him befall.

     Briefly, such a loving and kind master he was to his servants,
that be provided aforehand almost for them all; insomuch, that he
gave to twelve children, which were his musicians, twenty pounds a
piece, and so committed them to their friends, of whom some yet
remain alive, who both enjoyed the same, and also gave record of this
to be true.

     Furthermore, being in the Tower a prisoner, how quietly he bare
it, how valiantly he behaved himself, how gravely and discreetly be
answered and entertained the commissioners sent unto him, it is
worthy noting. Whatsoever articles and interregatories they
propounded, they could put nothing unto him, either concerning
matters ecclesiastical or temporal, wherein he was not more ripened,
and more furnished in every condition, than they themselves.

     Amongst the rest of those commissioners who came unto him, one
there was, whom the Lord Cromwell desired to carry for him a letter
to the king; which when he refused, saying that he would carry no
letter to the king from a traitor, then the Lord Cromwell desired him
at least to do from him a message to the king. To that the other was
contented, and granted, so that it were not against his allegiance.
Then the Lord Cromwell, taking witness of the other lords, what he
had promised, "You shall commend me," said he, "to the king, and tell
him, by that he hath so well tried and throughly proved you as I have
done, he shall find you as false a man as ever came about him."

     Besides this, he wrote also a letter from the Tower to the
king, whereof when none durst take the carriage upon him, Sir Ralph
Sadler (whom he also had preferred to the king before, being ever
trusty and faithful unto him) went unto the king to understand his
pleasure, whether he would permit him to bring the letter or not;
which when the king had granted, the said Master Sadler, as he was
required, presented the letter unto the king, which he commanded
thrice to be read unto him, insomuch that the king seemed to be moved
therewith.

     At last, three years after all this was done, Cromwell being
circumvented with the malicious craft and policy of divers, that, by
occasion of mention made touching the king's divorce with the Lady
Anne of Cleves, he had said these words, "That he wished his dagger
in him that had dissolved or broken that marriage;" hereupon it was
objected against him by Thomas, duke of Norfolk, and others, that it
was spoken against the king, who, at that time being in love with
Katharine Howard, was the chief cause and author of that divorce.
Whereupon divers of the nobles conspiring against him, some for
hatred, and some for religion's sake, he was cast into the Tower of
London; where, as it happened, (as it were by a certain fatal
destiny,) that whereas he, a little before, had made a law, that
whosoever was cast into the Tower, should be put to death without
examination, he himself suffered by the same law. It is said, (which
also I do easily credit,) that he made this violent law, not so much
for any cruelty or tyranny, as only for a certain secret purpose, to
have entangled the bishop of Winchester, who, albeit he was, without
doubt, the most violent adversary of Christ and his religion,
notwithstanding, God, peradventure, would not have his religion set
forth by any wicked cruelty, or otherwise than was meet and
convenient.

     Notwithstanding, by reason of the act of parliament before
passed, the worthy and noble Lord Cromwell, oppressed by his enemies,
and condemned in the Tower, and not coming to his answer, on the
twenty-eighth day of July, A. D. 1540, was brought to the scaffold on
Tower-bill, where he said thse words following: 

     "I am come hither to die, and not to purge myself, as some
think, peradventure, that I will:  for if I should so do, I were a
very wretch and a miser. I am, by the law, condemned to die, and
thank my Lord God that hath appointed me this death for mine offence.
For since the time that I have had years of discretion, I have lived
a sinner, and offended my Lord God; for the which I ask him heartily
forgiveness. And it is not unknown to many of you, that I have been a
great travailler in this world, and being but of a base degree, was
called to high estate; and since the time I came thereunto I have
offended my prince, for the which I ask him heartily forgiveness, and
beseech you all to pray to God with me, that He will forgive me. O
Father, forgive me! O Son, forgive me! O Holy Ghost, forgive me! O
three persons in one God, forgive me! And now I pray you that be
here, to bear me record, I die in the catholic faith, not doubting in
any article of my faith, no, nor doubting in any sacrament of the
church. Many have slandered me, and reported that I have been a
bearer of such as have maintained evil opinions; which is untrue:  but
I confess, that like as God, by his Holy Spirit, doth instruct us in
the truth, so the devil is ready to seduce us; and I have been
seduced. But bear me witness, that I die in the catholic faith of the
holy church. And I heartily desire you to pray for the king's Grace,
that he may long live with you in health and prosperity; and that
after him, his son, Prince Edward, that goodly imp, may long reign
over you. And once again I desire you to pray for me, that so long as
life remaineth in this flesh, I waver nothing in my faith."

     And so making his prayer, which was long, but not so long as
both godly and learned, kneeling on his knees he spake these words,
the effect whereof here followeth.

A prayer that the Lord Cromwell said at the hour of his death.

     "O Lord Jesu! which art the only health of all men living, and
the everlasting life of them which die in thee, I, wretched sinner,
do submit myself wholly unto thy most blessed will; and being sure
that the thing cannot perish which is committed unto thy mercy,
willingly now I leave this frail and wicked flesh, in sure hope that
thou wilt, in better wise, restore it to me again at the last day, in
the resurrection of the just. I beseech thee, most merciful Lord Jesu
Christ! that thou wilt, by thy grace, make strong my soul against all
temptations, and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against all
the assaults of the devil. I see and acknowledge that there is in
myself no hope of salvation, but all my confidence, hope, and trust,
is in, thy most merciful goodness. I have no merits nor good works
which I may allege before thee. Of sins and evil works, alas! I see a
great heap; but yet, through thy mercy, I trust to be in the number
of them to whom thou wilt not impute their sins; but wilt take and
accept me for righteous and just, and to be the inheritor of
everlasting life. Thou, merciful Lord! wast born for my sake; thou
didst suffer both hunger and thirst for my sake; thou didst teach,
pray, and fast for my sake; all thy holy actions and works thou
wroughtest for my sake; thou sufferedst most grievous pains and
torments for my sake:  finally, thou gavest thy most precious body and
thy blood to be shed on the cross for my sake. Now, most merciful
Saviour! let all these things profit me, that thou freely hast done
for me, which hast given thyself also for me. Let thy blood cleanse
and wash away the spots and foulness of my sins. Let thy
righteousness hide and cover my unrighteousness. Let the merits of
thy passion and blood-shedding be satisfaction for my sins. Give me,
Lord! thy grace, that the faith of my salvation in thy blood waver
not in me, but may ever be firm and constant:  that the hope of thy
mercy and life everlasting never decay in me:  that love wax not cold
in me; and finally, that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome
with the fear of death. Grant me, merciful Saviour! that when death
bath shut up the eyes of my body, yet the eyes of my soul may still
behold and look upon thee; and when death bath taken away the use of
my tongue, yet my heart may cry and say unto thee, Lord! into thy
hands I commend my soul; Lord Jesu I receive my spirit. Amen."

     And thus his prayer made, after he had godly and lovingly
exhorted them that were about him on the scaffold, he quietly
committed his soul into the hands of God; and so patiently suffered
the stroke of the axe, by a ragged and butcherly miser, which very
ungoodly performed the office.

     This valiant soldier and captain of Christ, the aforesaid Lord
Cromwell, as he was most studious of himself in a flagrant zeal to
set forward the truth of the gospel, seeking all means and ways to
beat down false religion and to advance the true, so he always
retained unto him and had about him such as could be found helpers
and furtherers of the same; in the number of whom were sundry and
divers fresh and quick wits, pertaining to his family; by whose
industry and ingenious labours, divers and excellent ballads and
books were contrived and set abroad, concerning the suppression of
the pope and all popish idolatry. Amongst which, omitting a great
sort that we might here bring in, yet this small treatise here
following, called The Fantassie of Idolatrie, we thought not to pass
over, containing in it, as in a brief sum, the great mass of 
idolatrous pilgrimages; for the posterity hereafter 'to understan ,
what then was used in England.

A Booke entitled the Fantassie of Idolatrie.

All Christen people
Beyng under the steple
Of Jesu Christes faith!
Marke and drawe nere,
And ye shall here
What the Holy Scripture sayth.

First, I wyll begyn
Your hartes to wyn
With nother fable nor lye;
But with God's testament,
As is moste expedient,
Concerning idolatrie: 

Wherin we myght se
Great authoritie,
Sauyng it were to long
For to rehearse,
Nowe, verse by verse,
In this same lytle song.

But I shall shewe,
In wordes fewe,
The summe of the whole effecte,
To them of good mynde,
That be wylling to fynde
The trade of idolatrous sect.

Fyrst, we will gather,
Of our heavenly Father,
Among his commaundmentes, ten;
Written as no fables,
But as in Moyse's tables,
To be kept of all Christen men.

Where that he sayth,
To the chyldren of fayth,
'I am your God and Kyng;
Other gods haue ye none, 
But me alone,
To love aboue all thing.'

Idols and images
Haue none in usage,
(Of what mettel so euer they be,)
Graued or carued;
My wyle be obserued,
Or els can ye not loue me.'

'Then I, a jealous God,
Wyll scourge with my rod;
I may not forbeare my hand: 
And specially
For idolatry.
My power who can withstand!'

The prophetes all,
In generall,
Of idols, as ye may se,
Put us from doubte,
And set them out,
In their colours, as they ought to be.

Saynt Paule also,
With many saintes mo,
Against idols, with al their myght,
Perceiuing suche swarmes,
Did blase their armes,
And brought them out to lyght.

This should suffise
All those that be wyse;
But we, of a stoubourne mynde,
Be so harde harted,
Wyll not be conuerted,
But rather styll be blynde.

Ronnyng hyther and thyther,
We cannot tell whither,
In offryng candels and pence
To stones and stockes,
And to olde rotten blockes,
That came, we know not from whense.

To Walsyngham[See note] a gaddyng,
To Cantorbury a maddyng,
As men distraught of mynde;
With fewe clothes on our backes,
But an image of waxe,
For the lame and for the blynde.

To Hampton, to Ipswyche,
To Harforth, to Shordyche,
With many mo places of pryce;
As, to our Lady of Worcester,
And the weet rode of Chester,
With the blessed Lady of Penryce.

To Leymster, to Kyngstone,
To Yorke, to Donyngton,
To Redying, to the chyld of grace;
To Wynsore, to Waltam,
To Ely, to Caultam,
Bare foted and bare legged apace.

To Saynt Earth, a right,
Where, in the dark nyght
Many juglyng casts hath be done;
To Saynt Augers rotten bones
That ran away for the nones;
To the crosse that groweth at Chaldon.

To the good Holy Ghoste,
That paynted poste,
Abyding at Basyngstoke;
Whiche doth as muche good
As a god made of wood,
And, yet, he beareth a great stroke.

To the holy blond of Hayles,
With your fyngers and nayles,
All that we may scratche and wynne;
Yet it woulde not be seen,
Except you were shryven,
And clene from all deadly synne.

There, were we flocked
Lowted and mocked;
For, nowe, it is knowen to be
But the blond of a ducke,
That long did sucke
The thrifte, from euery degre.

To Pomfret, to Wylsdon,
To Saynt Anne of Bucston,
To Saynt Mighels Mount also;
But, to reken all,
My wyttes be too small,
For, God knoweth, there be many mo!

To Saynt Syth for my purse;
Saynt Loye sane my horse;
For my teth to Saynt Apolyne
To Saynt Job for the poxe;
Saynt Luke save myne oxe;
Saynt Anthony save my swyne!

To Maister John Shorne,
That blessed man borne;
For the ague to hym we apply,
Whiche jugeleth with a bote
I beshrowe his herte rote
That wyle truste him, and it be I!

Suche was our truste,
Suche was our luste,
Upon creature to call and crye;
As men did please,
For every disease,
To haue a god peculiarly.

Blessed Saynt Sauiour,
For his noughty behauiour,
That dwelt not far from the stewes;
For causyng infidelitie,
Hath lost his dignitie
Of him we shall heare more newes.

The swete rode of Rambisbery,
Twenty myle from Maumbysbery,
Was oft times put in feare;
And nowe, at the laste,
He hath a brydling caste,
And is become, I wote not wheare.

Yet, hath it been saide,
His virtue so wayde,
That sixteen oxen and mo,
Were not able to carry
This rode from Rambisbery,
Though he toke seuen horses also: 

Whiche is a great lye,
For, the truth to trye
His virtue is not worth a bean;
For one man toke hym downe,
From his churche and towne
Thre men conueyed him cleane.

Thus ran we about
To seke idols out,
Wandryng farre and nere;
Thynkying the power
Of our blessed. Sauiour
In other places more then there.

But now some may ronne,
And, when they haue done,
Their idols they shall not finde;
They haue had such checkes,
That hath broke their neckes: 
Holde fast that be left behynde!

For the rode of grace
Hath lost his place,
And is rubbed on the gall;
For false deuotion
Hath lost his promotion,
And is broken in peces small.

He was made to jogle,
His eyes would gogle,
He wold bend his browes and frowne;
With his head he wold nod
Like a proper young god,
His shaftes would go up and downe.

The saying was: 
That this rode of grace
And our Lady of Walsyngham,
Should haue bene married,
Sauing they taried
To spie a tyme howe and whan.

For some time in the nyght,
If the peeple say ryght,
As two lovers eche others loue to procure,
They did mete very oft: 
Whereby it was thought,
That Lady and he had bene sure.

Now the rode is dead,
And can not her wed,
Death gaue him so sore a stroke,
That it cost him his lyfe,
And lost hym his wyfe,
The rychest of all Northfolke.

But if he hadde lyued,
She had provided,
With suche goodes as she wan,
(Though he neuer had worked
But like an idoll lurked,)
To finde hym lyke an honest man.

And the rode had a gyfte
To make great shyfte,
With his bowget under his cote;
To haue gotten their lyuing,
Ewen with false iugling,
Though she had neuer erned grote.

Also Delver Gathaerne,
As (saieth the Welcheman)
Brought outlawes out of hell,
Is come with spere and shelde,
In harneys to burne in Smythfielde;
For in Wales he may not dwell.

Then Forest the fryer
That obstynate lyer,
That wyllingly is dead;
In his contumacy,
The gospell dyd deny,
And the kyng to be supreme head.

At Saynt Marget Patens,
The rode is gone thens,
And stoele away by nyght;
With his tabernacle and crosse,
With all that there was,
And is gone away quyghte.

Yet haue we thought,
That these idols haue wrought
Myracles, in many a place,
Upon age and youth;
When, in very truth,
They were done by the devils grace.

For the cursed deuyll,
The mayster of euyll,
To get us under his winges,
Hath such a condition,
By God's permission,
To worke right wonderful thinges.

For when they bored holes
In the roodes' back of poles,
Which, as some men saye, dyd speake,
Then lay he still as a stocke,
Receyued there many a knocke,
And did not ones crie 'creake.'

Yet offer what ye wolde,
Were it otes, sylver, or golde
Pyn, poynt, brooche, or rynge,
The churche were as then,
Such charitable men,
That they would refuse nothyng.

But now may we see,
What gods they be,
Euen puppets, maumats and elfes: 
Throw them downe thryse,
They can not aryse,
Not onse, to helpe them seines.

Thus were we poore soules
Begyled with idolles,
With fayned myracles and lyes,
By the deuyll and his docters,
The pope and his procters
That, with such, haue blend our eyes.

For they were the souldiers
Of those idols and wonders,
In euery abbey and towne,
Like a syght of false deacons: 
Wherefore all men rekyns,
For suche juglyng, 'they shall downe.'

For it was great reuth,
To se age and yeuth
To be blynde after this facion;
But, thanke we our Lorde,
That them hath abhorde,
And had upon us compassion!

Besydes these stockes and stones,
Haue we not had, of late, traytors bones,
Thus their trumpery to maintain?
Whiche is a token, verely,
They go about most earnestly
To bryng in superstition again!

With dyvers other trickes,
Whiche sore in mens' consciences stickes: 
But to Christ let us all pray!
To plucke it up, by the hard rote,
(Seeing there is none other bote,)
And utterly to banyshe it away.

And now, to make an end: 
Lorde! we beseche Thee to sende
Us, peace and tranquillitie;
And, that of thy mere mercy and grace,
Within short tyme and space,
To illumine us with thy sincere veritie!

Note:  "The image of our Lady at Walsingham was so famous in former
times that even foreigners came on pilgrimage to visit it. Erasmus
has given us a description of the chapel or shrine in which it was
contained, and which appears to have been a distinct building from
the priory church. Henry the Third went thither in his twenty-sixth
year. Edward the First in his ninth and twenty-fifth years. Edward
the Second in his ninth year. Edward the Third in his thirty-fifth
year. John de Mountford, earl of Bretaigne, came over to visit it in
the thirty-fifth of Edward the Third. David Bruce, king of Scotland,
in the thirty-eighth year of Edward the Third. Henry the Sixth went
there in 1455. Henry the Seventh ordered an image of silver, gilt, to
be set up before it, in his will; and Henry the Eighth and his first
queen made more than one visit to it. Sir Henry Spelman says, that
when he was a youth, the tradition was that Henry the Eighth had
walked barefoot from the town of Barsham to the chapel of our Lady,
and presented her with a necklace of great value. This famous image,
however, upon the change of belief, was taken from Walsingham to
Chelsea, near London, and there burnt, the thirtieth year of Henry
the
Eighth." See Dugdale, vol. vi. p. 71, Lond. 1825.—FOX'S MARTYRS.
SEELEY

END OF PART THREE

GLOSSARY
Of obsolete words, or words used in an obsolete sense

Abject: (N) An outcast, low scoundrel  (V) To humble oneself
Abroach: To set abroach = to start something one cannot or will not 
stop
Accombred : Burdened
Accompt: Account
Accustomably: Normally
Acoluthes: Acolytes
Adjure : To bind under penalty of an oath
Advocation: Praying to the saints
Advoutry: Adultery
Advowson: The right of appointment to a benefice
Affection: A disposition or emotional attitude towards something 
Affiance: Trust
After-clap: A blow struck unexpectedly at an opponent who had thought 
the fight was over.
Againstond, againstand: Withstand, defeat
Agnize: To acknowledge
Ale-stake: An alehouse sign
Allege: To cite in argument
Almose: Alms
Almous: Of or relating to almsgiving or charity
Ambage: Roundabout or deceitfully ambiguous speech; legal 
technicalities
Amerce: To fine or tax heavily
Anences : Relating to; as anences = as regards 
Annat: The income of a diocese or benefice for the first year of a new 
appointee's tenure, which was given to the Pope. 
Annoiling: Anointing with sacred oil
Antelation: A right of preference or precedence 
Apertly : Openly
Apostoil: The pope
Appair: To damage or weaken
Appellatores: One who makes a false accusation for a reward
Appliable to their beck: Ready to obey them
Appone: To make use of
Appose: To interrogate or question in court
Arectet: Raised up
Arrear: To gather and prepare an army
Ascited: Summoned
Assay: Formally tasting food before giving it to a king or other 
important person
Assize: To impose or assess a tax; or, to set the price of a staple 
foodstuff etc.
Assoil: To pardon, absolve
Astonied: Astonished
Astonyings: Astonishment, confusion
Auditory: Audience
Auter: Altar
Avouch: To declare publicly
Avowe: Vow
Awmbry: A storehouse
Ayens : Against
Baily : Bailiff, steward
Ballets: Ballads
Band: Agreement, contract
Ban-dog: A big savage dog
Bassa: A Turkish general or pasha
Bate: Debate, strife
Beadman, Beadsman: A person employed or appointed to pray for others
Bead-roll: A long list of names
Bearing sheet: A winding-sheet or shroud in which a corpse is wrapped 
for burial
Bearward: A keeper or trainer of performing bears
Beetle: A mallet
Behanged: Decorated with hanging tapestries etc.
Behewed: Hacked with an axe
Behight: Gave, given
Belly-cheer: Gluttony
Bel-wether: The best sheep in a flock
Bene, ben: Are
Benemen, Benomin: Deprive, take away from
Bestead: Beset
Beth: Are, is
Bewray: To betray
Blaze: To proclaim or declare
Blemished: Disconcerted
Bliue: Believe 
Bolt: To sift
Bonchief: Good fortune, benefit
Bosom sermon: A sermon learned by heart and recited
Bounce: To thump
Brable: To quarrel loudly
Brary: One who brays or talks nonsense
Brast : Burst
Brenn: Burn
Brennen: Burn
Bribe: To steal
Brim: Brightly shining
Bristow: Bristol
Bruit: A noise
Buckler: A shield
Bug: A ghost, monster or other terrifying thing
Bushment: An ambush
Butt: An archery range
Buxom: Obedient
Buxumnesse: Obedience
By-cavillation: Legal quibbling or trickery
Byelden: Build
Byhoten: Promised
Byneme, Bynome: Deprive, take away from
Camping cure: A benefice which involves serving God by warfare
Canicular: In canicular days:  dog-days, early August
Canivise : Apparently a nonce-word invented by Foxe; presumably "To 
make into a dog"
Canning: Memorizing
Canvassed: Beaten, knocked about, defeated
Capernaitical: Believing in the Catholic doctrine of 
transubstantiation
Carle: A low churl or villain
Casule: A chasuble
Cavillations: Legal quibbles or trickery
Celsitude: High rank, majesty; your celsitude = your highness
Cense: To bless with incense
Certes: Certainly
Chafe: A fit of temper; fury
Chaffare : Merchandise
Channel: Gutter
Chap-men: Merchants
Chaps: Fissures
Chargeous: Dependent upon
Chart: A charter or official decree.   Blank chart = a blank royal 
decree to be filled in with the names etc. of those it will refer to 
Cheeping: Flattering words
Cheer: Facial expression
Chequer: In chequer matters:  Lawsuits relating to the collection of 
royal revenue
Chesille: A chasuble
Chimer: A loose gown with red sleeves, worn by a bishop
Chisil : A chasuble
Chrismatory: A sacred anointing
Chrisoms: Chrism, a holy oil used for anointing
Civilian: A lawyer specialising in civil law.
Clamper: To botch together
Clennere: To clean, absolve
Clepe: Call
Cloisterer: A monk or nun who stays in a monastery or convent; opposed 
to a friar, who wanders around begging.
Closter: An enclosure
Coact: To coerce
Coactive: Coercive
Coadjutor: An assistant
Cockle: A weed of corn fields (Lychnis githago) 
Cog: To foist or publish a forged document
Collateral: Of equal rank; one of the joint holders of an office
Collation: 1) Appointment of a clergyman to a benefice  2) A 
commentary on scripture
Colleginer: A fellow of a college
Comfortable: Comforting
Commencement: A conference
Comminatory: A sealed-off place, a cloister
Commodity: Advantage
Compter: A lock-up
Concion: A public speech 
Concupiscence: Overpowering desire (not necessarily sexual)
Confute: To prove wrong
Congruent : Appropriate, suitable
Conjunction adversative: A phrase (beginning with e.g. but or however) 
qualifying or contradicting the one before
Conning: Wisdom
Contemn : To despise
Contentation: Content, satisfaction
Contumacy: Contemptuous refusal to obey 
Contumelious: Degrading or insulting
Contumely, Contumelies: Insults
Convent: (V) 
Conventicle: A clandestine or illegal religious meeting
Cope: A long silken cloak worn as an ecclesiastical vestment on 
certain occasions
Copulative: Forming a connected whole
Cornleader: A carter of grain
Corporace: A cloth laid on the altar on which the chalice and paten 
are placed
Corporal: 1) of the body, physical  2) in Corporal oath, one taken 
while holding a physical object, such as a Bible, relic, or 
consecrated host. 
Coste : Breast
Couetice: Covetousness
Courser: A war-horse
Courtesan: A member of the Papal Curia
Cousin-german: A first cousin
Covetise: Covetousness
Craker: A blowhard or boaster
Criminous: Criminal; relating to crime
Croised: Marked with a cross; having take the cross as a crusader
Croisy: To bestow the cross upon someone, i.e. to declare him a 
crusader
Croysies: Crusaders
Crudelity: Cruelty
Cullen: Cologne
Customable: Customary or habitual
Dag: A pistol
Damnified: Damaged or injured
Damp: A state of stupefaction
Dastard: A coward
Decretal: Originally, a letter written by a Pope in response to a 
query; later, any papal decree or document
Deduce: To bring
Deject: To throw down
Deme, Demen: Judge
Demi-lance: A short-shafted lance
Depeach: To despatch a messenger
Detour: Debtor
Deturbate: To cast down or thrust out
Deyeden: Died
Ding: To strike, beat
Dirige: The matins of the Service for the dead, beginning Dirige, 
Domine, Deus meus, in conspectu tuo viam meam.
Dirt-dauber: A plasterer esp. one who uses mud to make wattle-and-daub 
walls
Disceptation: Debate
Disgarnish: To deprive of
Dishonest: To defile
Disme: A 10% tax or charge
Disparkle: To scatter or disperse
Dispensator: One who dispenses or distributes goods
Disperkle: To scatter, disperse
Disseize: To dispossess
Dissever: To separate
Dissimule: To deceive by hiding one's true feelings of inentions
Distain: Dishonoured
Distinction: A division or section of a book or document
Dome: Judgement
Domesmen: Judges
Donates: An honorary or temporary member of a religious order
Donative: A benefice which can be bestowed by the founder or patron 
without reference to the bishop or abbot.
Dought: Strongly
Draft: Spent brewing grains used as animal feed
Draught: A privy (US:  bathroom)
Drumflade: A kind of trumpet
Dubitation: Doubt
Dump: A state of bewilderment
Ear: To plough
Earlich: Early
Eftsoons: Soon afterwards, immediately
Eghenen: Eyes
Embassage: A diplomatic mission
Emblemish: To damage or disfigure
Embull: To seal
Enduing: Endowing
Enfeoff: To assign a fief of property or office to someone
Enmious: Hostile
Ensample: Example
Ententive: Assiduous in learning
Environ: To surround
Epicure: An atheist
Escheat: Riches obtained by plunder
Eschew: Renounce, reject
Espie : Spy
Ethnics: Pagans
Evacuate: To nullify
Evangely, Evangelies: The Gospels
Even: The day before a feast day
Even-christened: Fellow-Christians
Everichone : Each one
Examinate: A person under examination, either as witness or accused
Excheat: Confiscation of property, or encroachment on the privileges 
of another
Excoriate: To flay
Exeden: Asked
Exonerate: To remove an office or responsibility from someone
Experiment: To examine or test
Expugn: To conquer or overcome
Extravagant: A papal decree not included in the standard list
Fact: Deed
Faled: Broken or destroyed
Fane: A shrine
Fardel: A bundle or parcel
Farmary: An infirmary
Farmer: A bailiff
Fatigation: Weariness, long drawn-out effort
Fautor : A patron, supporter or abettor 
Fedity: Filthiness
Feile : Many
Feoffment: Under the feudal system, the action of assigning lands to 
someone 
Ferial: A weekday
Fet: Fetched
Fetch: (V) To steal by fraud or cunning  (N) Such an act of theft
Fetch: A trick or swindle
Fire-house: A house in which a fire is regularly lit (i.e. a dwelling-
house)
Flagitious: Very wicked
Fleen: Fled from
Floten : Flown
Foil: A defeat
Fond: (A) Foolish  (V) To speak foolishly
Fore-elder: An ancestor
Foreface: Preface
Forefact: A criminal accusation
Forefend: Prevent
Foreslack: To neglect
Forfend: Prevent
Form: A bench
Forward: A contract or sgreement
Foundment: Basis, foundation
Frater wall: The wall of the refectory in a monastery
Fraught: Filled with; (of a ship) fully laden.
Frele: Frail
Fretted: a) Worn, rubbed  b) Inlaid with precious metal or stones
Fulleden: Baptised
Fullen: To baptise
Fumish : Angry, irascible
Fustigation: Flogging
Gage: To pledge
Gainstand: To oppose
Gaud: A worthless trinket
Gazingstock: Something people stare at
Ghostly: Spititual
Gif: If
Gile: Guile, dishonesty
Gilten : To offend against
Gin: A mechanism
Glave: A weapon consisting of a short, broad blade fixed to a long 
handle
Glaverer: A flattering deceiver
Gleer: To smear with paint
Glose, Gloze: To explain, or more often distort, the meaning ofa text
Glossary: A commentary or explanation
Gloss-writer: A writer of commentaries, or a spin-doctor
Gossopry: The relationship of God-parent and God-child
Grope: To find out someone's business or secrets by cunning
Hanaper : An office of the court of chancery, which collected fees for 
sealing and registration of documents
Hem: Them
Her : Their
Heren: Theirs
Hery: To worship
Hest: Commandment
Hight: Was named
Holden: Held
Holocaust: A sacrifice where the entire animal is burnt (not just the 
inedible bits)
Holpen: Helped
Holydeme: Holiness
Homely: Friendly, affable
Hoorehouse: Brothel
Horen: Whores
Horsed up: Pulled up on a man's back or a frame, to be whipped
Hosen: Stockings
Hostelar: The landlady of an inn
Housel: (N) The eucharist;  
(V) To administer the eucharist
Hutching: Literally:  crouching or bowing low. Figuratively:  with 
abject humility
Hylden : Hold
Hyperbolismum: An instance of dishonest exaggeration
Hypotyposis: A vivid description of a scene
Ich: I
Ides: The thirteenth or fifteenth day of the month
Ignavy: Negligence or laziness
Imbecility: Helplessness
Imbrued: Stained with blood
Imitation: Adoption as a heir
Importable: Unbearable
Imposthume: An abscess
Inabilitation: Unfitness, disqualification
Incensive: Full of anger
Incommodity: Disadvantage
Incontinency : Lechery
Incontinent, Incontinently: Immediately
Indiction: A period of fifteen years
Indurate: Hardened, stubborn or callous
Inedge: To slip in edgeways
Infame: To make infamous
Infect : Imperfect
Infeoff: To assign a fief of property or office to someone
Infer: To state or bring forward as an argument
Infestine: Troublesome, annoying
Inspiral: Giving life to
Instant: Insistent
Instantly: Insistently
Interdictment: An interdict, i.e. a punishment laid by the church on a 
town etc., prohibiting any church service from being held there
Intermit: To interrupt
Intestine: Internal
Invitory: A prayer or verse of the Bible recited at the beginning of a 
church service
Inwrap: Involve
Isay: The prophet Isiah
Jakes: A privy (U.S:  bathroom)
Jangler: A story-teller
Javel : A low scoundrel
Jouresse: Duress, punishment
Kele : To satisfy hunger or thirst
Knack: A small or trifling article
Ladypsalter: The rosary, usually the full 15 decades 
Landloper: A renegade or fugitive
Latten: Brass
Laud: Praise
Lavatories: Ceremonial washings which were part of a royal levée
Laystall: A cesspit
Lean: Lend
Leasing: Lying
Lection: A reading
Leefen: Believe 
Leefull: Lawful 
Leese: To surrender or be deprived of
Leeue : A leeue Lord = O Lord in whom we believe
Lefull: Lawful
Legantine: Of or relating to a Papal legate
Legerdemain: Trickery
Leman: A lover
Leper: Leaper
Lesew, Lessewe: Pasture
Lesing: (A) False (V) Lying
Lesser Britain: Brittany
Let: To hinder or prevent (also past tense and noun)
Leven: Faith or confidence
Lewd: Ignorant or futile
Libard: A leopard
Libel: A document or certificate
Lictor: In Roman times, an official who attended a magistrate and 
carried out his orders to arrest, flog, execute etc. malefactors
Lieger: The holder of a feudal lordship or office
Lifelot : Livelihood
Lig: Lie
Like: Likely
Limbus: Limbo, in Catholic theology a state without either the 
torments of Hell or the bliss of Heaven, occupied by the souls of 
unbaptized children
Limiting: Begging
List: A strip of cloth
List: To want to do
Little Britain: Brittany
Livelode : Livelihood
Losel: A low scoundrel
Lotion: Ritual washing
Lucrified: Gained, profited 
Lying for the whetstone: Telling outrageous lies
Macerate: To mash or chop up
Mainprise: The act of bailing a prisoner
Make-bait: A trouble-maker
Makebate: A lie designed to stir up trouble for someone
Malapert: Insolent
Mall: A heavy hammer
Manchet: Fine white bread
Manducation: Nourishment; usually spiritual, via the Eucharist
Maniple: 1) A troop of soldiers   2) A strip of cloth worn hanging 
from the cuff
Manqueller: A murderer
Mansuetude: Gentleness
Maozim, Mauzzim: Hebrew name of a false god mentioned in Dan. xi 38.
Maritage: A tax paid by a vassal to his lord on the marriage of his 
(i.e. the vassal's) daughter
Mark: Silver, or unspecified:  Thirteen shillings and fourpence in 
money   Gold:  Eight ounces
Marmoset: A grotesque painting or statue
Masses-trecenaries: Series of three hundred masses
Maugre: Despite
Maumet, Mawmet : An idol
Maundement: Commandment
Mawmetry: Idolatry
Mecock: An effeminate weakling
Meed: Any valuable item or reward
Meet: Suitable
Meiny: Household
Mentz: Mainz
Merce: To fine
Mercement: A fine or imposition
Mercery-ware: Fine cotton, velvet or silk goods; the stock-in-trade of 
a mercer
Mere: Pure, complete or unmixed
Merilich: Merrily
Mete: Mete done = should do
Mickle: Great
Ministratoriously: In the capacity of an administrator. 
Miser: A wretch
Misprision: Under an Act of Parliament of 1534, misprision was the 
crime of refusing to swear an oath acknowledging the King as head of 
the church
Mo: More
Monition: Instruction, warning
Monitory: Containing a warning or admonishment
Mote: 1) May   2) Must
Mowe, Mow: May
Mulet: A young mule
Muniment : A document proving ownership or entitlement to something
Munition: A fortification
Murrey: A purplish-red colour
Mychel: Great
Namely: Especially
Nasturcium: Watercress (the flower now called nasturtium was not known 
in England in Foxe's time)
Naught: Wicked
Naverne: Navarre
Ne: No, not, nor, neither
Neatherd: A cow-herd
Nele : Will not
Neme: To take
Nene : Destruction
Nice: Silly
Nole: Will not
Nones: The 7th of March, May, July, or October; the 5th of any other 
month.
Nother : Neither
Nousle: To train or educate
Noyous: Annoying, troublesome
Oblation : 1) An animal offered for sacrifice  2) Money given to the 
church  3) One of two parts of the Mass; either the Offertory, or the 
presentation of the consecrated bread and wine with the words "Behold 
the Lamb of God, etc"
Obtrectation: Abuse, calumny
Occurrent: Happening
Offendicle: Something which leads or causes a person to commit sin
Offension: Injury or damage
Onychinus: Onyx
Opprobry: 1) Infamy, shame  2) Insults
Oppugn: To fight against
Ordinal: A book of rules and regulations
Ordinary: The ecclesiastical chief of an area i.e. the Parish priest 
in a parish, the bishop in a diocese, etc. 
Ostent: A wondrous event or miracle
Ouch: A gold or jewelled brooch or buckle
Overthwart: Crosswise, either literally or figuratively
Pack: A scoundrel
Paction: An alliance
Page: A canton of Switzerland
Painful: Painstaking
Palfrey: A small horse
Pall: A kind of scarf or stole worn by a bishop; used figuratively to 
mean the office of bishop.
Palsgrave: A Count Palatine, i.e. a ruler who has been granted full 
powers in his fief by the Holy Roman Emperor
Panim: A pagan or other non-Christian
Pantofle: Expensive, highly decorated slippers; Stood upon their 
pantofles = Stood on their dignity
Parochian: A parish priest
Pash: To smash
Patin, patine, paten: A dish on which the communion bread is placed
Pattens: Wooden overshoes 
Paunch: To cut open the belly of
Paynim: A pagan or Muslim
Pelt: To address with insults or reproaches
Penitentiary: 1) A penitent  2) A priest specially appointed to hear 
confessions of reserved sins (ones which cannot be absolved by 
ordinary priests)
Percase: Perhaps
Peregrine: A pilgrim
Perfitlich: Perfectly
Perpend: To consider
Phylacteries: Hypocritical displays of virtue
Pictavia: Poitou, in France
Pill: To rob, pillage
Pilled: Tonsured i.e. having the top of the head shaved
Pinbank: The rack or similar instrument of torture
Pin-fold: A pound for stray animals
Pix: A small box in which consecrated hosts are carried about. 
Plackard: An official document or proclamation
Plaice-mouth: A pursing of the lips
Plenar: Complete
Plete: To argue one's case
Plumbat: A lead ball on a cord
Point-maker: A maker of laces for fastening clothes
Poising: Weighing 
Poll: To extort money from
Pontificalibus: The robes of a bishop or cardinal
Popple: The corn-cockle (Lychnis githago), a weed of wheat fields 
Port: Appearance
Porthose: To canonize as a saint
Portues: A breviary or book of liturgy
Portuous: (Of a saint) Included in the standard breviary or calendar
Postil: A note or comment on a document
Potestate: A ruler, potentate
Pounced: Of a metal object, decorated by embossing or engraving
Præmunire: The crime in English law of appealing to, or acknowledging, 
a power outside England (usually the Papacy) in defiance of the 
monarch.
Pravity: Wickedness
Prebend: The revenue of a specific plot of land belonging to an 
ecclesiastical foundation; a prebendary was the priest to which a 
prebend was allocated or prebendated
Prefe: Proof
Premonish: To speak of beforehand
Prepense: Inclined towards
Presul: A prelate or bishop
Pretensed: Pretended, falsely claimed
Pretermit: To leave out, omit
Preue, preve : Proof 
Priuilich : Privately
Privation: Deprivation, removal from office
Privily: Secretly 
Privy: Secret
Probably: Plausibly, convincingly
Probation: Proof
Probations: Conclusive arguments, proofs
Proclive: Inclined towards
Prodition: Treachery
Prolix : Long-winded
Proll: To prowl or rob
Prolocutor: 1) a spokesman  2) The chairman of a parliament or 
congress
Prompt: Prompt with = armed with, and very ready to use
Propone: To propose
Prorogations: Postponements
Prorogue: To postpone
Proscript: Proscribed
Prosopopœia: An orator's trick of speaking as if in the voice or 
person of someone else
Protonotary: A senior papal clerk or envoy
Prototypon: The first or original version of a document etc.
Prove: To test
Provisor: A person holding the right to be appointed to an office or 
benefice when it becomes vacant
Provoke: To invite
Psalmograph: Writer of Psalms; a title of King David of Israel and 
Judah
Puissance: Power
Puissant: Powerful
Puissant: Powerful
Pung: To peck
Pursuivant: A messenger or agent
Quail: To quell, suppress
Quarrel: A cross-bow arrow
Questmen: Members of a commission of enquiry
Quick: Alive
Quier: A book
Quindecim: A fifteenth part
Quire: A choir
Quondam: Former, formerly
Rabbin: A Jewish Rabbi; used contemptuously to refer to other 
religious leaders
Ranging-wise: At random
Rap: To plunder or destroy
Rashful : Rash
Ratle: To scold, abuse
Readie: Quick-witted and eloquent
Reave: To rob
Receitor : A harbourer of criminals
Recluse: A prison cell
Recure: To restore to health
Reed: Advise
Refel: Disprove
Refuse: To reject
Regiment: Rule
Register: A keeper of records, registrar.
Relent: To return to one's original beliefs
Replication, Replication duplic: Stages in the arguing of a case 
before a court i.e.   The prosecutor makes a charge, then   The 
defendant makes a reply, then   The prosecutor makes a replication, 
then   The defendant makes a replication duplic
Repugn: To oppose, fight against
Rescript: Strictly, the decision of the Roman emperor on a case 
referred to him by a governor or judge; more loosely, any formal 
written command by a person in authority
Residentiary: The canons of a cathedral
Retcheth : Reck, care themselves with
Revest: To don vestments for a religious ceremony
Revestry: The vestry of a church
Rhodanus: The River Rhône
Rochet: A linen surplice
Rode, Rood: A crucifix
Rogation: Chanting the litany of the saints during a procession
Rooten: Dig up with the snout, like a pig in filth
Rown: To whisper 
Ruff: A state of excitement or pride
Ruffler: A fine-clothed but useless fellow
Ruffling: Showing off
Runnagate : A fugitive scoundrel
Sabaoth: Lord of Sabaoth = Lord of Hosts, a title of God
Sacramentary: One who holds "heretical" (i.e.not Catholic) views on 
the Eucharist
Sacring: The consecration of the Mass
Sale: To assail
Saturity: Repletion
Sauter: The Book of Psalms
Say: A fine cloth of silk and wool woven together
Scathe: Harm
Schone: Shall
Scurrier: A soldier sent out to see what the enemy is doing, a scout
Scutage: A tax paid instead of military service
Seam: Eight bushels
Sechen: Seek
Seggen: Say
Seigniory: Lordship or dominion; or the lands over which this is held
Sein: Say
Seised: Of land or property:  assigned or granted to someone
Seizin-taking: Taking possession of a token of ownership e.g. the keys 
of a house.
Seker: Certain
Semblable: Similar
Sententially : As a judicial sentence
Sententiary: A person who has compiled a compendium of theological 
opinions.
Sepulture: A tomb
Servage: Bondage, serfdom
Sewer: A servant who lays the table, serves the meal etc.
Seyen: See
Shad: Shed
Shaveling: A tonsured monk
Shawm: A musical instrument resembling an oboe.
Shearman: A cloth-shearer
Sheave: To collect, gather up
Shent: Ruined, destroyed
Shew-bread: Special loaves of bread which were placed on a table in 
the Temple of Jerusalem every Sabbath and eaten by the priests at the 
end of the week. See Exod. xxv. 30.
Shone: Shoes
Shrift: Absolution
Shriuing: Confession
Shullen: Shall
Shulne: Shall
Siege: Seat
Silly: Innocent
Sink: A sewer or drain
Sith: Since
Sith that: Provided that
Sithe: Times
Sithen: So that
Sithence: Since
Skill: To be of importance
Slander-giving: Encouraging others to sin by bad example
Sle: Slay
Slean: Slay
Sleight: Deceitful
Slops: Baggy trousers
Slowen: Slain
Smaragd: An emerald
Snaffle: A horse bridle
Snuff: To take snuff = to take offence
Sod, Sodden: Boiled
Soldan: Sultan
Solicitor: An agent or deputy
Somoner, Somnor: A bailiff or court messenger
Sooth-deacon : A formally appointed deputy or representative
Soothfastness: Constancy in holding to the truth
Souter: A cobbler or shoemaker
Spiritualty: The clergy or hierarchy
Spouse-breach: Adultery
Spoushod: Marriage
Springall: A young man
Spurging: Oozing of matter, fæces etc. from the body
Spurn: Kick or trample underfoot
Staple: A, or the only, legally licensed market for wool for purchase 
by foreigners
Stellify: To place among the stars
Sternship: Haughtiness
Stied: Went (the word is principally used to describe Christ's 
ascension into heaven)
Stocks: The name of a market for meat and fish in the City of London
Stover: Fodder, animal food
Strumpet: A whore
Sturdy: Obstinate
Suffragan: An assistant or subordinate bishop
Suffrage: 1) An assistant  2) Help, assistance of any kind
Sugge: To say
Sugget: A saying
Sumner: A bailiff of an ecclesiastical court, who summons people to 
attend
Sum-papal: A summary of papal edicts on a particular topic
Sumpter: A pack-horse
Supererogation: In works of supererogation:  in Catholic theology, the 
performance of good works beyond what God commands or requires; this 
builds up a store of grace which the Church can dispense in the form 
of indulgences etc.  
Supposition: An argument for a proposition
Supputation: A system of calculation
Sustentation: Provision of food, drink and other necessities
Sweuen: A false vision or fake miracle
Swinge: In phrase To bear the swinge = to have power or authority
Tallage: An arbitrary tax levied by special order
Tally for his own cates: To obtain food and other necessities on 
credit
Tarriance: Delay
Teende: Attend with
Temerarious: Rash, reckless
Tent: To clean a wound with a small roll of cloth
Tenths: Tithes 
Tergiversation: Desertion or apostacy
Terrene: Of the earth in the sense (a) as opposed to heavenly or (b) 
peasant-like, low-class
The land of behest: The Promised Land
Thicker: A fuller (of cloth)
Thilke: This
Tho: Then
Thoore : Unharmed
Thrall: A slave
Thurify: To bless with incense
Tickle: Unstable, ready to fall at a touch
Tied his points: Fastened his laces
Tippet: A hood or hooded cloak
Tipstave: A court usher or bailiff
Tithed to death: Decimated (i.e. every tenth man killed)
Titiviller: The name of a demon in a morality play; hence, a scoundrel
To lie for the whetstone: To tell outrageous lies
To-brast: Completely destroy
To-broken: Destroyed, torn up
Tofore: In front of
Tollage: Money paid in tolls or taxes
Tonsure: A shaven patch on the top of the head
Tose: To card wool
Totquots: A papal dispensation allowing the holder to have any number 
of benefices
Towardness: Exceptional aptitude.
Toy: A trifle or bauble
Tractation: Written discussion or discourse
Train: A deception or fraud
Transumpt: A transcript or formal copy of a record or decree
Trauel: Labour
Travail: 1) Labour  2) Suffering
Travell: Suffering
Traverse: A dispute or controversy
Travise: A dispute or controversy
Treen shoes: Wooden shoes, clogs
Trental: A series of thirty requiem masses
Trim-couched: Well-chosen to deceive
Trought: Truth
Tunably: Harmoniously
Uiker, Uicar: Vicar, in the sense of appointed representative
Unconning: Foolish
Unlefull: Unlawful
Unworshipped: Disrespected
Usance: Lending or borrowing at (usually usurious) interest
Utas: The eighth day after the specified feast day
Vail: An extra payment or profit, a perk
Vastation: Devastation, destruction
Vaumure: An outer fortification
Vaward: The vanguard
Verilich : Truly
Very: True, truly
Vilipend: To regard, or treat, a person as being vile or worthless
Vility: Vileness
Vineat: An ornamental border of vine leaves in a manuscript
Visor: A mask or outward show
Vitiate: To spoil or wear out
Void: To depart from
Waits: The members of a municipal band, employed by the city to play 
on public occasions
Walisch: Welsh
Wanyand: An imprecation or curse
Ward : A lock
Wast: Year, day and wast = "a prerogative whereby the sovereign was 
entitled to the profits for a year and a day of a tenement held by a 
person attainted of petty treason or felony, with the right of 
wasting the tenement" (OED)
Waster: A wooden sword used for fencing practice
Weed: A cloak or costume
Ween: Suppose, believe
Weet: 
Weet: To know
Wele : Prosperity
Wete, weten: 1) to know  2) to ask of someone
Wheeler: A wheel-maker
Whirlpit: A whirlpool
Wild he, nild he: Whether he wanted or not
Will-works: Works performed by the human will, without divine grace
Wimble: An auger or gimlet
Wist: Knew
Wolden: Would
Wonnyer, Wonnier: Inhabitant
Woodness: Madness
Woodnesse: Madness, violent anger
Wot: Know 
Wracke: Revenge
Wrakers: Those who wreak vengeance
Wreke: To work, do something
Wyllingly: Thankfully
Ybeden: Bade
Ybore: Born
Ych: I
Yeve: To give
Yift: A gift
Ylich: Equally
You-ward: Towards you
Yuill: Evil
Ywit: Know
Zif: Thus; or as phrase zif all = although
  