The Herbal
Or
General History of Plants

By

John Gerard
and
Thomas Johnson


Volume 4
(Book 2 Part 3)



Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2020
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain



CHAP. 332. Of Bean Capers.


Fig. 1311. Bean Capers.

The Description.

This plant which the Germans call Fabago, and Dodonæus savouring of 
Dutch, calleth it in his last edition Capparis fabago, and properly: 
Lobel calleth it Capparis leguminosa: between which there is no great 
difference, who labour to refer this plant unto the kinds of Capers, 
which is but a low and base herb, and not a shrubby bush, as are the 
true Capers. It bringeth forth smooth stalks tender and branched, 
whereupon do grow long thick leaves, lesser than those of the true 
Capers, and not unlike to the leaves of Purslane, coming out of the 
branches by couples, of a light green colour. The flowers before they 
be opened are like to those of the precedent, but when they be come 
to maturity and full ripeness they wax white, with some yellow chives 
in the midst: which being past, there appear long cods, wherein is 
contained small flat seed. The root is tender, branching hither and 
thither.

The Place.

It groweth of itself in corn fields of the Low Countries, from whence 
I have received seeds for my garden, where they flourish.

The Time.

It flowereth when the Caper doth.

The Names.
It is called in Latin of the later herbarists Capparis fabago: of 
most, Capparis leguminosa: it is thought to be that herb which 
Avicenna describeth in his 28th chapter, by the name of Ardifrigi: we 
may content ourselves that Capparis fabago retain that name still, 
and seek for none other, unless it be for an English name, by which 
it may be called after the Latin, Bean Caper.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Touching the faculties thereof we have nothing left in writing worth 
the remembrance.



CHAP. 333. Of Swallow-wort.

Fig. 1312. White Swallow-Wort (1) Fig. 1313. Black Swallow-Wort (2) 
The Description.

1. Swallow-Wort with white flowers hath divers upright branches of a 
brownish colour, of the height of two cubits, beset with leaves not 
unlike to those of Dulcamara or Woody Nightshade, somewhat long, 
broad, sharp-pointed, of a blackish green colour, and strong savour: 
among which come forth very many small white flowers star-fashion, 
hanging upon little slender footstalks: after which come in place 
thereof long sharp pointed cods, stuffed full of a most perfect white 
cotton resembling silk, as well in show as handling; (our London 
gentlewomen have named it Silken Cicely) among which is wrapped soft 
brownish seed. The roots are very many, white, thready, and of a 
strong savour.

2. The second kind is oftentimes found with stalks much longer, 
climbing up on props or such things as stand near unto it, attaining 
to the height of five or six cubits, wrapping itself upon them with 
many and sundry foldings: the flowers hereof are black; the leaves, 
cods, and roots be like those of the former.

The Place.

Both these kinds do grow in my garden, but not wild in England; yet 
have I heard it reported that it groweth in the fields about 
Northampton, but as yet I am not certain of it.

The Time.

They flower about June, in autumn the down hangeth out of the cods, 
and the seed falleth to the ground.

The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists Vincetoxicum: of Ruellius, 
Hederalis: in High Dutch, Swalluwe Wortele, that is to say in Latin 
Hirundinaria: in English, Swallow-wort: of our gentlewomen it is 
called Silken Cecily; Æsculapius (who is said to be the first 
inventer of physic, whom therefore the Greeks and Gentiles honored as 
a God) called it after his own name Asclepias, or Æsculapius' herb, 
for that he was the first that wrote thereof, and now it is called in 
shops Hirundinaria.

The Temperature.

The roots of Swallow-wort are hot and dry; they are thought to be 
good against poison.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that the roots of Asclepias or Swallow-Wort 
boiled in wine, and the decoction drunk, are a remedy against the 
gripings of the belly, the stingings of serpents, and against deadly 
poison, being one of the especiallest herbs against the same.

B. The leaves boiled and applied in form of a poultice, cure the evil 
sores of the paps or dugs, and matrix, that are hard to be cured.



CHAP. 334. Of Indian Swallow-Wort.

Fig. 1314 Indian Swallow-wort (1) Fig 1314. Apocynum Syriacum (2) 
The Description

1. There groweth in that part of Virginia, or Norembega, where our 
Englishmen dwelled (intending there to erect a certain colony) a kind 
of Asclepias, or Swallow-wort, which the Savages call Wisanck: there 
riseth up from a single crooked root one upright stalk a foot high, 
slender, and of a greenish colour: whereupon do grow fair broad 
leaves sharp pointed, with many ribs or nerves running through the 
same like those of Ribwort or Plantain, set together by couples at 
certain distances. The flowers come forth at the top of the stalks, 
which as yet are not observed, by reason the man that brought the 
seeds and plants hereof did not regard them. After which, there come 
in place two cods (seldom more) sharp pointed like those of our 
Swallow-Wort, but greater, stuffed full of a most pure silk of a 
shining white colour: among which silk appeareth a small long tongue 
(which is the seed) resembling the tongue of a bird, or that of the 
herb called Adder's Tongue. The cods are not only full of silk, but 
every nerve or sinew wherewith the leaves be ribbed are likewise most 
pure silk; and also the pilling of the stems, even as flax is torn 
from his stalks. This considered, behold the justice of God, that as 
he hath shut up those people and nations in infidelity and nakedness, 
so hath he not as yet given them understanding to cover their 
nakedness, nor matter wherewith to do the same; notwithstanding the 
earth is covered over with this silk, which daily they tread under 
their feet, which were sufficient to apparel many kingdoms, if they 
were carefullly manured and cherished.

2. This plant, which is kept in some gardens by the name of Virginia 
Silk Grass, I take to be the same, or very like the Beidelsar of 
Alpinus; and the Apocynum Syriacum of Clusius: at Padua they call it 
Esula indica by reason of the hot milky juice. Bauhinus hath very 
unfitly named it Lapathum ægyptiacum lactescens siliqua asclepiadis. 
But he is to be pardoned; for Iohannes Carolus Rosenbergus, of his 
Animad. Exerc. Medicæ, or Rosa Nobilis Iatrica, hath taken upon him 
the credit and invention of this absurd denomination: I may call it 
absurd, for that neither any way in shape or quality it resembles or 
participates anything with a Dock. I have given you the figure of our 
author with his title, and that of Clusius with his: in the former 
the cods are only well expressed; in the latter the leaves and 
flowers reasonably well, but that they are too few in number, and set 
too far asunder. Upon the sight of the growing and flowering plant I 
took this description: The root is long and creeping; the stalks two 
or three cubits high, square, hollow, a finger thick, and of a light 
green colour, sending out towards the top some few branches: upon 
this at certain spaces grow by couples leaves some half foot long, 
and three inches broad, dark green on their upper sides, more whitish 
below, and full of large and eminent veins: at the top of the stalk 
and branches it carries most commonly an hundred or more flowers, 
growing upon footstalks some inch long, all close thrust together 
after the manner of the Hyacinth of Peru at the first flowering: each 
flower is thus composed; first it hath five small green leaves 
bending back; which serve for the cup: then hath it other five leaves 
four times larger than the former, which bend back and cover them; 
and these are green on the underside, and of a pale colour with some 
redness above: then are there five little grains (as I may so term 
them) of a pleasant red colour, and on their outside like corns of 
Millet, but hollow on their insides, with a little thread or chive 
coming forth of each of them: these five ingirt a small head like a 
button, greenish underneath, and whitish above. I have given you the 
figure of one flower by the side of our author's figure. The leaves 
and stalks of this plant are very full of a milky juice.

The Place.

It groweth, as before is rehearsed, in the countries of Norembega, 
now called Virginia by the honourable Knight Sir Walter Raleigh, who 
hath bestowed great sums of money in the discovery thereof; where are 
dwelling at this present Englishmen.

The Time.

It springeth up, flowereth, and flourisheth both winter and summer, 
as do many or most of the plants of that country. It dies down with 
us every winter and comes up in the spring, and flowers in August, 
but never bringeth forth the cods with us, by reason of the coldness 
of our climate.

The Names.

The silk is used of the people of Pomeioc and other of the provinces 
adjoining, being parts of Virginia, to cover the secret parts of 
maidens that never tasted man; as in other places they use a white 
kind of moss Wisanck: we have thought Asclepias Virginiana, or 
Vincetoxicum Indianum fit and proper names for it: in English, 
Virginia Swallow-Wort, or the Silk-Wort of Norembega.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. We find nothing by report, or otherwise of our own knowledge, of 
his physical virtues, but only report of the abundance of most pure 
silk wherewith the whole plant is possessed.

B. The leaves beaten either crude, or boiled in water, and applied as 
a poultice, are good against swellings and pains proceeding of a cold 
cause.

C. The milky juice, which is very hot, purges violently; and 
outwardly applied is good against tetters, to fetch hair off skins, 
if they be steeped in it, and the like. Alpinus.



CHAP. 335. Of the Bombast or Cotton-Plant.


Fig. 1316. The Cotton Bush

The Description.

The Cotton bush is a low and base plant, having small stalks of a 
cubit high, and sometimes higher; divided from the lowest part to the 
top into sundry small branches, whereupon are set confusedly or 
without order a few broad leaves, cut for the most part into three 
sections, and sometimes more, as Nature list to bestow, somewhat 
indented about the edges, not unlike to the leaves of the Vine, or 
rather the Vervein Mallow, but lesser, softer, and of a greyish 
colour: among which come forth the flowers, standing upon slender 
footstalks, the brims or edges whereof are of a yellow colour, the 
middle part purple: after which appeareth the fruit, round, and of 
the bigness of a tennis ball, wherein is thrust together a great 
quantity of fine white cotton wool; among which is wrapped up black 
seed of the bigness of peas, in shape like the trattles or dung of a 
cony. The fruit being come to maturity or ripeness, the husk or cod 
opens itself into four parts or divisions, and casteth forth his wool 
and seed upon the ground, if it be not gathered in his time and 
season. The root is small and single, with few threads annexed 
thereto, and of a woody substance, as is all the rest of the plant.
The Place.

It groweth in India, in Arabia, Egypt, and in certain Islands of the 
Mediterranean sea, as Cyprus, Candy, Malta, Sicilia, and in other 
provinces of the continent adjacent. It groweth about Tripolis and 
Aleppo in Syria, from whence the factor of a worshipful merchant in 
London, Master Nicholas Lete before remembered, did send unto his 
said master divers pounds weight of the seed; whereof some were 
committed to the earth at the impression hereof, the success we leave 
to the Lord. Notwithstanding myself 3 years past did sow of the seed, 
which did grow very frankly, but perished before it came to 
perfection, by reason of the cold frost that overtook it in the time 
of flowering.

The Time.

Cotton seed is sown in ploughed fields in the spring of the year, and 
reaped and cut down in harvest, even as corn with us; and the ground 
must be tilled and sown new again the next year, and used in such 
sort at we do the tillage for corn and grain: for it is a plant of 
one year, and perisheth when it hath perfected his fruit, as many 
other plants do.

The Names.

Cotton is called in Latin, Xylum, and Gossipium after the Greek; in 
shops, Lanugo, Bombax, and Cotum: in Italian, Bombagia: in Spanish, 
Algodon: in High Dutch, Baumwool: in English and French, Cotton, 
Bombaste and Bombace.

Theophrastus hath made mention hereof in his fourth book, cap. 9, but 
without a name; and he saith it is a tree in Tylus which bears wool. 
Neither is it any marvel if he took an unknown shrub or plant, and 
that groweth in countries far off, for a tree: seeing also in this 
age (in which very many things come to be better known than in times 
past) the cotton or wool hereof is called of the Germans (as we have 
aid) Baum wooll, that is, wool of a tree, whereas indeed it is rather 
an herb or small shrub, and not to be numbered among trees.

Of this Theophrastus writeth thus; It is reported that the same 
island (viz. Tylus) doth bring forth many trees that bear wool, which 
have leaves like those of the Vine, &c.

Pliny writing of the same, lib. 19. cap. 1, saith thus: The upper 
part of Egypt toward Arabia bringeth forth a shrub which is called 
Gossipion, or Xylon, and therefore the linen that is made of it is 
called Xylina. It is (saith he) the plant that beareth that wool 
wherewith the garments are made which the priests of Egypt do weave.

The Temperature.

The seed of Cotton (according to the opinion of Serapio) is hot and 
moist: the wool itself is hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Cotton is good against the cough, and for them that 
are short winded: it also stirreth up the lust of the body by 
increasing natural seed, wherefore it surpasseth.

B. The oil pressed out of the seed taketh away freckles, spots, and 
other blemishes of the skin.

C. The ashes of the wool burned stancheth the bleeding of wounds, 
used in restrictive medicines, as Bole Armeniac, (check spelling) and 
is more restrictive than Bole itself.

D. To speak of the commodities of the wool of this plant were 
superfluous, common experience, and the daily use and benefit we 
receive by it show them. So that it were impertinent to our history 
to speak of the making of fustian, bombasies, and many other things 
that are made of the wool thereof.



CHAP. 336. Of Dog's-bane.

Fig 1317. Climbing Dog's-Bane (1) Fig. 1318. Broad-Leaved Dog's-Bane 
(2) 
The Kinds.

There be two kinds of Dog's-banes: the one a climbing or clambering 
plant; the other an upright shrub.

The Description.

1. Dog's-Bane riseth up like unto a small hedge bush, upright and 
straight, until it have attained to a certain height; then doth it 
clasp and climb with his tender branches as do the Bindweeds, taking 
hold upon props or poles, or whatsoever standeth next unto it: 
whereupon do grow fair broad leaves, sharp pointed like those of the 
Bay tree, of a deep green colour. The flowers come forth at the top 
of the stalks, consifting of five small white leaves: which being 
past, there succeed long cods, set upon a slender footstalk by 
couples, joining themselves together at the extreme point, and 
likewise at the stalk, making of two pieces knit together one entire 
cod; which cod is full of such downy matter and seed as that of 
Asclepias, but more in quantity by reason the cods are greater; which 
being dry and ripe, the silken cotton hangeth forth, and by little 
and little sheddeth, until the whole be fallen upon the ground. The 
whole plant yieldeth that yellow stinking milky juice that the other 
doth, and sometimes it is of a white colour, according to the climate 
where it groweth; for the more cold the country is, the whiter is the 
juice; and the more hot, the yellower. The root is long and single, 
with some threads anexed thereto.

2. There is another Dog's-bane that hath long and slender stalks like 
those of the Vine, but of a brown reddish colour, wherewith it 
windeth itself about such things as stand near unto it, in manner of 
a Bindweed: whereupon are set leaves not unlike to those of the Ivy, 
but not so much cornered, of a dark green colour, and of a rank smell 
being bruised between the fingers, yielding forth a stinking yellow 
milky juice when it is so broken: amongst which come forth little 
white flowers, standing scatteringly upon little husks: after the 
flowers come long cods, very like unto Asclepias or Swallow-Wort, but 
greater, stuffed with the like soft downy silk; among which down is 
wrapped up flat black seed. The roots are many and thready, creeping 
all about within the ground, budding forth new shoots in sundry 
places, whereby it greatly increaseth.

The Place.

They grow naturally in Syria, and also in Italy, as Matthiolus 
reporteth: my loving friend John Robin, herbarist in Paris did send 
plants of both the kinds for my garden, where they flower and 
flourish; but whether they grow in France, or that he procured them 
from some other region, as yet I have no certain knowledge.

The Times.

They begin to bud forth their leaves in the beginning of May, and 
show their flowers in September.

The Names.

Dog's-Bane is called by the learned of our age Periploca: it is 
evident that they are to be referred to the Apocynum of Dioscorides. 
The former of the two hath been likewise called Brassica canina, or 
Dog's-Cole: notwithstanding there is another Dog's-Cole, which is a 
kind of wild Mercury. We may call the first Creeping Dog's-bane; and 
the other, Upright or Syrian Dog's-Bane.

The Temperature.

These plants are of the nature of that pestilent or poisonous herb 
Thora, which being eaten of dogs or any other living creature doth 
certainly kill them, except there be in readiness an antidote or 
preservative against poison, and given, which by probability is the 
herb described in the former chapter, called Vincetoxicum; even as 
Anthora is the antidote and remedy against the poison of Thora; and 
Herba Paris against Pardalianches.

The Virtues.

A. Dog's-bane is a deadly and dangerous plant, especially to four-
footed beasts; for as Dioscorides writeth, the leaves hereof being 
mixed with bread and given, killeth dogs, wolves, foxes, and 
leopards, the use of their legs and huckle-bones being presently 
taken from them, and death itself followeth incontinent, and 
therefore not to be used in medicine.



CHAP. 337. Of Solomon's Seal.

Fig. 1319. Solomon's Seal (1) Fig. 1320. Small Solomon's Seal (2) 
The Description.

1. The first kind of Solomon's Seal hath long round stalks, set for 
the most part with long leaves somewhat furrowed and ribbed, not much 
unlike Plantain, but narrower, which for the most part stand all upon 
one side of the stalk, and hath small white flowers resembling the 
flowers of Lily Convall: on the other side when the flowers be faded 
there come forth round berries, which at the first are green, and of 
a black colour tending to blueness and when they be ripe be of the 
bigness of Ivy berries, of a very sweet and pleasant taste. The root 
is white and thick, full of knobs or joints, which in some places 
resemble the mark of a seal, whereof I think it took the name 
Sigillum Solomonis; and is sweet at the first, but afterward of a 
bitter taste, with some sharpness.

2. The second kind of Polygonatum doth not much vary from the former, 
saving in the leaves, which be narrower, and grow round about the 
stalk like a spur, in fashion like unto Woodruff or Red Madder: among 
the leaves come forth flowers like the former, but of a greener white 
colour: which being past, there succeed berries like the former, but 
of a reddish colour: which being past, there succeed berries like the 
former, but of a reddish colour: the roots are thick and knobby like 
the former, with some fibres annexed thereto.

Fig. 1321. Sweet-Smelling Somomon's Seal (3) Fig. 1322. Branched 
Solomon's Seal (4) 

3. The third kind of Solomon's Seal, which Carolus Clusius found in 
the woody mountains of Leitenberg, above Mandersdorf; and in many 
other mountains beyond the river Danube, especially among the stones, 
he sent to London to Mr Garth a worshipful gentleman, and one that 
greatly delighteth in strange plants, who very lovingly imparted the 
same unto me. This plant hath stalks very like unto the common 
Solomon's Seal, a foot high, beset with leaves upon one side of the 
stalk like the first and common kind; but larger, and more 
approaching to the bigness of the Broad-Leaved Plantain, the taste 
whereof is not very pleasant: from the bosom of which leaves come 
forth small well-smelling greenish white flowers not much unlike the 
first: which being past, there follow seeds or berries that are at 
the first green, but afterward black, containing within the same 
berries a small seed as big as a Vetch, and as hard as a stone. The 
roots are like unto the other of his kind, yet not so thick as the 
first.

4. The fourth kind according to my account, but the third of Clusius 
(which he found also in the mountains aforesaid) groweth a foot high, 
but seldom a cubit, differing from all the others of his kind; for 
his stalks divide themselves into sundry other branches, which are 
garnished with goodly leaves, larger and sharper pointed than any of 
the rest, which do embrace the stalks about after the manner of 
Perfoliata or Thoroughwax, yet very like unto the kinds of Solomon's 
Seal in show, save that they are somewhat hoary underneath the 
leaves; which at the first are sweet in taste, but somewhat acid or 
biting towards the later end. From the back part of the leaves shoot 
forth small long tender and crooked stems, bearing at the end little 
gaping white flowers not much unlike Lilium convallium, savouring 
like hawthorn flowers, spotted on the inner side with black spots: 
which being past, there come forth three-cornered berries like the 
Narrow-Leaved Solomon's Seal, green at the first, and red when they 
be ripe, containing many white hard grains. The roots differ from all 
the other kinds, and are like unto the crambling roots of Thalictrum, 
which the graver hath omitted in the picture.


Fig. 1323. Narrow-Leaved Solomon's Seal (5) 


5. This rare sort of Solomon's Seal rises up from his tuberous or 
knobby root, with a straight upright stalk jointed at certain 
distances, leaving between each joint a bare and naked stalk, smooth, 
and of a greenish colour tending to yellowness; from the which joints 
thrust forth divers small branches, with four narrow teams set about 
like a star or the herb Woodruff: upon which tender branches are set 
about the stalks by certain spaces long narrow leaves enclosing the 
same round about: among which leaves come forth small whitish flowers 
of little regard. The fruit is small, and of a red colour, full of 
pulp or meat; among which is contained a hard stony seed like that of 
the first Solomon's Seal.

6. There is kept in our gardens, and said to be brought from some 
part of America another Polygonatum, which sends a stalk some foot 
and more high, and it hath leaves long, nervous, and very green and 
shining, growing one by another without any order upon the stalk, 
which is somewhat crested, crooked, and very green; bearing at the 
very top thereof, above the highest leaf, upon little footstalks, 
some eight or nine little white flowers, consisting of six leaves 
apiece, which are succeeded by berries, as in the former. This 
flowers in May, and is vulgarly named Polygonatum Virginianum, or 
Virginian Solomon's Seal.

The Place.

The first sort of Solomon's Seal grows naturally wild in 
Somersetshire, upon the North side of a place called Mendip, in the 
parish of Shepton Mallet: also in Kent by a village called Crayford, 
upon Rough or Row hill: also in Odiham Park in Hampshire; in 
Bradford's Wood, near to a town in Wiltshire four miles from Bath; in 
a wood near to a village called Horsley, five miles from Guildford in 
Surrey, and in divers other places.

That sort of Solomon's Seal with broad leaves groweth in certain 
woods in Yorkshire called Clapdale woods, three miles from a village 
named Settle.

The Time.

They spring up in March, and show their flowers in May: the fruit is 
ripe in September.

The Names.

Solomon's Seal is called in Greek and Latin Polygonatum, of many, 
Knees, for so the Greek word doth import: in shops, Sigillum 
Solomonis, and Scala cli: in English likewise Scala cli, Solomon's 
Seal, and White-Wort, or White-Root: in High Dutch, Weizwurtz: in 
French, Seau de Solomon: of the Etrurians, Frasinella, and 
Fraxinella.

The Temperature.

The roots of Solomon's Seal, as Galen saith, have both a mixed 
faculty and quality also: For they have (saith he) a certain kind of 
astriction or binding, and biting withal, and likewise a certain 
loathsome bitterness, as the same author affirmeth: which is not to 
be found in those that do grow in our climate.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, That the roots are excellent good for to seal 
or close up green wounds, being stamped and laid thereon; whereupon 
it was called Sigillum Solomonis, of the singular virtue that it hath 
in sealing or healing up wounds, broken bones, and such like. Some 
have thought it took the name Sigillum of the marks upon the roots: 
but the first reason seems to me more probable.

B. The root of Solomon's Seal stamped while it is fresh and green, 
and applied, taketh away in one night, or two at the most, any 
bruise, black or blue spots gotten by falls or women's wilfulness, in 
stumbling upon their hasty husbands' fists, or such like.

C. Galen saith, that neither herb nor root hereof is to be given 
inwardly: but note what experience hath found out, and of late days, 
especially among the vulgar sort of people in Hampshire, which Galen, 
Dioscorides, or any other that have written of plants have not so 
much as dreamed of; which is, That if any of what sex or age soever 
chance to have any bones broken, in what part of their bodies soever; 
their refuge is to stamp the roots hereof, and give it unto the 
patient in ale to drink: which soldereth and glues together the bones 
in very short space, and very strangely, yea although the bones be 
but slenderly and unhandsomely placed and wrapped up. Moreover, the 
said people do give it in like manner unto their cattle, if they 
chance to have any bones broken, with good success; which they do 
also stamp and apply outwardly in manner of a poultice, as well unto 
themselves as their cattle.

D. The root stamped and applied in manner of a poultice, and laid 
upon members that have been out of joint, and newly restored to their 
places, driveth away the pain, and knitteth the joint very firmly, 
and taketh away the inflammation, if there chance to be any.

E. The same stamped, and the juice given to drink with ale or white 
wine, as aforesaid, or the decoction thereof made in wine, helps any 
inward bruise, disperseth the congealed and clotted blood in very 
short space.

F. That which might be written of this herb as touching the knitting 
of bones, and that truly, would seem unto some incredible; but common 
experience teacheth, that in the world there is not to be found 
another herb comparable to it for the purposes aforesaid: and 
therefore in brief, if it be for bruises inward the roots must be 
stamped, sour ale or wine put thereto, strained, and given to drink.

G. It must be given in the same manner to knit broken bones, against 
bruises, black or blue marks gotten by stripes, falls, or such like; 
against inflammation, tumors or swellings that happen unto members 
whose bones are broken, or members out of joint, after restoration: 
the roots are to be stamped small, and applied poultice or 
plasterwise, wherewith many great works have been performed beyond 
credit.

H. Matthiolus teacheth, That a water is drawn out of the roots, 
wherewith the women of Italy use to scour their faces from sun-
burning, freckles, morphew, or any such deformities of the skin.



CHAP. 338. Of Knee-Holm, or Butcher's Broom.


Fig. 1324. Butcher's Broom

The Description

Knee-Holm is a low woody plant, having divers small branches, or 
rather stems, rising immediately from the ground, of the height of a 
foot; whereupon are set many leaves like unto those of the Box tree, 
or rather of the Myrtle, but sharp and pricking at the point. The 
fruit groweth upon the middle rib of the leaf, green at the first, 
and red as coral when it is ripe, like those of Asparagus, but 
bigger. The roots are white, branched, of a mean thickness, and full 
of tough sprouting shoots thrusting forth in other places, whereby it 
greatly increaseth.

The Place.

It groweth plentifully in most places in England in rough and barren 
grounds, especially upon Hampsted Heath four miles from London; in 
divers places of Kent, Essex, and Berkshire, almost in every copse 
and low wood.

The Time.

The young and tender sprouts come forth at the first of the spring, 
which are eaten in some places, as the young tender stalks of 
Asparagus and such like herbs. The berries are ripe in August.

The Names

It is called in Latin, Ruscum, or Ruscus: in shops, Bruscus: of 
divers, Scopa regia, as testifieth Marcellus Empericus an old writer: 
in High Dutch, Muessdorn: in Low Dutch, Stekende palm: in Italian, 
Rusca, and Pontogopi: in Spanish, Gilbarbeyra: in English, Knee-Holm, 
Knee-Hulver, Butcher's Broom, and Petigree.

There be some (saith Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 13.) that call it 
Oxymyrsine.

Serapio, cap. 288, supposeth that Myrtus Agria, or wild Myrtle, is 
the same that Cubebæ are: he alledgeth a reason, because Galen hath 
not described Myrtus Agria, or Knee-holm; neither Dioscorides Cubebæ. 
Which as it is a reason of no account, so is it also without truth: 
for Galen doth nowhere make mention of Cubebæ; and be it that he had, 
it should not therefore follow that Knee-holm is Cubebæ. Galen 
speaketh of Carpesium, which Avicenna in his 137th chapter maketh to 
be Cubebæ, and that Carpesium doth much differ from Knee-Holm, those 
things do evidently declare which Galen hath left written hereof in 
his first book Of Counterpoisons. Carpesium (saith he) is an herb 
like in kind to that which is called Phu, or Setwall, but of greater 
force, and more aromatical or spicy. This groweth very plentifully in 
Sida a city of Pamphilia. Also he saith further, that some of the 
sticks of Carpesium are like to those of Cinnamon: there be two kinds 
thereof, one which is named Laërtium; and another that is called 
Ponticum. They both take their names of the mountains on which they 
grow: but Ponticum is the better, which is put into medicines in 
which the herb Phu ought to be put. For Carpesium, as I have said, is 
like unto Phu, or Setwall, yet is it stronger, and yieldeth a certain 
aromatical quality both in taste and smell. Thus far Galen. By which 
it plainly appeareth, that Knee-holm is not Carpesium, that is to 
say, Avicenna his Cubebæ, as shall be further declared in the chapter 
of Cubebæ. Herein Serapio was likewise deceived, who suspected it to 
be such a like thing; saying, There be certain fruits or grains 
called Cubebæ, not sticks: yet do they neither agree with Knee-Holm, 
neither yet were they known unto Galen.

Isaac in the second book of his Practise doth number it among the 
grains: and likewise Hali-abbas in the second book of his Practise 
also, num. 62. The later Grecians, among whom is Nicolaus Myrepsus, 
call them Cubebæ.

The Temperature.

The roots of Knee-Holm, which be chiefly used, are of temperature 
hot, and meanly dry, with a thinness of essence.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the roots of Knee-Hholm made in wine and drunken, 
provoketh urine, breaketh the stone, driveth forth gravel and sand, 
and easeth those that make their water with great pain.

B. Dioscorides writeth the same things of the leaves and berries, 
which moreover (saith he) bring down the desired sickness, help the 
headache and the yellow jaundice. Over and besides, the roots do 
serve to raise up gently tough and gross phlegm which sticketh in the 
lungs and chest, and do concoct the same.



CHAP. 339. Of Horse-Tongue or Double-Tongue.

Fig. 1325. Male Horse-Tongue (1) Fig. 1326. Female Horse-Tongue (2) 
The Description.

1. Horse-Tongue sendeth forth round stalks of a span long; whereupon 
are set long broad and sharp pointed leaves, but not pricking as are 
those of Knee-holm, not unlike to the leaves of the Bay tree, but 
lesser; greater than those of Knee-holm: out of the middle rib 
whereof cometh forth another leaf, sharp pointed also, but small, and 
of the bigness of the leaf of Knee-Holm, resembling a little tongue. 
From the bosom of which two leaves cometh forth a berry of the 
bigness of a pea, of colour red when it is ripe, which is sometimes 
in a manner all hid under the leaf. The root is white, long, and 
tough, and of a sweet and pleasant smell.

2. The female Horse-Tongue differeth not from the precedent but in 
stature and colour of the fruit: it riseth up (saith my author) four 
or five handfuls high: the berries come forth of the middle part of 
the greater leaf, and the setting on of the lesser, of a faint 
yellowish red colour, wherein consisteth the difference.


Fig. 1327. Italian Horse-Tongue (3) 

3. There is likewise another sort of Double-Tongue set forth by 
Matthiolus, which seems unto some not to differ from the first 
described or best known Horse-Tongue, being in truth the selfsame 
plant without any difference: notwithstanding I have set forth the 
figure, that it may appear to be the same, or very little different, 
and that not to be distinguished: but Matthiolus may not escape 
without reprehension, who knowing the untrue translation of Ruellius, 
would set forth so false a picture in his Commentaries.

The Place.

They are found on the Alps of Liguria, and on the mountains of 
Austria. Bellonius writeth, that they do grow very plentifully about 
the hill Athos.

The first of the Horse-Tongues grows in my garden very plentifully.

The Time.

That which groweth in my garden flowered in the beginning of May: the 
fruit is ripe in the fall of the leaf.

The Names.

Horse-Tongue is called of the later herbarists, Bonifacia, Uvularia, 
Bislingua, Lingua Pagana, and Victoriola. The same is also named 
Daphen Idæa, of Ida a mountain of Troy, which is called Alexander's 
Troy: of some, Laurus Alexandrina, or the Bay of Alexandria, and 
Laurus Idæa.

This Hippoglossum Bonifacia is called in High Dutch, Zapflinkraut: in 
Low Dutch, Tonghenbladt: in Spanish, Lengua de Cavallo: in English, 
Horse-Tongue, Tongue-Blade, Double-Tongue, and Laurel of Alexandria.

The Temperature.

Horse-Tongue is evidently hot in the second degree, and dry in the 
first.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Double-Tongue boiled in wine, and the decoction 
drunk, helpeth the strangury, provoketh urine, easeth women that have 
hard travail in child-bearing. It expelleth the secondine or 
afterbirth. The root beaten to powder, whereof six drams given in 
sweet wine, doth help the diseases aforesaid: it bringeth down the 
terms, as Dioscorides teacheth. The like writeth Pliny also: adding 
further, That it causeth women to have speedy deliverance, especially 
if half an ounce of the powder of the root be given to drink in a 
draught of sweet wine.

B. Baptista Sardus doth notably commend this herb for the diseases of 
the mother; by giving, saith he, a little spoonful of the powder 
either of the herb, the fruit, or of the root, to her that is 
troubled with the mother, she is thereby forthwith recovered. He also 
writeth, that the same is a singular good medicine for those that be 
bursten, if a spoonful of the powder of the root be drunk in the 
broth of flesh certain days together.



CHAP. 340. Of Cucumbers.
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Cucumber; some greater, others lesser; some 
of the Garden, some wild; some of one fashion, and some of another, 
as shall be declared in the following chapters.

Fig. 1328. Common Cucumnber (1) Fig. 1329. Adder's Cucumber (2) 
The Description.

1. The Cucumber creeps alongst upon the ground all about, with long 
rough branches; whereupon do grow broad rough leaves uneven about the 
edges: from the bosom whereof come forth crooked clasping tendrils 
like those of the Vine. The flowers shoot forth between the stalks 
and the leaves, set upon tender footstalks, composed of five small 
yellow leaves: which being past, the fruit succeedeth, long, 
cornered, rough, and set with certain bumps or strings, green at the 
first, and yellow when they be ripe, wherein is contained a firm and 
solid pulp or substance transparent or through-shining, which 
together with the seed is eaten a little before they be fully ripe. 
The seeds be white, long, and flat.

2. There be also certain long cucumbers, which were first made (as is 
said) by art and manuring, which Nature afterwards did preserve: for 
at the first, when as the fruit is very little, it is put into some 
hollow cane, or other thing made of purpose, in which the cucumber 
groweth very long, by reason of that narrow hollowness, which being 
filled up, the cucumber increaseth in length. The seeds of this kind 
of cucumber being sown bringeth forth not such as were before, but 
such as art hath framed; which of their own growth are found long, 
and oftentimes very crookedly turned: and thereupon they have been 
called Anguini, or Long Cucumbers.

3. The Pear-Fashioned Cucumber hath many trailing branches lying flat 
upon the ground, rough and prickly; whereon do stand at each joint 
one rough leaf, sharp pointed, and of an overworn green colour; among 
which come forth clasping tendrils, and also slender footstalks, 
whereon do grow yellow star-like flowers. The fruit succeeds, shaped 
like a pear, as big as a great Warden. The root is thready.


Fig. 1330. Spanish Cucumber (4) 

4. There hath been not long since sent out of Spain some seeds of a 
rare & beautiful cucumber, into Strasbourg a city in Germany, which 
there brought forth long trailing branches, rough & hairy, set with 
very large rough leaves sharp pointed, fashioned like unto the leaves 
of the Great Burdock, but more cut in or divided: amongst which come 
forth fair yellow flowers growing nakedly upon their tender 
footstalks: the which being past, the fruit cometh in place, of a 
foot in length, green on the side toward the ground, yellow to the 
sunward, streaked with many spots and lines of divers colours. The 
pulp or meat is hard and fast like that of our Pumpkin.

The Place.

These kinds of Cucumbers are planted in gardens in most countries of 
the world.

The Time.

According to my promise heretofore made, I have thought it good and 
convenient in this place to set down not only the time of sowing and 
setting of Cucumbers, Musk-Melons, Citruls, Pumpkins, Gourds, and 
such like, but also how to set or sow all manner and kinds of other 
cold seeds, as also whatsoever strange seeds are brought unto us from 
the Indies, or other hot regions.

First of all in the midst of April or somewhat sooner (if the weather 
be anything temperate) you shall cause to be made a bed or bank of 
hot and new horse dung taken forth of the stable (and not from the 
dunghill) of an ell in breadth, and the like in depth or thickness, 
of what length you please according to the quantity of your seed: the 
which bank you shall cover with hoops or poles, that you may the more 
conveniently cover the whole bed or bank with mats, old painted 
cloth, straw or such like, to keep it from the injury of the cold 
frosty nights, and not hurt the things planted in the bed: then shall 
you cover the bed all over with the most fertilest earth finely 
sifted, half a foot thick, wherein you shall set or sow your seeds: 
that being done, cast your straw or other coverture over the same; 
and so let it rest without looking upon it, or taking away of your 
covering for the space of seven or eight days at the most, for 
commonly in that space they will thrust themselves up nakedly forth 
of the ground: then must you cast upon them in the hottest time of 
the day some water that hath stood in the house or in the sun a day 
before, because the water so cast upon them newly taken forth of a 
well or pump, will so chill and cool them being brought and nourished 
up in such a hot place, that presently in one day you have lost all 
your labour; I mean not only your seed, but your bank also; for in 
this space the great heat of the dung is soft and spent, keeping in 
memory that every night they must be covered and opened when the day 
is warmed with the sunbeams: this must be done from time to time 
until that the plants have four or six leaves apiece, and that the 
danger of the cold nights is past: then must they be replanted very 
curiously, with the earth sticking to the plant, as near as may be 
unto the most fruitful place, and where the sun hath most force in 
the garden; provided that upon the removing of them you must cover 
them with some Dock leaves or wisps of straw, propped up with forked 
sticks, as well to keep them from the cold of the night, as also the 
heat of the sun: for they cannot whilst they be young and newly 
planted, endure neither overmuch cold nor overmuch heat, until they 
are well rooted in their new place or dwelling.

Oftentimes it falleth out that some seeds are more franker and 
forwarder than the rest, which commonly do rise up very nakedly with 
long necks not unlike to the stalk of a small mushroom, of a night 
old. This naked stalk must you cover with the like fine earth even to 
the green leaves, having regard to place your bank so that it may be 
defended from the north winds.

Observe these instructions diligently, and then you shall not have 
cause to complain that your seeds were not good, nor of the 
intemperancy of the climate (by reason whereof you can get no fruit) 
although it were in the furthest parts of the North of Scotland.

The Names.

The Cucumber is named generally Cucumis: in shops, Cucumer: in Latin, 
Cucumus sativus, or Garden Cucumber: in High Dutch, Cucumen: in 
Italian, Concomero: in Spanish, Cogombro: in French, Concombre: in 
Low Dutch, Concommeren; in English, Cowcumbers and Cucumbers.

The Temperature and virtues.

A. All the Cucumbers are of temperature cold and moist in the second 
degree. They putrefy soon in the stomach, and yield unto the body a 
cold and moist nourishment, and that very little, and the same not 
good.

B. Those Cucumbers must be chosen which are green and not yet ripe: 
for when they are ripe and yellow they be unfit to be eaten.

C. The seed is cold, but nothing so much as the fruit. It openeth and 
cleanseth, provoketh urine, openeth the stoppings of the liver, 
helpeth the chest and lungs that are inflamed; and being stamped and 
outwardly applied instead of a cleanser, it maketh the skin smooth 
and fair.

D. Cucumber (saith my author) taken in meats, is good for the stomach 
and other parts troubled with heat. It yieldeth not any nourishment 
that is good, insomuch as the unmeasurable use thereof filleth the 
veins with naughty cold humours.

E. The seed stamped and made into milk like as they do with almonds, 
or strained with milk or sweet wine and drunk, looseth the belly 
gently, and is excellent against the exulceration of the bladder.

F. The fruit cut in pieces or chopped as herbs to the pot and boiled 
in a small pipkin with a piece of mutton, being made into pottage 
with oatmeal, even as herb pottage are made, whereof a mess eaten to 
breakfast, as much to dinner, and the like to supper; taken in this 
manner for the space of three weeks together without intermission, 
doth perfectly cure all manner of saucefleme and copper faces, red 
and shining fiery noses (as red as red Roses) with pimples, rubies, 
and such like precious faces.

G. Provided always that during the time of curing you do use to wash 
or bathe the face with this liquor following.

H. Take a pint of strong white wine vinegar, powder of the roots of 
Ireos or Orrice three drams, searced or bolted into most fine dust, 
brimstone in fine powder half an ounce, camphor two drams, stamped 
with two blanched almonds, four oak-apples cut through the middle, 
and the juice of four lemons: put them all together in a strong 
double glass, shake them together very strongly, setting the same in 
the sun for the space of ten days: with which let the face be washed 
and bathed daily, suffering it to dry of itself without wiping it 
away. This doth not only help fiery faces, but also taketh away 
lentils, spots, morphew, sunburn, and all other deformities of the 
face.



CHAP. 341. Of Wild Cucumber.


Fig. 1331.Wild Cucumber

The Description.
The Wild Cucumber hath many fat hairy branches, very rough and full 
of juice, creeping or trailing upon the ground, whereupon are set 
very rough leaves, hairy, sharp pointed, & of an overworn greyish 
green colour: from the bosom of which come forth long tender 
footstalks: on the ends whereof do grow small flowers composed of 
five small leaves of a pale yellow colour: after which cometh forth 
the fruit, of the bigness of the smallest pullet's egg, but somewhat 
longer, very rough and hairy on the outside, and of the colour and 
substance of the stalks, wherein is contained very much water and 
small hard blackish seeds also, of the bigness of tares; which being 
come to maturity and ripeness, it casteth or squirteth forth his 
water with the seeds, either of its own accord, or being touched with 
the most tender or delicate hand never so gently, and oftentimes 
striketh so hard against those that touch it (especially if it chance 
to hit against the face) that the place smarteth long after: 
whereupon of some it hath been called Noli me tangere, Touch-Me-Not. 
The root is thick, white and long-lasting.

The Place.

It is found in most of the hot countries among rubbish, gravel, & 
other untilled places: it is planted in gardens in the Low Countries, 
and being once planted, saith Dodonæus, it easily cometh up again 
many years after (which is true:) and yet saith he further, that it 
doth not spring again of the root, but of the seeds spirted or cast 
about: which may likewise be true where he hath observed it, but in 
my garden it is otherwise, for as I said before, the root is long 
lasting, and continueth from year to year.

The Time.

It springeth up in May, it flowereth and is ripe in autumn; and is to 
be gathered at the same time, to make that excellent composition 
called Elaterium.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Agrestis, and Erraticus Cucumis: in shops, 
Cucumer asininus: in Italian, Cocomero salvatico: in Spanish, 
Cogumbrillo amargo: in English, Wild Cucumber, Spurting Cucumbers, 
and Touch-Me-Not: in French, Concombres sauvages.

The Temperature.

The leaves of wild Cucumbers, roots and their rinds as they are 
bitter in taste, so they be likewise hot and cleansing. The juice is 
hot in the second degree, as Galen witnesseth, and of thin parts. It 
cleanseth and wasteth away.

The Virtues.

A. The juice called Elaterium doth purge forth choler, phlegm, and 
watery humours, and that with force, and not only by siege, but 
sometimes also by vomit.

B. The quantity that is to be taken at one time is from five grains 
to ten, according to the strength of the patient.

C. The juice dried or hardened, and the quantity of half a scruple 
taken, driveth forth by siege gross phlegm, choleric humours, and 
prevaileth mightily against the dropsy, and shortness of breath.

D. The same drawn up into the nostrils mixed with a little milk, 
taketh away the redness of the eyes.

E. The juice of the root doth also purge phlegm, choleric and 
waterish humours, and is good for the dropsy: but not of snch force 
as Elaterium, which is made of the juice of the fruit: the making 
whereof I commend to the learned and curious apothecaries: among 
which number, Mr William Wright in Bucklersbury my loving friend hath 
taken more pains in curious composing of it, and hath more exactly 
performed the same, than any other whatsoever that I have had 
knowledge of.



CHAP. 342. Of Citrul Cucumbers.

Fig. 1332. Citrul Cucumber (1) Fig. 1333. Small Citrul (2) 
The Description.

1. The Citrul Cucumber hath many long, flexible, and tender stalks 
trailing upon the ground, branched like unto the Vine, set with 
certain great leaves deeply cut and very much jagged: among which 
come forth long clasping tendrils, and also tender footstalks, on the 
ends whereof do grow flowers of a gold yellow colour: the fruit is 
somewhat round, streaked or ribbed with certain deep furrows alongst 
the same, of a green colour above, and underneath on that side that 
lieth upon the ground something white: the outward skin whereof is 
very smooth; the meat within is indifferent hard, more like to that 
of the Pumpkin than of the Cucumber or Musk Melon: the pulp wherein 
the seed lieth, is spongy, and of a slimy substance: the seed is 
long, flat, and greater than those of the Cucumbers: the shell or 
outward bark is blackish, sometimes of an overworn reddish colour. 
The fruit of the Citrul doth not so easily rot or putrefy as doth the 
Melon, which being gathered in a fair dry day may be kept a long 
time, especially being covered in a heap of wheat, as Matthiolus 
saith; but according to my practise you may keep them much longer and 
better in a heap of dry sand.

2. The second kind of Citrul differeth not from the former, saving 
that it is altogether lesser, and the leaves are not so deeply cut or 
jagged, wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place and Time.

The Citrul prospereth best in hot regions, as in Sicily, Apulia, 
Calabria, and Syria about Aleppo and Tripoli. We have many times sown 
the seeds, and diligently observed the order prescribed in planting 
of Cucumbers.

The Names.

The later herbarists do call it Anguria: in shops, Citrullus, and 
Cucumus Citrullus: in English, Citruls, and Cucumber Citruls, and the 
seed is known by the name of Semen Citrulli: or Citrul seed. But if 
Cucumis Citrullus, be so called of the yellow colour of the Citron, 
then is the common Cucumber properly Cucumis Citrulus: which is known 
unto all to be contrary.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The meat or pulp of Cucumber Citrul which is next unto the bark is 
eaten raw, but more commonly boiled: it yieldeth to the body little 
nourishment, and the same cold: it engendereth a waterish blood, 
mitigateth the extremity of heat of the inner parts, and tempereth 
the sharpness and fervent heat of choler: being raw and held in the 
mouth, it takes away the roughness of the tongue in agues, and 
quencheth thirst.

B. The seeds are of the like faculty with those of Cucumbers.



CHAP. 343. Of the Wild Citrul called Colocynthis.

Fig. 1334. Wild Citrul or Coloquintida (1) Fig. 1335. Pear-Fashioned 
Coloquintida (2) 
The Description.

1. Coloquintida hath been taken of many to be a kind of the wild 
Gourd, it lieth along creeping on the ground as do the Cucumbers and 
Melons, coming nearest of all to that which in those days of some 
herbarists is called Citrul Cucumber: it bringeth forth upon his long 
branches small crooked tendrils like the Vine, and also very great 
broad leaves deeply cut or jagged: among which come forth small 
flowers of a pale yellow colour; then cometh the fruit round as a 
bowl covered with a thin rind, of a yellow colour when it is ripe, 
which when it is peeled or pared off, the white pulp or spongy 
substance appeareth full of seeds, of a white or else an overworn 
brown colour; the fruit so pared or peeled, is dried for medicine; 
the which is most extreme bitter, and likewise the seed, and the 
whole plant itself in all his parts.

2. The second kind of Coloquintida hath likewise many long branches 
and clasping tendrils, wherewith it taketh hold of such things as are 
near unto it. It bringeth forth the like leaves, but not so much 
jagged. The flowers are small and yellow: the fruit is fashioned like 
a pear, and the other sort round, wherein the especial difference 
consisteth.

The Place.

Coloquintida is sown and cometh to perfection in hot regions, but 
seldom or never in these Northerly and cold countries.

The Time.

It is sown in the spring, and bringeth his fruit to perfection in 
August.

It hath been divers times delivered unto me for a truth, that they do 
grow in the sands of the Mediterranean sea shore, or very near unto 
it, wild, for every man to gather that list, especially on the coast 
of Barbary, as also without the mouth of the Straights near to Santa 
Cruz and other places adjacent; from whence divers surgeons of London 
that have travelled thither for the curing of sick and hurt men in 
the ship have brought great quantities thereof at their return.

The Names.

It is vulgarly called Coloquintida: the Latin translators for 
Colocynthis do oftentimes set down Cucurbita sylvestris: 
notwithstanding there is a Cucurbita sylvestris that differeth from 
Colocynthis, or Coloquintida: for Cucurbita sylvestris is called in 
Greek kolokyntha agria, or wild Coloquintida, whereof shall be set 
forth a peculiar chapter next after the Cucurbita or Gourd: in 
English it is called Coloquintida, or Apple of Coloquintida.

The Temperature.

Coloquintida as it is in his whole nature and in all his parts 
bitter, so is it likewise hot and dry in the latter end of the second 
degree; and therefore it purgeth, cleanseth, openeth and performeth 
all those things that most bitter things do: but that the strong 
quality which it hath to purge by the stool, is, as Galen saith, of 
more force than the rest of his operations.

The Virtues.

A. Which operation of purging it worketh so violently, that it doth 
not only draw forth phlegm and choler marvellous speedily, and in 
very great quantity: but oftentimes fetcheth forth blood and bloody 
excrements, by shaving the guts, and opening the ends of the 
mesaraical veins.

B. So that therefore the same is not to be used either rashly, or 
without some dangerous and extreme disease constrain thereunto: 
neither yet at all, unless some tough and clammy thing be mixed 
therewith, whereby the vehemency thereof may be repressed, the 
hurtful force dulled, and the same speedily passing through the 
belly, the guts be not fret or shaved. Mesues teacheth to mix with it 
either Mastic, or gum Tragacanth.

C. There be made of it trochisks, or little flat cakes with Mastic, 
gum Arabic, Tragacanth and Bdellium, of these, Mastic hath a manifest 
binding quality: but tough and clammy things are much better, which 
have no astriction at all in them, or very little.

D. For by such binding or astringent things violent medicines being 
restrained and bridled, do afterward work their operation with more 
violence and trouble: but such as have not binding things mixed with 
them do easier work, and with lesser pain, as be those pills which 
Rhasis in his ninth book of Almanzor calleth illiacæ: which are 
compounded of Coloquintida and Scammony, two of the strongest 
medicines that are; and of a third called gum Sagapene, which through 
his clamminess doth as it were daub the entrails and guts, and defend 
them from the harm that might have some of either of them.

E. The which composition, although it be wonderful strong, and not to 
be used without very great necessity urge thereunto, doth 
notwithstanding easily purge, and without any great trouble, and with 
lesser torment than most of the mildest and gentlest medicines which 
have Mastic and other things mixed with them that are astringent.

F. And for this cause it is very like that Galen in his first book of 
Medicines, according to the places affected, would not suffer Mastic 
and Bdellium to be in the pills, which are surnamed cochiæ: the which 
notwithstanding his schoolmaster Quintus was also wont before to add 
unto the same.

G. But Coloquintida is not only good for purgations in which it is a 
remedy for the dizziness or the turning sickness, the megrim, 
continual headache, the apoplexy, the falling sickness, the stuffing 
of the lungs, the gnawings and gripings of the guts and entrails, and 
other most dangerous diseases, but also it doth outwardly work his 
operations, which are not altogether to be rejected.

H. Common oil wherein the same is boiled, is good against the singing 
in the ears, and deafness: the same killeth and driveth forth all 
manner of worms of the belly, and doth oftentimes provoke to the 
stool, if the navel and bottom of the belly be therewith anointed.

J. Being boiled in vinegar, and the teeth washed therewith, it is a 
remedy for the toothache, as Mesues teacheth.

K. The seed is very profitable to keep and preserve dead bodies with; 
especially if Aloes and Myrrh be mixed with it.

L. The white pulp or spongeous pith taken in the weight of a scruple 
openeth the belly mightily, and purgeth gross phlegm, and choleric 
humours.

M. It hath the like force if it be boiled and laid to infuse in wine 
or ale, and given to drink.

N. Being taken after the same manner it profiteth the diseases before 
remembered, that is, the apoplexy, falling sickness, giddiness of the 
head, the colic, looseness of sinews, and places out of joint, and 
all diseases proceeding of cold.

O. For the same purposes it may be used in clysters.

P. The same boiled in oil, and applied with cotton or wool, taketh 
away the pain of the haemorrhoids.

Q. The decoction made in wine, and used as a fomentation or bath, 
bringeth down the desired sickness.



CHAP. 344. Of Musk Melon, or Million.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Melons found at this day, differing very 
notably in shape and proportion, as also in taste, according to the 
climate and country where they grow; but of the ancients there was 
only one and no more, which is that Melopepo called of Galen, 
Cucumis, or Galen's Cucumber: notwithstanding some have comprehended 
the Musk Melons under the kinds of Citruls, wherein they have greatly 
erred: for doubtless the Musk Melon is a kind of Cucumber, according 
to the best approved authors.

Fig. 1336. Musk Melon (1) Fig. 1337. Sugar Melon (2) 
The Description.

1. That which the later herbarists do call Musk Melons is like to the 
common Cucumber in stalks, lying flat upon the ground, long, 
branched, and rough. The leaves be much alike, yet are they lesser, 
rounder, and not so cornered: the flowers in like manner be yellow: 
the fruit is bigger, at the first somewhat hairy, something long, now 
and then somewhat round; oftentimes greater, and many times lesser: 
the bark or rind is of an overworn russet green colour, ribbed and 
furrowed very deeply, having often chaps or chinks, and a confused 
roughness: the pulp or inner substance which is to be eaten, is of a 
faint yellow colour. The middle part whereof is full of slimy 
moisture, among which is contained the seed, like unto those of the 
Cucumber, but lesser, and of a browner colour.

2. The Sugar Melon hath long trailing stalks lying upon the ground, 
whereon are set small clasping tendrils like those of the Vine; and 
also leaves like unto the common Cucumber, but of a greener colour: 
the fruit cometh forth among those leaves, standing upon slender 
footstalks, round as the fruit of Coloquintida, and of the same 
bigness, of a most pleasant taste like Sugar, whereof it took the 
surname Saccharatus.

3. The Pear-Fashioned Melon hath many long viny branches, whereupon 
do grow cornered leaves like those of the Vine, and likewise great 
store of long tendrils, clasping and taking hold of each thing that 
it toucheth: the fruit groweth upon slender footstalks, fashioned 
like unto a Pear, of the bigness of a great Quince.


Fig. 1338. Spanish Melon (4) 

4. The Spanish Melon bringeth forth long trailing branches, whereon 
are set broad leaves slightly indented about the edges, not divided 
at all, as are all the rest of the Melons. The fruit groweth near 
unto the stalk, like unto the common Pumpkin, very long, not crested 
or furrowed at all, but spotted with very many such marks as are on 
the back side of the Hart's-Tongue leaf. The pulp or meat is not so 
pleasing in taste as the other.

The Place.

They delight in hot regions, notwithstanding I have seen at the 
Queen's house at Saint James very many of the first sort ripe, 
through the diligent and curious nourishing of them by a skilful 
gentleman the keeper of the said house, called Mr. Fowle, and in 
other places near unto the Right Honorable the Lord of Sussex' house, 
of Bermondsey by London, where from year to year there is very great 
plenty, especially if the weather be anything temperate.

The Time.

They are set or sown in April as I have already shown in the chapter 
of Cucumbers: their fruit is ripe in the end of August, and sometimes 
sooner.

The Names.

The Musk Melon is called in Latin, Melo: in Italian, Mellone: in 
Spanish, Melon: in French, Melons: in High Dutch, Melaun: in low 
Dutch, Meloenen: in Greek, Melon, which doth signify an apple; and 
therefore this kind of Cucumber is more truely called Melopepon: by 
reason that Pepo hath the smell of an apple, whereto the smell of 
this fruit is like; having withal the smell as it were of Musk: which 
for that cause are also named Melones Muschatellini, or Musk Melons.

The Temperature.

The meat of the Musk Melon, is very cold and moist.

The Virtues.

A. It is harder of digestion than is any of the rest of Cucumbers: 
and if it remain long in the stomach it putrefieth, and is occasion 
of pestilent fevers: which thing also Aëtius witnesseth in the first 
book of his Tetrabibles, writing that the use of Cucumeres, or 
Cucumbers, breedeth pestilent fevers; for he also taketh Cucumis to 
be that which is commonly called a Melon: which is usually eaten of 
the Italians and Spaniards rather to repress the rage of lust, than 
for any other physical virtue.

B. The seed is of like operation with that of the former Cucumber.



CHAP. 345. Of Melons, or Pumpkins.

The Kinds.

There be found divers kinds of Pumpkins which differ either in 
bigness or form: it shall be therefore sufficient to describe some 
one or two of them, and refer the rest unto the view of the figures, 
which most lively do express their differences; especially because 
this volume waxeth great, the description of no moment, and I hasten 
to an end.

Fig. 1339. Great Long Pumpkin (1) Fig. 1340. Great round Pumpkin (2) 
The Description.

1. The great Pumpkin bringeth forth thick and rough prickly stalks, 
which with their clasping tendrills take hold upon such things as are 
near unto them, as poles, arbours, pales, and ledges, which unless 
they were near unto them would creep along upon the ground; the 
leaves be wild, and great, very rough, and cut with certain deep 
gashes, nicked also on the edges like a saw; the flowers be very 
great like unto a bell cup, of yellow colour like gold, having five 
corners standing out like teeth: the fruit is great, thick, round, 
set with thick ribbes, like edges sticking forth. The pulp or meat 
whereof which is next under the rind is white, and of a mean 
hardness: the pith or substance in the middle is spongy, and slimy: 
the seed is great, broad, flat, something white, much greater than 
that of the Cucumber, otherwise not differing at all in form. The 
colour of the bark or rind is oftentimes of an obscure green, 
sometimes grey. The rind of the green Pumpkin is harder, and as it 
were of a woody substance: the rind of the grey is softer and 
tenderer.

2. The second kind of Melons or Pumpkins is like unto the former in 
stalks and leaves, and also in clasping tendrils: but the gashes of 
the leaves are not so deep, and the stalks be tenderer: the flowers 
are in like manner yellow, gaping, and cornered at the top, as be 
those of the former: but the fruit is somewhat rounder; sometimes 
greater, and many times lesser: and oftentimes of a green colour with 
an harder bark; now and then softer and whiter. The meat within is 
like the former: the seeds have also the same form, but they be 
somewhat lesser.


Fig 1341. Kinds of Pumpkin (3-6) 

3. Of this kind there is also another Pumpkin like unto the former in 
rough stalks, and in gashed and nicked leaves: the flower is also 
great and yellow, like those of the others: the fruit is of a great 
bigness, whose bark is full of little bunnies or hilly welts, as is 
the rind of the Citron, which is in like manner yellow when it is 
ripe.

4. The fourth Pumpkin doth very much differ from the others in form: 
the stalks, leaves, and flowers are like those of the rest: but the 
fruit is not long or round, but altogether broad, and in a manner 
flat like unto a shield or buckler; thicker in the middle, thinner in 
the compass, and curled or bumped in certain places about the edges, 
like the rugged or uneven bark of the Pomecitron; the which rind is 
very soft, thin, and white: the meat within is meetly hard and 
durable. The seed is greater than that of the common Cucumber, in 
form and colour all one.

Macocks virginiani, sive Pepo virginianus.
The Virginian Macocke, or Pumpkin.

This hath rough cornered streaked trailing branches proceeding from 
the root, eight or nine foot long, or longer, and those again divided 
into other branches of a blackish green colour, trailing, spreading, 
or running along the earth, covering a great deal of ground, sending 
forth broad cornered rough leaves, on great gross, long, rough, hairy 
footstalks, like and fully as big as the leaves of the common 
Pumpkin, with clasping tendrils and great broad shrivelled yellow 
flowers also like those of the common Pumpkin: the fruit succeedeth, 
growing alongst the stalks, commonly not near the root, but towards 
the upper part or tops of the branches, somewhat round, not extending 
in length, but flat like a bowl, but not so big as an ordinary bowl, 
being seldom four inches broad, and three inches long, of a blackish 
green colour when it is ripe. The substance or eatable part is of a 
yellowish white colour, containing in the midst a great deal of pulp 
or soft matter, wherein the seed lieth in certain rows also, like the 
common Pumpkin, but smaller. The root is made of many whitish 
branches, creeping far abroad in the earth, and perish at the first 
approach of winter.

Melones aquatici edules Virginiani
The Virginian Water-Melon.

This Melon or Pumpkin is like and fully as big as the common Pumpkin, 
in spreading, running, creeping branches, leaves, flowers and 
clasping tendrils: the fruit is of a very blackish green colour, and 
extendeth itself in length near four inches long, and three inches 
broad, no bigger nor longer than a great apple, and grow alongst the 
branches forth of the bosoms of the leaves not far from the root even 
to the tops of the branches, containing a substance, pulp, and flat 
seed, like the ordinary Pumpkin: the root is whitish, and disperseth 
itself very far abroad in the earth, and perisheth about the 
beginning of winter. October the tenth, 1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.

All these Melons or Pumpkins be garden plants: they joy best in a 
fruitful soil, and are common in England; except the last described, 
which is as yet a stranger.

The Time.

They are planted at the beginning of April: they flower in August: 
the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

The great Melon or Pumpkin is named in Greek and Latin Pepo: the 
fruits of them all when they be ripe are called by a common name in 
Greek, Pepones: in English, Millions or Pumpkin. Whereupon certain 
physicians, saith Galen, have contended, that this fruit ought to be 
called in Latin, Pepo Cucumeralis or Cucumber Pumpkin. Pliny in his 
ninth book the fifth chapter writeth, that Cucumeres when they exceed 
in greatness are named Pepones: it is called in High Dutch, Pluker: 
in Low Dutch, Pepoenen: in French, Pompons.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. All the Melons are of a cold nature, with plenty of moisture: they 
have a certain cleansing quality, by means whereof they provoke 
urine, and do more speedily pass through the body than do either the 
Gourd, Citrul, or Cucumber, as Galen hath written.

B. The pulp of the Pumpkin is never eaten raw, but boiled. For so it 
doth more easily descend, making the belly soluble. The nourishment 
which cometh hereof is little, thin, moist and cold, (bad, saith 
Galen) and that especially when it is not well digested: by reason 
whereof it maketh a man apt and ready to fall into the disease called 
the Choleric Passion, and of some the Felony.

C. The seed cleanseth more than the meat, it provoketh urine, and is 
good for those that are troubled with the stone of the kidneys.

D. The fruit boiled in milk and buttered, is not only a good 
wholesome meat for man's body, but being so prepared, is also a most 
physical medicine for such as have an hot stomach, and the inward 
parts inflamed.

E. The flesh or pulp of the same sliced and fried in a pan with 
butter, is also a good and wholesome meat: but baked with apples in 
an oven, it doth fill the body with flatuous or windy belchings, and 
is food utterly unwholesome for such as live idly; but unto 
robustious and rustic people nothing hurteth that filleth the belly.



CHAP. 346. Of Wild Pumpkins.

Fig. 1342. Great Wild Pumpkin (1) Fig. 1343. Small Wild Pumpkin (2) 
The Description.

1. As there is a wild sort of Cucumbers, of Melons, Citruls and 
Gourds, so likewise there be certain wild Pumpkins, that be so of 
their own nature. These bring forth rough stalks, set with sharp 
thorny prickles. The leaves be likewise rough: the flowers yellow as 
be those of the garden Melon, but every part is lesser. The fruit is 
thick, round, and sharp pointed, having a hard green rind. The pulp 
or meat whereof, and the middle pith, with the seed are like those of 
the garden Pumpkin, but very bitter in taste.

2. The second is like unto the former, but it is altogether lesser, 
wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

These Melons do grow wild in Barbary, Africa, and most parts of the 
East and West Indies: They grow not in these parts except they be 
sown.

The Time.

Their time of flowering and flourishing answereth that of the garden 
Pumpkin.

The Names.

Although the ancient physicians have made no mention of these plants, 
yet the thing itself doth show, that there be such, and ought to be 
called in Latin, Pepones sylvestres: in English, Wild Melons or 
Pumpkins.

The Temperature.

Like as these wild Melons be altogether of their own nature very 
bitter, so be they also of temperature hot and dry, and that in the 
latter end of the second degree. They have likewise a cleansing 
faculty, not inferior to the wild Cucumbers.

The Virtues.

A. The wine, which when the pith and seed is taken forth, is poured 
into the rind, and hath remained so long therein till such time as it 
becommeth bitter, doth purge the belly, and bringeth forth phlegmatic 
and choleric humours. To be brief, the juice hereof is of the same 
operation that the wild Cucumber is of; and being dried it may be 
used instead of Elaterium, which is the dried juice of the wild 
Cucumber.



CHAP. 347. Of Gourds.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Gourds, some wild, and others tame of the 
garden; some bringing forth fruit like unto a bottle; others long, 
bigger at the end, keeping no certain form or fashion; some greater, 
others lesser. I will only figure and describe two or three of the 
chiefest, and so pass over the rest, because each one upon the first 
sight of them knows to what kind to refer them.

Fig. 1344. Snake's Gourd (1) Fig. 1345. Bottle Gourd (2) 
The Description.

1. The Gourd bringeth forth very long stalks as be those of the Vine, 
cornered and parted into divers branches, which with his clasping 
tendrils taketh hold and climbeth upon such things as stand near unto 
it: the leaves be very great, broad, and sharp pointed, almost as 
great as those of the Clot-Bur, but softer, and somewhat covered as 
it were with a white frieze, as be also the stalks and branches, like 
those of the Marsh Mallow: the flowers be white, and grow forth from 
the bosom of the leaves: in their places come up the fruit, which are 
not all of one fashion, for oftentimes they have the form of flagons 
or bottles, with a great large belly and a small neck. The Gourd 
(saith Pliny, lib. 19. cap. 5) groweth into any form or fashion that 
you would have it, either like unto a wreathed dragon, the leg of a 
man, or any other shape, according to the mould wherein it is put 
whilst it is young: being suffered to climb upon any arbour where the 
fruit may hang, it hath been seen to be nine foot long, by reason of 
his great weight which hath stretched it out to the length. The rind 
when it is ripe is very hard, woody, and of a yellow colour: the meat 
or inward pulp is white; the seed long, flat, pointed at the top, 
broad below, with two peaks standing out like homes, white within, 
and sweet in taste.

2. The second differeth not from the precedent in stalks, leaves, or 
flowers: the fruit hereof is for the most part fashioned like a 
bottle or flagon, wherein especially consisteth the difference.

The Place.

The Gourds are cherished in the gardens of these cold regions rather 
for pleasure than for profit: in the hot countries where they come to 
ripeness they are sometimes eaten, but with small delight; especially 
they are kept for the rinds, wherein they put Turpentine, Oil, Honey, 
and serve them for pails to fetch water in, and many other the like 
uses.
The Time.

They are planted in a bed of horse-dung in April, even as we have 
taught in the planting of cucumbers: they flourish in June and July; 
the fruit is ripe in the end of August.

The Name.

The Gourd is called in Latin, Cucurbita edulis, Cucurbita sativa: of 
Pliny, Cucurbita cameraria, because it climbeth up, and is a covering 
for arbours and walking places, and banqueting houses in gardens: he 
calleth the other which climbeth not up, but lieth crawling on the 
ground, Cucurbita plebeia: in Italian, Zucca: in Spanish, Calabazza: 
in French, Courge: in High Dutch, Kurbs: in Low Dutch, Cauwoorden: in 
English, Gourds.

The Temperature.

The meat or inner pulp of the Gourd is of temperature cold and moist, 
and that in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The juice being dropped into the ears with oil of roses is good 
for the pain thereof proceeding of a hot cause.

B. The pulp or meat mitigateth all hot swellings, if it be laid 
thereon in manner of a poultice, and being used to this manner it 
taketh away the headache and the inflammation of the eyes.

C. The same author affirmeth, that a long Gourd or else a Cucumber 
being laid in the cradle or bed by the young infant while it is 
asleep and sick of an ague, it shall be very quickly made whole.

D. The pulp also is eaten sodden, but because it hath in it a 
waterish and thin juice, it yieldeth small nourishment to the body, 
and the same cold and moist; but it easily passeth through, 
especially being sodden, which by reason of the slipperiness and 
moistness also of his substance mollifieth the belly.

E. But being baked in an oven or fried in a pan it loseth the most 
part of his natural moisture, and therefore it more slowly 
descendeth, and doth not mollify the belly so soon.

F. The seed allayeth the sharpnesss of urine, and bringeth down the 
same.



CHAP. 348. Of the Wild Gourd.

Fig. 1346. Wild Bottle Gourd (1) Fig. 1347. Mushroom Wild Gourd (2) 
The Description

1. There is besides the former one a certain wild Gourd: this is like 
the garden Gourd in climbing stalks, clasping tendrils, and soft 
leaves, and as it were downy; all and every one of which things being 
far less: this also climbeth upon arbours and banquetting houses: the 
fruit doth represent the great bellied Gourd, and those that be like 
unto bottles in form, but in bigness it is very far inferior; for it 
is small, and scarce so great as an ordinary Quince, and may be held 
within the compass of a man's hand: the outward rind at the first is 
green, afterwards it is as hard as wood, and of the colour thereof: 
the inner pulp is moist, and very full of juice, in which lieth the 
seed. The whole is as bitter as Coloquintida, which hath made so many 
errors, one especially, in taking the fruit Coloquintida for the wild 
Gourd.

2. The second wild Gourd hath likewise many trailing branches and 
clasping tendrils, wherewith it taketh hold of such things as be near 
unto it: the leaves be broad, deeply cut into divers sections, like 
those of the Vine, soft and very downy, whereby it is especially 
known to be one of the Gourds: the flowers are very white, as are 
also those of the Gourds. The fruit succeedeth, growing to a round 
form, flat on the top like the head of a Mushroom, whereof it took 
his surname.

The Place.

They grow of themselves wild in hot regions; they never come to 
perfection of ripeness in these cold countries.

The Time.

The time answereth those of the garden.

The Names.

The wild Gourd is called in Latin, Cucurbita sylvestris, or wild 
Gourd. Pliny, lib. 20. Cap. 3, affirmeth, that the wild Gourd is 
named of the Grecians, symphos, which is hollow, an inch thick, not 
growing but among stones, the juice whereof being taken is very good 
for the stomach. But the wild Gourd is not that which is so 
described; for it is above an inch thick, neither is it hollow, but 
full of juice, and by reason of the extreme bitterness offensive to 
the stomach.

Some also there be that take this for Coloquintida, but they are far 
deceived; for Colocynthis is the wild Citrul Cucumber, whereof we 
have treated in the chapter of Citruls.

The Temperature.

The wild Gourd is as hot and dry as Coloquintida, that is to say, in 
the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The wild Gourd is extreme bitter, for which cause it openeth and 
scoureth the stopped passages of the body; it also purgeth downwards 
as do wild Melons.

B. Moreover, the wine which hath continued all night in this Gourd 
likewise purgeth the belly mightily, and bringeth forth choleric and 
phlegmatic humours.



CHAP. 349. Of Potatoes.


Fig. 1348. [Sweet] Potatoes

The Description.

This Plant (which is called of some Sisarum Peruvianum, or Skirrets 
of Peru) is generally of us called Potatus, or Potatoes. It hath long 
rough flexible branches trailing upon the ground like unto Pumpkins; 
whereupon are set green three-cornered leaves, very like unto those 
of the wild Cucumber. There is not any that have written of this 
plant have said anything of the flowers: therefore I refer their 
description unto those that shall hereafter have further knowledge of 
the same. Yet have I had in my garden divers roots that have 
flourished unto the first approach of winter, and have grown unto a 
great length of branches, but they brought not forth any flowers at 
all; whether because the winter caused them to perish, before their 
time of flowering, or that they be of nature barren of flowers, I am 
not certain. The roots are many, thick, and knobby, like unto the 
roots of Peonies, or rather of the white Asphodel, joined together at 
the top into one head, in maner of the Skirret, which being divided 
into divers parts and planted, do make a great increase, especially 
if the greatest roots be cut into divers gobbets, and planted in good 
and fertile ground.

The Place.

The Potatoes grow in India, Barbary, Spain, and other hot regions; of 
which I planted divers roots (that I bought at the Exchange in 
London) in my garden, where they flourished until winter, atwhich 
time they perished and rotted.

The Time.

It flourisheth unto the end of September: at the first approach of 
great frosts the leaves together with the roots and stalks do perish.

The Names.

Clusius calleth it Battata, Camotes, Amotes, and Ignames: in English, 
Potatoes, Potatus, and Potades.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Potatoes are hot and dry, as may evidently appear by 
the taste. The roots are of a temperate quality.

The Virtues.

A. The Potato roots are among the Spaniards, Italians, Indians, and 
many other nations common and ordinary meat; which no doubt are of 
mighty and nourishing parts, and do strengthen and comfort nature; 
whose nutriment is as it were a mean between flesh and fruit, but 
somewhat windy; but being roasted in the embers they lose much of 
their windiness, especially being eaten sopped in wine.

B. Of these roots may be made conserves no less toothsome, wholesome, 
and dainty than of the flesh of Quinces: and likewise those 
comfortable and delicate meats called in shops morcelli, placentulæ, 
and divers other such like.

C. These roots may serve as a ground or foundation whereon the 
cunning Confectioner or sugar-baker may work and frame many 
comfortable delicate conserves, and restorative sweetmeats.

D. They are used to be eaten roasted in the ashes. Some when they be 
so roasted infuse them and sop them in wine; and others to give them 
the greater grace in eating, do boil them with prunes, and so eat 
them. And likewise others dress them (being first roasted) with oil, 
vinegar, and salt, every man according to his own taste and liking. 
Notwithstanding howsoever they be dressed, they comfort, nourish, and 
strengthen the body, procuring bodily lust, and that with greediness.



CHAP. 350. Of Potatoes of Virginia.


Fig. 1349. Virginia Potatoes

The Description.

Virginia Potato hath many hollow flexible branches trailing upon the 
ground, three square, uneven, knotted or kneed in sundry places at 
certain distances: from the which knots cometh forth one great leaf 
made of divers leaves, some smaller, and others greater, set together 
upon a fat rniddle rib by couples, of a swart green colour tending to 
redness; the whole leaf resembling those of the Winter Cresses, but 
much larger; in taste at the first like grass, but afterward sharp 
and nipping the tongue. From the bosom of which leaves come forth 
long round slender footstalks, whereon do grow very fair & pleasant 
flowers, made of one entire whole leaf, which is folded or plaited in 
such strange sort, that it seemeth to he a flower made of five sundry 
small leaves, which cannot easily be perceived except the same be 
pulled open. The whole flower is of a light purple colour, striped 
down the middle of every fold or welt with a light show of 
yellowness, as if purple and yellow were mixed together; in the 
middle of the flower thrusteth forth a thick flat pointel yellow as 
gold, with a small sharp green prick or point in the midst thereof. 
The fruit succeedeth the flowers, round as a ball, of the bigness of 
a little Bullace or wild plum, green at the first, and black when it 
is ripe; wherein is contained small white seed lesser than those of 
Mustard. The root is thick, fat, and tuberous, not much differing 
either in shape, colour, or taste fron the common Potatoes, saving 
that the roots hereof are not so great nor long; some of them are as 
round as a ball, some oval or egg-fashion; some longer, and others 
shorter: the which knobby roots are fastened unto the stalks with an 
infinite number of thready strings.

The Place.

It groweth naturally in America, where it was first discovered, as 
reports C. Clusius, since which time I have received roots hereof 
from Virginia, otherwise called Norembega, which grow and prosper in 
my garden as in their own native country.

The Time.

The leaves thrust forth of the ground in the beginning of May: the 
flowers bud forth in August. The fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

The Indians do call this plant Pappus, meaning the roots: by which 
name also the common Potatoes are called in those Indian countries. 
We have the name proper unto it mentioned in the title. Because it 
hath not only the shape and proportion of Potatoes, but also the 
pleasant taste and virtues of the same, we may call it in English, 
Potatoes of America or Virginia.

Clusius questions whether it be not the Arachidna of Theophrastus. 
Bauhin hath referred it to the Nightshades; and calleth it Solanum 
tuberosum esculentum; and largely figures and describes it in his 
Prodromus, pag. 89.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The temperature and virtues be referred unto the common Potatoes, 
being likewise a food, as also a meat for pleasure, equal in goodness 
and wholesomeness unto the same, being either roasted in the embers, 
or boiled and eaten with oil, vinegar, and pepper, or dressed any 
other way by the hand of some cunning in cookery.

B. Bauhin saith, That he heard that the use of these roots was 
forbidden in Burgundy (where they call them Indian Artichokes) for 
that they were persuaded the too frequent use of them caused the 
leprosy.



CHAP. 351. Of the Garden Mallow called Hollyhock.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts or kinds of Mallows; some of the garden: there 
be also some of the marsh or seashore; others of the field, and both 
wild. And first of the Garden Mallow or Hollyhock.

Fig. 1350. Single Garden Hollyhock (1) Fig. 1351. Jagged Strange 
Hollyhock (2) 
The Description.

1. The tame or garden Mallow bringeth forth broad round leaves of a 
whitish green colour, rough, and greater than those of the wild 
Mallow. The stalk is straight, of the height of four or six cubits; 
whereon do grow upon slender footstalks single flowers not much 
unlike to the wild Mallow, but greater, consisting only of five 
leaves, sometimes white or red, now and then of a deep purple colour, 
varying diversely, as Nature list to play with it: in their places 
groweth up a round knop like a little cake, compact or made up of a 
multitude of flat seeds like little cheeses. The root is long, white, 
tough, easily bowed, and groweth deep in the ground.

2. The second being a strange kind of Hollyhock hath likewise broad 
leaves, rough and hoary, or of an overworn russet colour, cut into 
divers sections even to the middle rib, like those of Palma Christi. 
The flowers are very single, but of a perfect red colour, wherein 
consisteth the greatest difference. And this may be called Malva 
rosea simplex peregrina folio ficus, Jagged Strange Hollyhock.


Fig. 1352. Double Purple Hollyhock (3) 

3. The double Hollyhock with purple flowers hath great broad leaves, 
confusedly indented about the edges, and likewise toothed like a saw. 
The stalk groweth to the height of four or five cubits. The flowers 
are double, and of a bright purple colour.

4. The Garden Hollyhock with double flowers of the colour of scarlet, 
groweth to the height of five or six cubits, having many broad leaves 
cut about the edges. The stalk and root is like the precedent. This 
may be called Malva hortensis rubra multiplex, Double Red Hollyhocks, 
or Rose Mallow.

5. The Tree Mallow is likewise one of the Hollyhocks; it bringeth 
forth a great stalk of the height of ten or twelve foot, growing to 
the form of a small tree, whereon are placed divers great broad 
leaves of a russet green colour, not unlike to those of the great 
Clot-Bur Dock, deeply indented about the edges. The flowers are very 
great and double as the greatest Rose, or double Peony, of a deep red 
colour tending to blackness. The root is great, thick, and of a woody 
substance, as is the rest of the plant. This may be called Malva 
hortensis atrorubente multiplice flore.

The Place.

These Hollyhocks are sown in gardens, almost everywhere, and are in 
vain sought elsewhere.

The Time.

The second year after they are sown they bring forth their flowers in 
July and August; when the seed is ripe the stalk withereth, the root 
remaineth and sendeth forth new stalks, leaves and flowers, many 
years after.

The Names.

The Hollyhock is called of divers, Rosa ultramarina, or outlandish 
Rose, and Rosa hyemalis, or winter Rose. And this is that Rose which 
Pliny in his 2nd book, 4th chapter writes to have the stalk of a 
Mallow, and the leaves of a pot-herb, which they call Mosceuton: in 
High Dutch, Garten pappelen: in low Dutch, Winter Roosen: in French, 
Rose d'outre mer: in English, Hollyhock, and Hocks.

The Temperature.

The Hollyhock is meetly hot, and also moist, but not so much as the 
wild Mallow: it hath likewise a clammy substance, which is more 
manifest in the seed and root, than in any other part.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the flowers, especially those of the red, doth 
stop the overmuch flowing of the monthly courses, if they be boiled 
in red wine.

B. The roots, leaves, and seeds serve for all those things for which 
the wild Mallows do, which are more commonly and familiarly used.



CHAP. 352. Of Wild Mallows.

Fig. 1353. Field Mallow (1) Fig. 1354. Dwarf Wild Mallow (2) 
The Description.

1. The Wild Mallow hath broad leaves somewhat round and cornered, 
nicked about the edges, smooth, and green of colour: among which rise 
up many slender tough stalks, clad with the like leaves, but smaller. 
The flowers grow upon little footstalks of a reddish colour mixed 
with purple streaks, consisting of five leaves, fashioned like a 
bell: after which cometh up a knop or round button, like unto a flat 
cake, compact of many small seeds. The root is white, tough, and full 
of a slimy juice, as is all the rest of the plant.

2. The Dwarf Wild Mallow creepeth upon the ground: the stalks are 
slender and weak; yet tough and flexible. The leaves be rounder, and 
more hoary than the other. The flowers are small and of a white 
colour.

Fig. 1355. French Curled Mallow (3) Fig. 1356. Vervain Mallow (4) 
	3. The crisp or curled Mallow, called of the vulgar sort French 
Mallows, hath many small upright stalks, growing to the height of a 
cubit; and sometimes higher; whereon do grow broad leaves somewhat 
round and smooth, of a light green colour, plaited or curled about 
the brims like a ruff. The flowers be small and white. The root 
perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.

4. The Vervain Mallow hath many straight stalks, whereon do grow 
divers leaves deeply cut and jagged even to the middle rib, not 
unlike to the leaves of Vervain, whereof it took his name: among 
which come forth fair and pleasant flowers like unto those of the 
common Mallow in form, but of a more bright red colour, mixed with 
stripes of purple, which setteth forth the beauty. The root is thick, 
and continueth many years. This is sometimes though more rarely found 
with white flowers.


Fig. 1357. Spanish Mallow (5) 

5. This annual Mallow, called by Clusius, Malva trimestris, is very 
like our common Mallow, sending up slender branched stalks some three 
foot high; the bottom leaves are round, those on the stalks more 
sharp pointed, green above, and whiter underneath; the flowers 
consist of five leaves of a light carnation colour, the seed is like 
that of the ordinary Mallow, but smaller; and such also is the root, 
which perishes every year as soon as the seed is ripe: it is sown in 
some gardens, and grows wild in Spain.

The Place.

The two first Mallows grow in untoiled places among pot-herbs, by 
highways, and the borders of fields.

The French Mallow is an excellent pot-herb, for the which cause it is 
sown in gardens, and is not to be found wild that I know of.

The Vervain Mallow groweth not everywhere: it grows on the ditch 
sides on the left hand of the place of execution by London, called 
Tyburn: also in a field near unto a village fourteen miles from 
London called Bushey, on the back-side of a gentleman's house named 
Mr Robert Wylbraham: likewise amongst the bushes and hedges as you go 
from London to a bathing place called the Old Ford; and in the bushes 
as you go to Hackney a village by London, in the closes next the 
town, and in divers other places, as at Bassingburne in 
Hertfordshire, three miles from Royston.

Goodyer found the Vervain Mallow with white flowers growing 
plentifully in a close near Mapledurham in Hampshire, called 
Aldercrofts.

The Time.

These wild Mallows do flower from June till summer be well spent: in 
the meantime their seed also waxeth ripe.

The Names.

The wild Mallow is called in Latin Malva sylvestris: of some, 
Osiriaca: in High Dutch, Papvelin: in Low Dutch, Maluwe, and Keeskens 
Cruyt: in English, Mallow.

The Vervain Mallow is called of Dioscorides, Alcea: of some, Herba 
Hungarica, and Herba Simeonis, or Simon's Mallow: in English, Vervain 
Mallow, and Jagged Mallow.

The name of this herb Malva seemeth to come from the Hebrews, who 
call it in their tongue Malluach, of the saltness, because the Mallow 
groweth in saltish and old ruinous places, as in dung-hills and such 
like, which in most abundant manner yieldeth forth saltpetre and such 
like matter: for Melach signifieth salt, as the learned know. I am 
persuaded that the Latin word Malua or Malva cometh from the Chaldee 
name Mallucha, the gutturall letter ch, being left out for good 
sound's sake: so that it were better in this word Malua to read u as 
a vowel, than as a consonant: which words are uttered by the learned 
Doctor Rabbi David Kimhi, and seem to carry a great show of truth: in 
English it is called Mallow; which name cometh as near as may be to 
the Hebrew word.

The Temperature.

The wild Mallows have a certain moderate and middle heat, and 
moistness withal: the juice thereof is slimy, clammy, or gluing, the 
which are to be preferred before the garden Mallow or Hollyhock, as 
Diphilus Siphinus in Athenæus doth rightly think; who plainly 
showeth, that the wild Mallow is better than that of the garden: 
although some do prefer the Hollyhock, whereunto we may not consent, 
neither yet yield unto Galen, who is partly of that mind, yet 
standeth he doubtful: for the wild Mallow without controversy is 
fitter to be eaten, and more pleasant than those of the garden, 
except the French Mallow, which is generally holden the wholesomest, 
and amongst the pot-herbs not the least commended by Hesiod: of whose 
opinion was Horace, writing in his second Ode of his Epodon,

-- & gravi
Maluæ salubres corpori.
["and Mallows salubrious for a sickly body"
Horace, Epodes, 2.57]

The Mallow (saith Galen) doth nourish moderately, engendereth gross 
blood, keepeth the body soluble, and looseth the belly that is bound. 
It easily descendeth, not only because it is moist, but also by 
reason it is slimy.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Mallows are good against the stinging of scorpions, 
sees, wasps, and such like: and if a man be first anointed with the 
leaves stamped with a little oil, he shall not be stung at all, 
Dioscorides saith.

B. The decoction of Mallows with their roots drunken are good against 
all venom and poison, if it be incontinently taken after the poison, 
so that it be vomited up again.

C. The leaves of Mallows boiled till they be soft and applied, do 
mollify tumors and hard swellings of the mother, if they do withal 
sit over the fume thereof, and bathe themselves therewith.

D. The decoction used in clysters is good against the roughness and 
fretting of the guts, bladder, and fundament.

E. The roots of the Vervain Mallow do heal the bloody flux and inward 
burstings, being drunk with wine and water, as Dioscorides and Paulus 
Ægineta testify.



CHAP. 353. Of Marsh Mallow.


Fig. 1358. Mallows (1-4) 

The Description.

1. Marsh Mallow is also a certain kind of wild Mallow: it hath broad 
leaves, small toward the point, soft, white, and friezed or cottoned, 
and slightly nicked about the edges: the stalks be round and 
straight, three or four foot high, of a whitish grey colour; whereon 
do grow flowers like unto those of the wild Mallows, yet not red as 
they are, but commonly white, or of a very light purple colour out of 
the white: the knop or round button wherein the seeds lie is like 
that of the first wild Mallow. The root is thick, tough, white 
within, and containeth in it a clammy and slimy juice.

2. This strange kind of Mallow is holden amongst the best writers to 
be a kind of Marsh Mallow: some excellent herbarists have set it down 
for Sida theophrasti, whereto it doth not fully answer: it hath 
stalks two cubits high, whereon are set without order many broad 
leaves hoary and whitish, not unlike those of the other Marsh Mallow: 
the flowers consist of five leaves, and are larger than those of the 
Marsh Mallow, and of a purple colour tending to redness: after which 
there come round bladders of a pale colour, in shape like the fruit 
or seeds of round Aristochia, or Birthwort, wherein is contained 
round black seed. The root is thick and tough, much like that of the 
common Mallow.

3. This wild Mallow is likewise referred unto the kinds of Marsh 
Mallow, called generally by the name of Althæa, which groweth to the 
form of a small hedge tree, approaching nearer to the substance or 
nature of wood than any of the other, wherewith the people of Olbia 
and Narbonne in France do make hedges, to sever or divide their 
gardens and vineyards (even as we do with quicksets of privet or 
thorn) which continueth long: the stalk whereof groweth upright, very 
high, coming near to the Willow in woodiness and substance. The 
flowers grow alongst the same, in fashion and colour of the common 
wild Mallow.

4. The Shrubby Mallow riseth up like unto a hedge bush, and of a 
woody substance, dividing itself into divers tough and limber 
branches, covered with a bark of the colour of ashes; whereupon do 
grow round pointed leaves, somewhat nicked about the edges, very 
soft, not unlike to those of the common Marsh Mallow, and of an 
overworn hoary colour. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of 
a purple colour, consisting of five leaves, very like to the common 
wild Mallow, and the seed of the Marsh Mallow.


Fig. 1359. Hemp-Leaved Mallow (5) 


5. We have another sort of Mallow, callled of Pena, Alcea fruticosior 
pentaphylla: it bringeth forth in my garden many twiggy branches, set 
upon stiff stalks of the bigness of a man's thumb, growing to the 
height of ten or twelve foot: whereupon are set very many leaves 
deeply cut even to the middle rib, like unto the leaves of hemp: the 
flowers and seeds are like unto the common Mallow: the root is 
exceeding great, thick, and of a woody substance. Clusius calls this 
Alcea fruticosa cannabino folio: and it is with good reason thought 
to be the Cannabis sylvestris described by Dioscorides, lib. 3. cap. 
166.

The Place.

The common Marsh Mallow groweth very plentifully in the marshes both 
on the Kentish and Essex shore alongst the river of Thames, about 
Woolwich, Erith, Greenhithe, Gravesend, Tilbury, Lee, Colchester, 
Harwich, and in most salt marshes about London: being planted in 
gardens it prospereth well, and continueth long.

The second groweth in the moist and fenny places of Ferraria, between 
Padua in Italy, and the river Eridanus.

The others are strangers likewise in England: notwithstanding at the 
impression hereof I have sown some seeds of them in my garden, 
expecting the success.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in July and August: the root springeth forth 
afresh every year in the beginning of March, which are then to be 
gathered, or in September.

The Names.

The common Marsh Mallow is called Latin Althæa and Ibiscus: in shops, 
Bismalva, and Malvaviscus; as though they should say Malva Ibiscus: 
in High Dutch, Ibisch: in Low Dutch, Witte Maluwe, and Witten Hemst: 
in Italian and Spanish, Maluavisco: in French, Guimaulve: in English, 
Marsh Mallow, Moorish Mallow, and White Mallow.

The rest of the Mallows retain the names expressed in their several 
titles.

The Temperature.

Marsh Mallow is moderately hot, but drier than the other Mallows: the 
roots and seeds hereof are more dry, and of thinner parts, as Galen 
writeth; and likewise of a digesting, softening or mollifying nature.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Marsh Mallow are of the power to digest, mitigate 
pain, and to concoct.

B. They be with good effect mixed with fomentations and poultices 
against pains of the sides, of the stone, and of the bladder, in a 
bath also they serve to take away any manner of pain.

C. The decoction of the leaves drunk doth the same, which doth not 
only assuage pain which proceedeth of the stone, but also is very 
good to cause the same to descend more easily, and to pass forth.

D. The roots and seeds are profitable for the same purpose: moreover 
the decoction of the roots helpeth the bloody flux, yet not by any 
binding quality, but by mitigating the gripings and frettings 
thereof; for they do not bind at all, although Galen otherwise 
thought; but they cure the bloody flux, by having things added unto 
them, as the roots of Bistort, Tormentil, the flowers and rinds of 
Pomegranates and such like.

E. The mucilage or slimy juice of the roots, is mixed very 
effectually with all oils, ointments, and plasters that slacken and 
mitigate pain.

F. The roots boiled in wine, and the decoction given to drink, expell 
the stone and gravel, help the bloody flux, sciatica, cramps, and 
convulsions.

G. The roots of Marsh Mallows, the leaves of common Mallows, and the 
leaves of Violets, boiled in water until they be very soft, and that 
little water that is left drained away, stamped in a stone mortar, 
adding thereto a certain quantity of fenugreek, and linseed in 
powder; the root of the black Bryony, and some good quantity of 
barrow's grease, stamped altogether to the form of a poultice, and 
applied very warm, mollify and soften apostumes and hard swellings, 
swellings in the joints, and sores of the mother: it consumeth all 
cold tumors, blastings, and windy outgrowings; it cureth the rifts of 
the fundament; it comforteth, defendeth, and preserveth dangerous 
green wounds from any manner of accidents that may happen thereto, it 
helpeth digestion in them, and bringeth old ulcers to maturation.

H. The seeds dried and beaten into powder and given to drink; 
stoppeth the bloody flux and lask, and all other issues of blood.



CHAP. 354. Of the Yellow Mallow.


Fig. 1360. Yellow Mallow

The Description.

The Yellow Mallow riseth up with a round stalk, something hard or 
woody, three or four cubits high, covered with broad leaves something 
round, but sharp pointed, white, soft, set with very fine hairs like 
to the leaves of gourds, hanging upon long tender footstalks: from 
the bosom of which leaves come forth yellow flowers, not unlike to 
those of the common Mallow in form: the knops or seed vessels are 
black, crooked, or wrinkled, made up of many small cods, in which is 
black seed: the root is small, and dieth when it hath perfected his 
seed.

The Place.

The seed hereof is brought unto us from Spain and Italy: we do yearly 
sow it in our gardens, the which seldom or never doth bring his seed 
to ripeness: by reason whereof, we are to seek for seeds against the 
next year.

The Time.

It is sown in the midst of April, it bringeth forth his flowers in 
September.

The Names.

Some think this to be Abutilon: whereupon that agreeth which Avicenna 
writeth, that it is like to the Gourd, that is to say in leaf, and to 
be named Abutilon, and Arbutilon: divers take it to be that Althæa or 
Marsh Mallow, unto which Theophrastus in his ninth book of the 
History of Plants doth attribute Florem milinon, or a yellow flower: 
for the flower of the common Marsh Mallow is not yellow, but white; 
yet may Theophrastus his copy, which in divers places is faulty, and 
hath many empty and unwritten places, be also faulty in this place; 
therefore it is hard to say, that this is Theophrastus' Marsh Mallow, 
especially seeing that Theophrastus seemeth also to attribute unto 
the root of Marsh Mallow so much slime, as that water may be 
thickened therewith, which the roots of common Marsh Mallow can very 
well do: but the root of Abutilon or Yellow Mallow not at all: it may 
be called in English, Yellow Mallow, and Avicennna his Mallow.

The Temperaturer

The temperature of this Mallow is referred unto the Tree Mallow.
The Virtues.

A. Avicenna saith, that Abutilon or Yellow Mallow, is held to be good 
for green wounds, and doth presently glue together, and perfectly 
cure the same.

B. The seed drunk in wine prevaileth mightily against the stone.

C. Bernardus Paludanus of Anchusen reporteth, that the Turks do drink 
the seed to provoke sleep and rest.



CHAP. 355. Of Venice Mallow, or Goodnight at Noon.

Fig. 1361. Venice Mallow (1) Thorny Mallow (2) 
The Description.

1. The Venice Mallow riseth up with long, round, feeble stalks, 
whereon are set upon long slender footstalks, broad jagged leaves, 
deeply cut even to the middle rib: amongst which come forth very 
pleasant and beautiful flowers, in shape like those of the common 
Mallow, something white about the edges, but in the middle of a fine 
purple: in the midst of this flower standeth forth a knop or pistil, 
as yellow as gold: it openeth itself about eight of the clock; and 
shutteth up again at noon about twelve o'clock when it hath received 
the beams of the sun, for two or three hours, whereon it should seem 
to rejoice to look, and for whose departure, being then upon the 
point of declension, it seems to grieve, and so shuts up the flowers 
that were open, and never opens them again; whereupon it might more 
properly be called Malva horaria, or the Mallow of an hour: and this 
Columella seemeth to call Moloche, in this verse; 

Et Moloche, Prono sequitur quæ vertice solem.
["And Moloche, which is accustomed to follow the course of the sun"]

The seed is contained in thick rough bladders, whereupon Dodonæus 
calleth it Malva vesicaria: within the bladders or seed vessels are 
contained black seed, not unlike to those of Nigella romana. The root 
is small and tender, & perisheth when the seed is ripe, and must be 
increased by new and yearly sowing of the seed, carefully reserved.

2. Thorny Mallow riseth up with one upright stalk of two cubits high, 
dividing itself into divers branches, whereupon are placed leaves 
deeply cut to the middle rib, and likewise snipped about the edges 
like a saw, in taste like Sorrel. The flowers for the most part 
thrust forth of the trunk or body of the small stalk, compact of five 
small leaves, of a yellowish colour; the middle part whereof is of a 
purple tending to redness: the husk or cod wherein the flower doth 
stand is set or armed with sharp thorns; the root is small, single, 
and most impatient of our cold climate, insomuch that when I had with 
great industry nourished up some plants from the seed, and kept them 
unto the midst of May; notwithstanding one cold night chancing among 
many, hath destroyed them all.


Fig. 1363. Egyptian Codded Mallow


3. This also is a stranger cut leaved Mallow, which Clusius hath set 
forth by the name of Alcea ægyptia: and Prosper Alpinus by the title 
of Bammia: the stalk is round, straight, green, some cubit and half 
high: upon which without order grow leaves at the bottom of the 
stalk, like those of Mallow, cornered and snipped about the edges; 
but from the middle of the stalk to the top they are cut in with five 
deep gashes like as the leaves of the last described: the flowers 
grow forth by the sides of the stalk, in form and colour like those 
of the last mentioned, to wit, with five yellowish leaves: after 
these follow long thick fine cornered hairy and sharp pointed seed 
vessels, containing a seed like Orobus, covered with a little 
downiness: this grows in Egypt, where they eat the fruit thereof as 
we do peas and beans: Alpinus attributes divers virtues to this 
plant, agreeable to those of the common Marsh Mallow.

The Place.

The seeds hereof have been brought out of Spain and other hot 
countries. The first prospereth well in my garden from year to year.

The Time.

They are to be sown in the most fertile ground and sunny places of 
the garden, in the beginning of May, or in the end of April.

The Names.

Their names have been sufficiently touched in their several 
descriptions. The first may be called in English, Venice Mallow, 
Goodnight-at-Noon, or the Mallow flowering but an hour: of Matthiolus 
it is called Hypecoon, or Rue Poppy; but unproperly.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. There is a certain clammy juice in the leaves of the Venice 
Mallow, whereupon it is thought to come near unto the temperature of 
the common Mallow, and to be of a mollifying faculty: but his use in 
physic is not yet known, and therefore can there be no certainty 
affirmed.



CHAP. 356. Of Crane's-Bill.

The Kinds.

There be many kinds of Crane's-Bill, whereof two were known to 
Dioscorides, one with the knobby root, the other with the Mallow 
leaf.


Fig. 1364. Dove's Foot, or Crane's Bill (1) 

The Description.

1. Dove's-Foot hath many hairy stalks, trailing or leaning toward the 
ground, of a brownish colour, somewhat kneed or jointed; whereupon do 
grow rough leaves of an overworn green colour, round, cut about the 
edges, and like unto those of the common Mallow: amongst which come 
forth the flowers of a bright purple colour: after which is the seed, 
set together like the head and bill of a bird; whereupon it was 
called Crane's-Bill, or Stork's-Bill, as are also all the other of 
his kind. The root is slender, with some fibres annexed thereto.

2. There is another kind of this with larger stalks and leaves, also 
the leaves are more deeply cut in and divided, and the flowers are 
either of the same colour as those of the common kind, or else 
somewhat more whitish. This may be called Geranium columbinum maius 
dissectis foliis, Great Dove's-Foot.

3. To this kind may also fitly be referred the Geranium saxatile of 
Thalius: the root is small and thready, the leaves are smoother, 
redder, more bluntly cut about the edges, and transparent than those 
of the first described, yet round, and otherwise like them: the 
flowers are small and red, and the bills like those of the former. 
Master Goodyer found it growing plentifully on the banks by the 
highway leading from Guildford towards London, near unto the town's 
end.

The Place.

It is found near to common highways, desert places, untilled grounds, 
and specially upon mud walls almost everywhere.

The Time.

It springeth up in March and April, flowereth in May, and bringeth 
his seed to ripeness in June.

The Names.

It is commonly called in Latin, Pes Columbinus: in High Dutch, 
Scarter kraut: in Low Dutch, Duyven voet: in French, Pied de Pigeon: 
hereupon it may be called Geranium columbinum: in English, Dove's-
Foot, and Pigeon's-foot: of Dioscorides, Geranium alterum: of some, 
Pulmonia, and Gruina.

The Temperature.

Dove's-Foot is cold and somewhat dry, with some astriction or 
binding, having power to solder or join together.

The Virtues.

A. It seemeth, saith my author, to be good for green and bleeding 
wounds, and assuageth inflammations or hot swellings.

B. The herb and roots dried, beaten into most fine powder, and given 
half a spoonful fasting, and the like quantity to bedwards in red 
wine, or old claret, for the space of one and twenty days together, 
cureth miraculously ruptures or burstings, as myself have often 
proved, whereby I have gotten crowns and credit: if the ruptures be 
in aged persons, it shall be needful to add thereto the powder of red 
snails (those without shells) dried in an oven, in number nine, which 
fortifieth the herbs in such sort, that it never faileth, although 
the rupture be great and of long continuance: it likewise profiteth 
much those that are wounded into the body, and the decoction of the 
herb made in wine, prevaileth mightily in healing inward wounds, as 
myself have likewise proved.



CHAP. 357. Of Herb Robert.


Fig. 1365. Herb Robert

The Description.

Herb Robert bringeth forth slender weak and brittle stalks, somewhat 
hairy, and of a reddish colour, as are oftentimes the leaves also, 
which are jagged and deeply cut, like unto those of Chervil, of a 
most loathsome stinking smell. The flowers are of a most bright 
purple colour; which being past, there follow certain small heads, 
with sharp beaks or bills like those of birds: the root is small and 
thready.

The Place.

Herb Robert groweth upon old walls, as well those made of brick and 
stone, as those of mud or earth: it groweth likewise among rubbish, 
the bodies of trees that are cut down; and in moist and shadowy ditch 
banks.

The Time.

It flowereth from April till summer be almost spent: the herb is 
green in winter also, and is hardly hurt with cold.
The Names.

It is called in high Dutch, Ruprechts kraut: in low Dutch, Robrechts 
kruit: and thereupon it is named in Latin, Ruberta, and Roberti 
herba: Ruellius calleth it Robertiana, and we, Robertianum: of 
Tabernamontanus, Rupertianum: in English, Herb Robert. He that 
conferreth this Crane's-Bill with Dioscorides his third Sideritis 
shall plainly perceive, that they are both one, and that this is most 
apparently Sideritis 3. Dioscoridis; for Dioscorides setteth down 
three Sideritides, one with the leaf of Horehound, the next with the 
leaf of Fern; and the third groweth in walls and vineyards: the 
native soil of Herb Robert agree thereunto, and likewise the leaves, 
being like unto Chervil, and not unlike to those of Corianders, 
according to Dioscorides' description.
The Temperature.
Herb Robert is of temperature somewhat cold: and yet both scouring 
and somewhat binding, participating of mixed faculties.

The Virtues.

A. It is good for wounds and ulcers of the dugs & secret parts; it is 
thought to stanch blood, which thing Dioscorides doth attribute to 
his third Sideritis: the virtue of this, saith he, is applied to heal 
up bloody wounds.



CHAP. 358. Of Knobbed Crane's-Bill.


Fig. 1366. Knobbed Crane's-Bill

The Description.

This kind of Crane's-Bill hath many flexible branches, weak and 
tender, fat, and full of moisture, whereon are placed very great 
leaves cut into divers small sections or divisions, resembling the 
leaves of the tuberous Anemone, or Wind-Flower, but somewhat greater, 
of an over-worn greenish colour: among which come forth long 
footstalks, whereon do grow fair flowers, of a bright purple colour, 
and like unto the smallest briar Rose in form: which being past, 
there succeed such heads and beaks as the rest of the Crane's-Bills 
have: the root is thick, bumped or knobbed, which we call tuberous.

The Place.

This kind of Crane's-Bill is a stranger in England, notwithstanding I 
have it growing in my garden.

The Time.

The time answereth the rest of the Crane's-Bills.

The Names.

Crane's-Bill is called in Latine, Gruinalis, commonly Rostrum Gruis, 
or Rostrum Ciconiæ: of the likeness of a Crane's-Bill, or Stork's-
Bill: of some, Acus moscata: but that name doth rather belong to 
another of this kind: it is also called Acus pastoris: in Italian, 
Rostro di grua: in French, Bec de Grue: in Spanish, Pico di Ciquina, 
pico del grou: in High Dutch, Storckenschuable: in Low Dutch, 
Diievoers beck: in English, Stork's-Bill, Crane's-Bill, Heron's-Bill, 
and Pink-Needle: this is also called for distinction's sake, Geranium 
tuberosum, and Geranium bulbosum: it is likewise Geranium primum 
Diorcoridis or Dioscorides his first Crane's-Bill.

The Temperature.

The roots of this Crane's-Bill have a little kind of heat in them.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith that the roots may be eaten, and that a dram 
weight of them drunk in wine doth waste and consume away the 
windiness of the matrix.

B. Also Pliny affirmeth, that the root hereof is singular good for 
such as after weakness crave to be restored to their former strength.

C. The same author affirmeth that the weight of a dram of it drunk in 
wine three times in a day, is excellent good against the phthisic, or 
consumption of the lungs.



CHAP. 359. Of Musked Crane's-Bill.


Fig. 1367. Musked Crane's-Bill

The Description.

Musked Crane's-Bill hath many weak and feeble branches trailing upon 
the ground, whereon do grow long leaves, made of many smaller leaves, 
set upon a middle rib, snipped or cut about the edges, of a pleasant 
sweet smell, not unlike to that of Musk: among which come forth the 
flowers set upon tender footstalks, of a red colour, compact of five 
small leaves apiece: after which appear small heads and pointed beaks 
or bills like the other kinds of Crane's-Bills. the root is small and 
thready.

The Place.

It is planted in gardens for the sweet smell that the whole plant is 
possessed with, but if you rub the leaves and then smell to them, you 
shall find them to have a scent quite contrary to the former.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth all the summer long.

The Names.

It is called Myrrhida plinii rostrum ciconiæ, Arcus moschata, in 
shops, and Acus pastoris, and likewise Geranium moschatum: in 
English, Musked Stork's-Bill, and Crane's-Bill, Muschatum, and of the 
vulgar sort Muschata, and also Pick-needle.

The Temperature.

This Crane's-Bill hath not any of his faculties found out or known: 
yet it seemeth to be cold and a little dry, with some astriction or 
binding.
The Virtues.
The virtues are referred unto those of Dove's-Foot, and are thought 
of Dioscorides to be good for green and bloody wounds, and hot 
swellings that are newly begun.



CHAP. 360. Of Crowfoot Crane's-Bill, or Gratia Dei.


Fig. 1368. Kinds of Crane's-Bill (1-4) 

The Description.

1. Crowfoot Crane's-Bill hath many long and tender branches tending 
to redness, set with great leaves deeply cut or jagged, in form like 
those of the field Crowfoot, whereof it took his name; the flowers 
are pretty large, and grow at the top of the stalks upon tender 
footstalks, of a perfect blue colour: which being past, there succeed 
such heads, beaks, and bills as the other Crane's-Bills.

I have in my garden another sort of this Crane's-Bill, bringing forth 
very fair white flowers, which maketh it to differ from the 
precedent; in other respects there is no difference at all.

2. This which is the Geranium 2. batrachiodes minus of Clusius hath 
large stalks and leaves, and those very much divided or cut in; the 
stalks also are divided into sundry branches, which upon long 
footstalks carry flowers like in shape, but less than those of the 
formerly described, and not blue, but of a reddish purple colour, 
having ten threads and a pointel coming forth of the middle of the 
flower: the beaks or bills which are the seed stand upright, and hang 
not down their points as most others do. The root is large and lives 
many years.

3. The stalks of this are stiff, green, and hairy, divided at their 
tops into sundry branches which end in long footstalks, upon which 
grow flowers commonly by couples, and they consist of five leaves 
apiece, and these of a dark red colour. The leaves are large, soft, 
and hairy, divided into six or seven parts, and snipped about the 
edges; the roots are large and lasting. It is kept with us in 
gardens, and flowers in May. Clusius calls it Geranium 1. pullo 
flore.

4. This also hath stalks and leaves much like those of the last 
described, but somewhat less: the flowers are as large as those of 
the last described, but of a more light red, and they are contained 
in thicker and shorter cups, and succeeded by shorter seeds or bills, 
and are commonly of a sweet musk-like smell: The root is very long, 
red, and lasting. It flowers in the midst of May, and is called by 
Gesner, Geranium montanum: by Dodonæus, Geranium batrachioides 
alterum; and by Lobell, Geranium batrachioides longius radicatum.

The Place.

These Crane's-Bills are wild of their own nature, and grow in barren 
places, and in valleys rather than in mountains. Both of them do grow 
in my garden.

The Time.

They flower, flourish, and grow green most part of the Summer.
The Names.

It called in Greek, Batrachioides, and Geranium batrachioides, which 
name it taketh from the likeness of Crowfoot: of some it is called 
Ranunculus cæruleus, or blue Crowfoot: Fuchsius calleth it Gottes 
gnad, that is in Latin, Gratia Dei [God's thanks]: in English also 
Gratia dei, Blue Crane's-Bill, or Crane's-Bill with the blue flowers, 
or blue Crow's-Foot Crane's-Bill.

The Temperature.
The Temperature is referred to the other Crane's-Bills.

The Virtues.

None of these plants are now in use in physic; yet Fuchsius saith, 
that Crane's-Bill with the blue flower is an excellent thing to heal 
wounds.



CHAP. 361. Of Candy Crane's-Bill.

Fig. 1369. Candy Crane's-Bill (1) Fig. 1370. Bastard Candy Crane's-
Bill (2) 
The Description.

1. The Crane's-Bill of Candy hath many long tender stalks, soft, and 
full of juice: dividing itself into divers branches, whereon are set 
great broad leaves, cut, or jagged in divers sections or cuts: among 
which come forth flowers composed of five leaves apiece, of a bluish 
or watchet colour, in the middle part whereof come forth a few 
chives, and a small pointel of a purplish colour: the head and beak 
is like to the rest of the Crane's-Bills, but greater; the root dieth 
when it hath perfected his seed.

2. This Crane's-Bill, being a bastard kind of the former, hath long 
slender branches growing to the height of two or three cubits, set 
about with very great leaves, not unlike to those of Hollyhocks, but 
somewhat lesser, of an overworn green colour: among which rise up 
little footstalks, on the ends whereof do grow small flowers, lesser 
than those of the precedent, and of a murrey colour: the head and 
seeds are like also, but much lesser: the roots do likewise die at 
the first approach of Winter.

The Place.

These are strangers in England, except in the gardens of some 
herbarists: they grow in my garden very plentifully.

The Time.

The time answereth the rest of the Crane's-Bills, yet doth that of 
Candy flower for the most part with me in May.

The Names.

There is not more to be said of the names than hath been remembered 
in their several titles: they may be called in English, Crane's-
Bills, or Stork's-Bills.

The Temperature.

Their temperature answereth that of Dove's-Foot.

The Virtues.

A. Their faculties in working are equal to those of Dove's-foot, and 
used for the same purporses, (& rightly) specially being used in 
wound drinks, for the which it doth far excel any of the Crane's-
Bills, and is equal with any other herb whatsoever for the same 
purpose.



CHAP 362. Of Divers Wild Crane's-Bills.


Fig. 1371. Kinds of Wild Crane's-Bill (1, 2, 3, 5) 

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts or kinds of Crane's-Bills which have not been 
remembered of the ancients, nor much spoken of by the later writers, 
all which I mean to comprehend under this chapter, making as it were 
of them a chapter of wild Crane's-Bills, although some of them have 
place in our London gardens, and that worthily, especially for the 
beauty of the flowers: their names shall be expressed in their 
feveral titles, their natures and faculties are referred to the other 
Crane's-Bills, or if you please to a further consideration.

The Description.

1. Spotted Crane's-Bill, or Stork's-Bill, the which Lobel describeth 
in the title thus, Geranium fuscum flore livido purpurante, & medio 
candicante, whose leaves are like unto Crowfoot (being a kind 
doubtless of Crane's-Bill, called Gratia Dei) of an overworn dusty 
colour, and of a strong savour, yet not altogether unpleasant: the 
stalks are dry and brittle, at the tops whereof do grow pleasant 
flowers of a dark purple colour, the middle part of them tending to 
whiteness: from the style or pointel thereof, cometh forth a tuft of 
small purple hairy threads. The root is thick and very brittle, 
lifting itself forth of the ground, insomuch that many of the said 
roots lie above the ground naked without earth, even as the roots of 
Fleur-de-lys do.

2. Of those wild ones I have another sort in my garden, which Clusius 
in his Pannonic Observations hath called Geranium hæmatoides or 
sanguine Crane's-Bill: and Lobel, Geranium gruinam, or gruinale: it 
hath many flexible branches creeping upon the ground: the leaves are 
much like unto Dove's-Foot in form, but cut even to the middle rib. 
The flowers are like those of the small wild Mallows and of the same 
bigness, of a perfect bright red colour, which if they be suffered to 
grow and stand until the next day, will be a murrey colour; and if 
they stand unto the third day, they will turn into a deep purple 
tending to blueness, their changing is such, that you shall find at 
one time upon one branch flowers like in form, but of divers colours. 
The root is thick, and of a woody substance.

3. This wild kind of Musked Crane's-Bill, being altogether without 
savour or smell, is called Myrrhida inodorum, or Geranium arvense 
inodorum, which hath many leaves spread flat upon the ground, every 
leaf made of divers smaller leaves, and those cut or jagged about the 
edges, of no smell at all: amongst which rise up slender branches, 
whereon do grow small flowers of a light purple colour: the root is 
long and fibrous.

4. This is also one of the wild kinds of Crane's-Bills, agreeing with 
the last described in each respect, except the flowers, for as the 
other hath purple flowers, so this plant bringeth forth white 
flowers, other difference there is none at all.

5. The Crane's-Bill with violet coloured flowers, hath a thick woody 
root, with some few strings annexed thereto: from which rise 
immediately forth of the ground divers stiff stalks, which divide 
themselves into other small branches, whereupon are set confusedly 
broad leaves, made of three leaves apiece, and those jagged or cut 
about the edges: the flowers grow at the top of the branches of a 
perfect violet colour, whereof it took his name: after which come 
such beaks or bills as the other of his kind.

6. I have likewise another sort that was sent me from Robinus of 
Paris, whose figure was never set forth, neither described of any: it 
springeth from a thick tough root, with many branches of a brownish 
colour: whereupon do grow leaves not unlike to those of Gratia Dei, 
but not so deeply cut, somewhat cornered, and of a shining green 
colour: the flowers grow at the top of the tender branches, composed 
of six small leaves, of a bright scarlet colour.

The Place.

The third and fourth of these Crane's-Bills grow of themselves about 
old walls, and about the borders of fields, woods and copses; and 
most of the rest we have growing in our gardens.

The Time.

Their time of flowering and seeding answereth the rest of the 
Crane's-Bills.

The Names.

Their several titles shall serve for their names, referring what 
might have been said more to a further confideration.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. There hath not as yet anything been found either of their 
temperature or faculties, but may be referred unto the other of their 
kind.



CHAP. 363. Of certain other Crane's-Bills.

Fig. 1372. Penny's Bulbous Crane's-Bill (1) Fig. 1373. Knotty 
Crane's-Bill (2) 
The Description

1. This which Clusius received from Doctor Thomas Penny of London, 
and sets forth by the same title as you find it here expressed, hath 
a root consisting of sundry long and small bulbs, and which is 
fibrous towards the top: the stalk is a cubit high, jointed, and red 
near unto the root, and about the joints: out of each of these joints 
come two leaves which are fastened unto somewhat long footstalks, and 
divided into five parts, which also are snipped about the edges: out 
of each of which joints by the setting on the footstalks come forth 
five little sharp pointed leaves: the flowers grow by couples upon 
the tops of the stalks, and are of a reddish purple colour. It grows 
wild in Denmark; whence Dr. Turner brought it, and bestowed it upon 
Dr. Penny before mentioned.

2. This hath stalks some foot high, jointed, and of a purplish 
colour: upon which grow leaves divided into three parts; but those 
below are cut into five, and both the one and the other are snipped 
about the edges: the flowers are composed of five reddish purple 
leaves of a pretty largeness, with a reddish pointel in the middle; 
and falling, the seed follows, as in other plants of this kind: the 
root is knotty, and jointed, with some fibres: it flowers in May, and 
so continueth a great part of the summer after. Clusius calls this 
Geranium 5. nodosum, Plateau. This sometimes is found to carry 
tuberous excrescences upon the stalks, toward the later end of 
summer, whence Plateau distinguished it from the other, but 
afterwards found it to be the same; and Clusius also figures and 
describeth this later variety by the name of Geranium 6. tuberiferum 
Plateau.


Fig. 1374. Silver-Leaved Mountain Crane's-Bill (3) 


3. The root of this is some two handfuls long, black without, and 
white within, and towards the top divided into sundry parts; whence 
put forth leaves covered over with a fine silver down; and they are 
divided into five parts, each of which again is divided into three 
others, and they are fastened to long slender and round footstalks: 
the flowers grow upon footstalks shorter than those of the leaves; 
the flowers in colour and shape are like those of the Vervain Mallow, 
but much less; and after it is faded there follows a short bill, as 
in the other plants of this kind. It flowers in July, and grows upon 
the Alps, where Pona found it, and first set it forth by the name of 
Geranium alpinum longius radicatum.

4. The stalks of this pretty Crane's-Bill are some foot or better 
high, whereon grow leaves parted into five or six parts like those of 
the Geranium fuscum, but of a lighter green colour: the flowers are 
large, composed of five thin and soon fading leaves of a whitish 
colour, all over intermixed with fine veins of a reddish colour, 
which add a great deal of beauty to the flower: for these veins are 
very small, and curiously dispersed over the leaves of the flower. It 
flowers in June, and is preserved in divers of our gardens; some call 
it Geran. romanum striatum: in the Hortus Estettensis it is set forth 
by the name of Geranium anglicum variegatum. Bauhin calls it Geranium 
batrachioides flore variegato. We may call it Variegated or Striped 
Crane's-Bill.

5. There is of late brought into this kingdom; and to our knowledge, 
by the industry of Mr John Tradescant, another more rare and no less 
beautiful than any of the former; and he had it by the name of 
Geranium indicum noctu odoratum; this hath not as yet been written of 
by any that I know; therefore I will give you the description 
thereof, but cannot as yet give you the figure, because I omitted the 
taking thereof the last year, and it is not as yet come to his 
perfection. The leaves are larger, being almost a foot long, composed 
of sundry little leaves of an unequal bigness, set upon a thick and 
stiff middle rib; and these leaves are much divided and cut in, so 
that the whole leaf somewhat resembles that of Tanacetum inodorum: 
and they are thick, green, and somewhat hairy: the stalk is thick, 
and some cubit high; at the top of each branch, upon footstalks some 
inch long grow some eleven or twelve flowers, and each of these 
flowers consisteth of five round pointed leaves of a yellowish 
colour, with a large black purple spot in the middle of each leaf; as 
if it were painted, which gives the flower a great deal of beauty, 
and it also hath a good smell. I did see it in flower about the end 
of July, 1632, being the first time that it flowered with the owner 
thereof. We may fitly call it Sweet Indian Stork's-Bill, or Painted 
Stork's-Bill: and in Latin, Geranium Indicum odoratum flore maculato.



CHAP. 364. Of Sanicle.


Fig. 1375. Sanicle

The Description.

Sanicle hath leaves of a blackish green colour, smooth and shining, 
somewhat round, divided into five parts like those of the Vine, or 
rather those of the Maple: among which rise up slender stalks of a 
brown colour, on the tops whereof stand white mossy flowers: in their 
places come up round seed, rough, cleaving to men's garments as they 
pass by, in manner of little burs: the root is black, and full of 
thready strings.

The Place.

It groweth in shadowy woods and copses almost everywhere: it joyeth 
in a fat and fruitful moist soil.

The Time.

It flowereth in May and June: the seed is ripe in August: the leaves 
of the herb are green all the year, and are not hurt with the cold of 
winter.

The Names.

It is commonly called Sanicula; of divers, Diapensia: in high and low 
Dutch, Sanikel: in French, Sanicle: in English, Sanicle, or Sanikel: 
it is so called, à sanandus vulneribus, or of healing of wounds, as 
Ruellius saith: there be also other Sanicles, so named of most 
herbarists, as that which is described by the name of Dentaria, or 
Coralwort, and likewise Auricula ursi, or Bear's-Ear, which is a kind 
of Cowslip; and likewise another set forth by the name of Sanicala 
guttata, whereof we have entreated among the kinds of Bear's-Ears.

The Temperature.

Sanicle as it is in taste bitter, with a certain binding quality, so 
besides that it cleanseth, and by the binding faculty strengtheneth, 
it is hot and dry, and that in the second degree, and after some 
authors, hot in the third degree, and astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The juice being inwardly taken is good to heal wounds. The 
decoction of it also made in wine or water is given against spitting 
of blood, and the bloody flux: also foul and filthy ulcers be cured 
by being bathed therewith. The herb boiled in water, and applied in 
manner of a poultice, doth dissolve and waste away cold swellings it 
is used in potions which are called vulnerary potions, or wound 
drinks, which maketh whole and sound all inward wounds and outward 
hurts; it also helpeth the ulcerations of the kidneys, ruptures, or 
burstings.



CHAP. 365. Of Lady's Mantle, or great Sanicle.


Fig. 1376. Lady's Mantle

The Description.

Lady's Mantle hath many round leaves, with five or six corners finely 
indented about the edges, which before they be opened are plaited and 
folded together, not unlike to the leaves of Mallows, but whiter, and 
more curled: among which rise up tender stalks set with the like 
leaves but much lesser: on the tops whereof grow small mosssy flowers 
clustering thick together, of a yellowish green colour. The seed is 
small and yellow, enclosed in green husks. The root is thick, and 
full of thready strings.

The Place.

It groweth of itself wild in divers places, as in the town pastures 
of Andover, and in many other places in Berkshire and Hampshire in 
their pastures and copses, or low woods, and also upon the bank of a 
moat that encloseth a house in Bushey called Bourne Hall, fourteen 
miles from London, and in the highway from thence to Watford, a small 
mile distant from it.

The Time.

It flowereth in May and June: it flourisheth in winter as well as in 
summer.
The Names

It is called of the later herbarists Alchimilla: and of most, 
Stellaria, Pes leonis, Pata leonis, and Sanicula maior: in High 
Dutch, Synnauw, and Onser Frauwen Mantel: in French, Pied de Lion: in 
English, Lady's Mantle, Great Sanicle, Lion's Foot, Lion's Paw; and 
of some, Padelyon.
The Temperature.

Lady's Mantle is like in temperature to little Sanicle, yet is it 
more drying and more binding.

The Virtues.

A. It is applied to wounds after the same manner that the smaller 
Sanicle is, being of like efficacy: it stoppeth bleeding, and also 
the overmuch flowing of the natural sickness: it keeps down maidens' 
paps or dugs, and when they be too great or flaggy it maketh them 
lesser or harder.



CHAP. 366. Of Neeze-wort Sanicle.


Fig. 1377. Neeze-Wort Sanicle

The Description.

When I made mention of Helleborus albus, I did also set down my 
censure concerning Elleborine, or Epipactus: but this Elleborine of 
the Alps I put in this place, because it approacheth nearer unto 
Sanicle and Ranunculus, as participating of both: it groweth in the 
mountains and highest parts of the Alpish hills, and is a stranger as 
yet in our English gardens, The root is compact of many small twisted 
strings like Black Hellebore: from thence arise small tender stalks, 
smooth, and easy to bend; in whose tops grow leaves with five 
divisions, somewhat nicked about the edges like unto Sanicle: the 
flowers consist of six leaves somewhat shining, in taste sharp, yet 
not unpleasant. This is the plant which Pena found in the Forest of 
Esens, nor far from Jupiter's Mount, and sets forth by the name of 
Alpina elleborine saniculæ & Ellebori nigri facie.

The Nature and Virtues.

I have not as yet found anything of his nature or virtues.



CHAP. 367. Of Crowfoots.


Fig 1378. Kinds of Crowfoot (1-4) 

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts or kinds of these pernicious herbs comprehended 
under the name of Ranunculus, or Crowfoot, whereof most are very 
dangerous to be taken into the body, and therefore they require a 
very exquisite moderation, with a most exact and due manner of 
tempering, not any of them are to be taken alone by themselves, 
because they are of most violent force, and therefore have the 
greater need of correction.

The knowledge of these plants is as necessary to the physician as of 
other herbs, to the end they may shun the same, as Scribonius Largos 
saith, and not take them ignorantly: or also, if necessity at any 
time require, that they may use them, and that with some deliberation 
and special choice, and with their proper correctives. For these 
dangerous simples are likewise many times of themselves beneficial, 
and oftentimes profitable: for some of them are not so dangerous, but 
that they may in some sort, and oftentimes in fit and due season 
profit and do good, if temperature and moderation be used: of which 
there be four kinds, as Dioscorides writeth; one with broad leaves, 
another that is downy, the third very small, and the fourth with a 
white flower: the later herbarists have observed also many more: all 
these may be brought into two principal kinds, so that one be a 
garden or tame one, and the other wild; and of these some are common, 
and others rare, or foreign. Moreover, there is a difference both in 
the roots and in the leaves; for one hath a bumped or knobby root, 
another a long leaf as Spearwort: and first of the wild or field 
Crowfoots, referring the reader unto the end of the stock and kindred 
of the same, for the temperature and virtues.

The Description.

1. The common Crowfoot hath leaves divided into many parts, commonly 
three, someimes five, cut here and there in the edges, of a deep 
green colour, in which stand divers white spots: the stalks be round, 
something hairy, some of them bow down toward the ground, and put 
forth many little roots, whereby it taketh hold of the ground as it 
traileth along: some of them stand upright, a foot high or higher; on 
the tops whereof grow small flowers with five leaves apiece, of a 
yellow glittering colour like gold: in the middle part of these 
flowers stand certain small threads of like colour: which being past, 
the seeds follow, made up in a rough ball: the roots are white and 
thready.

2. The second kind of Crowfoot is like unto the precedent, saving 
that his leaves are fatter, thicker, and greener, and his small 
twiggy stalks stand upright, otherwise it is like: of which kind it 
chanced, that walking in the field next to the Theatre by London, in 
the company of a worshipful merchant named Mr Nicolas Lete, I found 
one of this kind there with double flowers, which before that time I 
had not seen.

The Place.

They grow of themselves in pastures and meadows almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower in May and many months after.

The Names.

Crowfoot is called of Lobel, Ranunculus pratensis: of Dodonæus, 
Ranunculus hortensis, but unproperly: of Pliny, Polyanthemum, which 
he saith divers name Batrachion: in High Dutch, Schmalbluom: in low 
Dutch, Boter Bloemen; in English, King Kob, Gold cups, Gold knobs, 
Crowfoot, and Butter-flowers.
The Description.

3. The third kind of Crowfoot, called in Latin Ranunculus arvuorum, 
because it grows commonly in fallow fields where corn hath been 
lately sown, and may be called Corn Crowfoot, hath for the most part 
an upright stalk of a foot high, which divides itself into other 
branches: whereon do grow fat thick leaves very much cut or jagged, 
resembling the leaves of Samphire, but nothing so green, but rather 
of an overworn colour. The flowers grow at the top of the branches, 
compact of five small leaves of a faint yellow colour: after which 
come in place clusters of rough and sharp pointed seeds. The root is 
small and thready.

4. The fourth Crowfoot, which is called Ranunculus alpinus, because 
those that have first written thereof have not found it elsewhere but 
upon the Alpish mountains (notwithstanding it groweth in England 
plentifully wild, especially in a wood called Hampstead Wood, and is 
planted in gardens) hath divers great fat branches two cubits high, 
set with large leaves like the common Crowfoot, but greater, of a 
deep green colour, much like to those of yellow Aconite, called 
Aconitum luteum ponticum. The flowers consist of five white leaves, 
with small yellow chives in the middle, smelling like the flowers of 
May or Hawthorn, but more pleasant. The roots are greater than any of 
the stock of Crowfoots.

The Place and Time.

Their place of growing is touched in their description: their time of 
flowering and seeding answereth the other of their kinds.
The Names.

The white Crowfoot of the Alps and French mountains is the fourth of 
Dioscorides his description; for he describeth his fourth to have a 
white flower: more hath not been said touching the names, yet 
Tabernamontanus calls it Batrachium album: in English, White 
Crowfoot.

Fig. 1379. Illyrian Crowfoot (5) Fig. 1380. Round-Rooted Crowfoot (6) 
The Description.

5. Among the wild Crowfoots there is one that is surnamed Illyricus, 
which brings forth slender stalks, round, and of a mean length: 
whereupon do grow long narrow leaves cut into many long gashes, 
something white, and covered with a certain downiness: the flowers be 
of a pale yellow colour: the root consisteth of many small bumps as 
it were grains of corn, or little long bulbs growing close together 
like those of Pilewort. It is reported, that it was first brought out 
of Illyria into Italy, and from thence into the Low Countries: 
notwithstanding we have it growing very common in England, but only 
in gardens that I have seen.

6. The sixth kind of Crowfoot, called Ranunculus bulbosus, or Onion-
Rooted Crowfoot, and Round-Rooted Crowfoot, hath a round knobby or 
onion-fashioned root, like unto a small Turnip, and of the bigness of 
a great Olive: from the which rises up many leaves spread upon the 
ground, like those of the Field Crowfoot, but smaller, and of an 
overworn green colour: amongst which rise up slender stalks of the 
height of a foot: whereupon do grow flowers of a faint yellow colour. 
This grows wild in most places, and flowers at the beginning of May.

The Place.

It is also reported to be found not only in Illyria and Slavonia, but 
also in the island Sardinia, standing in the Midland, or Mediteranian 
sea.

The Names.

This Illyrian Crowfoot is named Apium sylvestre, or Wild Smallage: 
also Herba sardoa: it may be, saith my author, that kind of Crowfoot 
called Apium risus; and this is thought to be that Golotophillis, of 
which Pliny maketh mention in his 24th book, 17th chap. which being 
drunk, saith he, with wine and myrrh, causeth a man to see divers 
strange sights, and not to cease laughing till he hath drunk 
pineapple kernels with pepper in wine of the date tree, (I think he 
would have said until he be dead) because the nature of laughing 
Crowfoot is thought to kill laughing, but without doubt the thing is 
clean contrary; for it causeeth such convulsions, cramps and 
wringings of the mouth and jaws, that it hath seemed to some that the 
parties have died laughing, whereas in truth they have died in great 
torment.


Fig. 1381. Kinds of Crowfoot (7-10) 

The Description.

7. The seventh kind of Crowfoot called Auricomus, of the golden locks 
wherewith the flower is thrummed, hath for his root a great bush of 
blackish hairy strings; from which shoot forth small jagged leaves, 
not much unlike to Sanicle, but divided only into three parts, yet 
sometimes into five; among which rise up branched stalks of a foot 
high, whereon are placed the like leaves but smaller, set about the 
top of the stalks, whereon do grow yellow flowers, sweet smelling, of 
which it hath been called Ranunculus dulcis tragi, or Tragus his 
sweet Crowfoot. It grows in meadows and about the sides of woods, and 
flowers in April.

8. Frog Crowfoot, called of Pena, Aconitum batrachioides: of 
Dodonæus, Batrachion apulei, is that formerly described in the fourth 
place, whereto this is much alike, but that the stalks and leaves are 
larger, as also the flowers, which are white: the root is tough and 
thready.

9. The ninth Crowfoot hath many grassy leaves, of a deep green 
tending to blueness, somewhat long, narrow and smooth, very like unto 
those of the Small Bistort, or Snakeweed, among which rise up slender 
stalks, bearing at the top small yellow flowers like the other 
Crowfoots: the root is small and thready. There is a variety of this 
having double flowers; and I have given you the figure thereof.

10. The autumn or winter Crowfoot hath divers broad leaves spread 
upon the ground, snipped about the edges, of a bright shining green 
colour on the upper side, and hoary underneath, full of ribs or 
sinews as are those of Plantain, of an unpleasant taste at the first, 
afterward nipping the tongue: among which leaves rise up sundry 
tender footstalks, on the tops whereof stand yellow flowers 
consisting of six small leaves apiece: after which succeed little 
knops of seed like to a dry or withered strawberry. The root is 
compact of a number of limber roots, rudely thrust together in manner 
of the Asphodel.

Fig. 1382. Portugal Crowfoot (11) Fig. 1383. Globe Crowfoot (12) 

11. The Portugal Crowfoot hath many thick clogged roots fastened unto 
one head, very like those of the yellow Asphodel, from which rise up 
three leaves, seldom more, broad, thick, and puffed up in divers 
places, as if it were a thing that were blistered, by means whereof 
it is very uneven. From the middle of which leaves riseth up a naked 
stalk, thick, fat, very tender, but yet fragile, or easy to break: on 
the end whereof standeth a fair single yellow flower, having in the 
middle a naked roundel of a gold yellow tending to a Saffron colour.

12. The Globe Crowfoot hath very many leaves deeply cut and jagged, 
of a bright green colour like those of the field Crowfoot, among 
which riseth up a a stalk, divided toward the top into other 
branches, furnished with the like leaves of those next the ground, 
but smaller: on the tops of which branches grow very fair yellow 
flowers, consisting of a few leaves folded or rolled up together like 
a round ball or globe: whereupon it was called. Ranunculus globosus, 
or the Globe Crowfoot, or Globe flower: which being past, there 
succeed round knops, wherein is blackish seed. The root is small and 
thready.

Fig. 1384. Rough White-Flowered Mountain Crowfoot (13) Fig. 1385. 
Rough Purple-Flowered Mountain Crowfoot (14) 

13. This hath large leaves like those of the last described, but 
rough and hairy: the stalk is four foot high; the flowers are pretty 
large, composed of five white sharpish pointed leaves. It flowers in 
July, and grows in the Alps: it is the Ranunculi montani 2 species 
altera of Clusius.

14. This other hath leaves not unlike those of the precedent, and 
such stalks also; but the flowers consist of round leaves, purplish 
beneath; the edges of the upper side are of a whitish purple, & the 
residue wholly white, with many yellow threads in the middle; it 
grows in the mountain Jura, against the city of Geneva, whereas it 
flowers in June, and ripens the seed in August. Clusius had the 
figure and description hereof from Dr. Penny, and he calls it 
Ranunculus montanus 3.

The Place.

The twelfth kind of Crowfoot groweth in most places of Yorkshire and 
Lancashire, and other bordering shires of the North country, almost 
in every meadow, but not found wild in these Southerly or Westerly 
parts of England that I could ever understand of.

The Time.

It flowereth in May and June: the seed is ripe in August.
The Names.

The Globe-Flower is called generally Ranunculus globosus, of some, 
Flos trollius, and Ranunculus alpinus, in English, Globe Crowfoot, 
Troll-Flowers, and Lockron Gowlons.



CHAP. 368. Of Double Yellow and White Bachelor's Buttons.

Fig.1386. Bachelor's Buttons (1) Fig. 1387. Double Wild Yellow 
Crowfoot (2) 
The Description.

1. The great double Crowfoot or Bachelor's Button hath many jagged 
leaves of a deep green colour: among which rise up stalks, whereon do 
grow fair yellow flowers exceeding double, of a shining yellow 
colour, oftentimes thrusting forth of the midst of the said flowers 
one other smaller flower: the root is round, or fashioned like a 
Turnip; the form whereof hath caused it to be called of some St. 
Anthony's Turnip, or Rape Crowfoot. The seed is wrapped in a cluster 
of rough knobs, as are most of the Crowfoots.

2. The Double Yellow Crowfoot hath leaves of a bright green colour, 
with many weak branches trailing upon the ground; whereon do grow 
very double yellow flowers like unto the precedent, but altogether 
lesser. The whole plant is likewise without any manifest difference, 
saving that these flowers do never bring forth any smaller flower out 
of the middle of the greater, as the other doth, and also hath no 
Turnip or knobby root at all, wherein consisteth the difference.


Fig. 1388. Double White Crowfoot (3) 


3. The white double Crowfoot hath many great leaves deeply cut with 
great gashes, and those snipped about the edges. The stalks divide 
thernselves into divers brittle branches, on the tops whereof do grow 
very double flowers as white as snow, and of the bigness of our 
yellow Batchelor's Button. The root is tough, limber, and disperseth 
itself far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.

The Place.

The first and third are planted in gardens for the beauty of the 
flowers, and likewise the second, which hath of late been brought out 
of Lancashire unto our London gardens, by a curious gentleman in the 
searching forth of simples, Mr. Thomas Hesketh, who found it growing 
wild in the town fields of a small village called Hesketh, not far 
from Latham in Lancashire.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of May to the end of June.

The Names.

Dioscorides hath made no mention hereof; but Apuleius hath separated 
the first of these from the others, intreating of it apart, and 
naming it by a peculiar name Batrachion; whereupon it is also called 
Apuleii batrachion, or Apuleius' Crowfoot.

It is commonly called Rapum S. Anthonii, or Saint Anthony's Rape: it 
may be called in English, Rape Crowfoot: it is called generally about 
London, Bachelor's Buttons and Double Crowfoot: in Dutch, S. Anthony 
Rapkin. Thus our author, but these names and faculties properly 
belong to the Ranunculus bulbosus, described in the sixth place of 
the last chapter; and also to the first double one here described; 
for they vary little but in colour, and the singleness and doubleness 
of their flowers.

The third is called of Lobel, Ranunculus niveus polyanthos: of 
Tabernamontanus, Ranunculus albus multiflorus: in English, Double 
white Crowfoot, or Bachelor's buttons.

The Temperature.

These plants do bite as the other Crowfoots do.

The Virtues.

A. The chiefest virtue is in the root, which being stamped with salt 
is good for those that have a plague sore; if it be presently in the 
beginning tied to the thigh, in the middle between the groin or flank 
and the knee: by means whereof the poison and malignity of the 
disease is drawn from the inward parts, by the emunctory or cleansing 
place of the flank, into those outward parts of less account: for it 
exulcerateth and presently raiseth a blister, to what part of the 
body soever it is applied. And if it chance that the sore happeneth 
under the arm, then it is requisite to apply it to the arm a little 
above the elbow. My opinion is, that any of the Crowfoots will do the 
same: my reason is, because they all and every of them do blister and 
cause pain, wheresoever they be applied, and pain doth draw unto 
itself more pain; for the nature of pain is to resort unto the 
weakest place, and where it may find pain; and likewise the poison 
and venomous quality of that disease is to resort unto that painful 
place.

B. Apuleius saith further, That if it be hanged in a linen cloth 
about the neck of him that is lunatic, in the wane of the moon, when 
the sign shall be in the first degree of Taurus or Scorpio, that then 
he shall forthwith be cured. Moreover, the herb Batrachion stamped 
with vinegar, root and all, is used for them that have black scars or 
such-like marks on their skins, it eats them out, and leaves a colour 
like that of the body.



CHAP. 369. Of Turkey or Asian Crowfoots.

Fig. 1389. Double Red Crowfoot (1) Fig. 1390. Double Asian Scarlet 
Crowfoot (2) 
The Description.

1. The Double Red Crowfoot hath a few leaves rising immediately forth 
of the ground, cut in the edges with deep gashes, somewhat hollow and 
of a bright shining green colour. The stalk riseth up to the height 
of a foot, smooth and very brittle, dividing itself into other 
branches sometimes two, seldom three: whereon do grow leaves 
confusedly, set without order: the flowers grow at the tops of the 
stalks, very double, and of great beauty, of a perfect scarlet 
colour, tending to redness. The root is compact of many long tough 
roots, like those of the yellow Asphodel.

2. Of this kind there is also another, or other the same better 
expresed; for Clusius the author of these never sees the former, but 
makes it only to differ, in that the flowers are of a sanguine 
colour, and those of this of a kind of scarlet, or red lead colour.


Fig. 1391. Kinds of Asian Crowfoot (3-6) 

3. This differs nothing from the former, but that it sends up another 
flower somewhat lesser, out of the middle of the first flower, which 
happens by the strength of the root, and goodness of the soil where 
it is planted.

4. The Crowfoot of Tripolis or the single red Ranunculus hath leaves 
at the first coming up like unto those of Groundsel: among which 
riseth up a stalk of the height of half a cubit, somewhat hairy, 
whereon grow broad leaves deeply cut, even to the middle rib, like 
those of the common Crowfoot, but greener: the flower groweth at the 
top of the stalk, consisting of five leaves, on the outside of a dark 
overworn red colour, on the inside of a red lead colour, bright and 
shining, in shape like the wild Corn Poppy: the knop or style in the 
middle which containeth the seed is garnished or bedecked with very 
many small purple thrums tending to blackness: the root is as it were 
a roundel of little bulbs or grains like those of the small Celandine 
or Pilewort.

5. There be divers other Asian Crowfoots which Clusius hath set 
forth, and which grow in the most part in the gardens of our prime 
florists, and they differ little in their roots, stalks, or leaves, 
but chiefly in the flowers; wherefore I will only briefly note their 
differences, not thinking it pertinent to stand upon whole 
descriptions, unless they were more necessary: this fifth differs 
from the fourth in that the stalks are divided into sundry branches, 
which bear like, but less flowers than those which stand upon the 
main stalk: the colour of these differs not from that of the last 
described.

6. This is like the last described, but the flowers are of a pure 
white colour and sometimes have a few streaks of red about their 
edges.


Fig. 1392. Asian Crowfoot with Yellow Striped Flowers (7) 

7. This in stalks and manner of growing is like the precedent; the 
stalk seldom parting itself into branches; but on the top thereof it 
carries a fair flower consisting commonly of round topped leaves of a 
greenish yellow colour, with divers red veins here and there 
dispersed and running alongst the leaves, with four purple thrums, 
and a head standing up in the middle as in the former.

The Place.

The first groweth naturally in and about Constantinople, and in Asia 
on the further side of Bosphorus, from whence there hath been brought 
plants at divers times, and by divers persons, but they have perished 
by reason of their long journey, and want of skill of those bringers, 
that have suffered them to lie in a box or such-like so long, that 
when we have received them they have been as dry as ginger; 
notwithstanding Clusius saith he received a plant fresh and green, 
the which a domestical thief stole forth of his garden. My Lord and 
Master the right Honorable the Lord Treasurer had divers plants sent 
him from thence which were dry before they came, as aforesaid. The 
other groweth in Aleppo and Tripolis in Syria naturally, from whence 
we have received plants for our gardens, where they flourish as in 
their own country.

The Time.

They bring forth their pleasant flowers in May and June: the seed is 
ripe in August.

The Names.

The first is called Ranunculus constantinopolitanus: Of Lobel, 
Ranunculus sanguineus multiplex, Ranunculus byzantinus, sive 
asiaticus: in the Turkish tongue, Torobolos, Catamer laile: in 
English, the double red Ranunculus, or Crowfoot.

The fourth is called Ranunculus tripolitanus, of the place from 
whence it was first brought into these parts: of the Turks, Torobolos 
Catamer, without that addition laile; which is a proper word to all 
flowers that are double.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Their temperature and virtues are referred to the other Crowfoots, 
whereof they are thought to be kinds.



CHAP. 370. Of Spearwort, or Banewort.

Fig. 1393. Great Spearwort (1) Fig. 1394. Lesser Spearwort (2) 
The Description.

1. Spearwort hath an hollow stalk full of knees or joints, whereon do 
grow long leaves, a little hairy, not unlike those of the willow, of 
a shining green colour: the flowers are very large, and grow at the 
tops of the stalks, consisting of five leaves of fair yellow coIour, 
very like to the field Goldcup, or Wild Crowfoot: after which come 
round knops or seed vessels, wherein is the seed: the root is 
contract of divers bulbs or long clogs, mixed with an infinite number 
of hairy threads.

2. The common Spearwort being that which we have called the lesser, 
hath leaves, flowers, and stalks like the precedent, but altogether 
lesser: the root consisteth of an infinite number of thready strings.

Fig. 1395. Jagged Spearwort (3) Fig. 1396. Marsh Spearwort (4) 

3. Jagged Spearwort hath a thick fat hollow stalk, dividing itself 
into divers branches, whereon are set sometimes by couples two long 
leaves, sharp pointed, & cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw. 
The flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow colour, in 
form like those of the Field Crowfoot: the root consisteth of a 
number of hairy strings.

4. Marsh Crowfoot, or Spearwort (whereof it is a kind, taken of the 
best approved authors to be the true Apium risus, though divers think 
that Pulsatilla is the same: of some it is called Apium 
hæmorrhoidarum) riseth forth of the mud or waterish mire from a 
thready root, to the height of a cubit, sometimes higher. The stalk 
divideth itself into divers branches, whereupon do grow leaves deeply 
cut round about like those of Dove's-Foot, and not unlike to the cut 
Mallow, but somewhat greater, and of a most bright shining green 
colour: the flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow 
colour, like unto the other water Crowfoots.

The Place.

They grow in moist and dankish places, in brinks or watercourses, and 
such like places almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower in May when other Crowfoots do.

The Names.

Spearwort is called of the later herbarists Flammula, and Ranunculus 
flammeus; of Cordus, Ranunculus platyphyllus or broad-leaved 
Crowfoot: of others, Ranunculus longifolius, or long-leaved Crowfoot: 
in Low Dutch, Egelcoolen: in English, Spear Crowfoot, Spearwort, and 
Banewort, because it is dangerous and deadly for sheep; and that if 
they feed of the same it inflameth their livers, fretteth and 
blistereth their guts and entrails.

The Temperature of all the Crowfoots.

Spearwort is like to the other Crowfoots in faculty, it is hot in the 
mouth or biting, it exulcerateth and raiseth blisters, and being 
taken inwardly it killeth remediless. Generally all the Crowfoots, as 
Galen saith, are of a very sharp or biting quality, insomuch as they 
raise blisters with pain: and they are hot and dry in the fourth 
degree.

The Virtues of All the Crowfoots.

A. The leaves or roots of Crowfoots stamped and applied unto any part 
of the body, causeth the skin to swell and blister, and raiseth up 
weals, bladders, causeth scars, crusts, and ugly ulcers: it is laid 
upon cragged warts, corrupt nails, and such like excrescences, to 
cause them to fall away.

B. The leaves stamped and applied unto any pestilential or plague 
sore, or carbuncle, stayeth the spreading nature of the same, and 
causeth the venomous or pestilential matter to breath forth, by 
opening the parts and passages in the skin.

C. It prevaileth much to draw a plague sore from the inward parts, 
being of danger, unto other remote places further from the heart, and 
other of the spiritual parts, as hath been declared in the 
description.

D. Many do use to tie a little of the herb stamped with salt unto any 
of the fingers, against the pain of the teeth; which medicine seldom 
faileth; for it causeth greater pain in the finger than was in the 
tooth, by the means whereof, the greater pain taketh away the lesser.

E. Cunning beggars do use to stamp the leaves, and lay it unto their 
legs and arms, which causeth such filthy ulcers as we daily see 
(among such wicked vagabonds) to move the people the more to pity.

F. The kind of Crowfoot of Illyria, being taken to be Apium risus of 
some, yet others think Aconitum batrachioides to be it. This plant 
spoileth the senses and understanding, and draweth together the 
sinews and muscles of the face in such strange manner, that those who 
beholding such as died by the taking hereof, have supposed that they 
died laughing; so forcibly hath it drawn and contracted the nerves 
and sinews, that their faces have been drawn awry, as though they 
laughed, whereas contrariwise they have died with great torment.



CHAP. 371. Of Divers Other Crowfoots.

Fig. 1397. Broad-Leaved Candy Crowfoot (1) Fig. 1398. Plantain-Leaved 
Crowfoot (2) 
The Description.

1. The roots of this are somewhat like those of the Asian Ranunculus: 
the leaves are very large & roundish, of a light green colour, cut 
about the edges, & here and there deeply divided: the stalk is thick, 
round, and stiff, divided into two or three branches; at the setting 
on of which grow longish leaves a little nicked about the end: the 
flowers are of an indifferent bigness, and consist of five longish 
round pointed leaves, standing a little each from other, so that the 
green points of the cups show themselves between them: there are 
yellow threads in the middle of these flowers, which commonly show 
themselves in February, or March. It is found only in some gardens, 
and Clusius only hath set it forth by the name we here give you.

2. This also that came from the Pyrenæan hills is made a denizen in 
our gardens: it hath a stalk some foot high, set with nervous leaves, 
like those of Plantain, but thinner, and of the colour of Woad, and 
they are something broad at their setting on, and end in a sharp 
point: at the top of the stalk grow the flowers; each consisting of 
five round slender pure white leaves, of a reasonable bigness, with 
yellowish threads and a little head in the middle: the root is white 
and fibrous. It flowers about the beginning of May. Clusius also set 
forth this by the title of Ranunculus pyrenæus albo flore.

Fig. 1399. Lesser Mountain Crowfoot (3) Fig. 1400.Greater Mountain 
Crowfoot (4) 

3. The same author hath also given us the knowledge of divers other 
plants of this kind, and this he calls Ranunculus montanus 1. It hath 
many round leaves, here and there deeply cut in, and snipped about 
the edges, of a dark green colour, and shining, pretty thick, and of 
a very hot taste; amongst which rises up a slender, single, and short 
stalk, bearing a white flower made of five little leaves with a 
yellowish thrum in the middle: which falling, the seeds grow 
clustering together as in other plants of this kind: the root is 
white and fibrous.

4. This also is nothing else but a variety of the last described, and 
differs from it in that the flowers are larger, and it is sometimes 
found with them double. Both these grow on the tops of the Alps, and 
there they flower as soon as the snow is melted away, which is 
usually in June: but brought into gardens they flower very early, to 
wit, in April.
Fig. 1401. Rue-Leaved Crowfoot (5) Fig. 1402. Columbine Crowfoot (6) 

5. The leaves of this are cut or divided into many parts, like those 
of Rue, but softer, & greener (whence Clusius names it Ranunculus 
ruta folio) or not much unlike those of Coriander (whereupon Pona 
calls it Ranunculus coriandri folio) : amongst or rather before these 
comes up a stalk four handfuls high, bearing at the top thereof one 
flower of a reasonable bigness: on the outside before it be throughly 
open of a pleasing red colour, but white within, composed of twelve 
or more leaves,

6. This hath a stalk some foot high, small and reddish, whereon grow 
sundry leaves like those of the greater Thalictrum, or those of 
Columbines, but much less, and of a bitter taste: out of the bosoms 
of these leaves come the flowers at each space one, white, and 
consisting of five leaves apiece: which falling, there succeed two or 
three little horns containing a round reddish seed: the root is 
fibrous, white, very bitter, and creeps here and there, putting up 
new shoots. It grows in divers woods of Austria, and flowers in 
April, and the seed is ripe in May, or June. Clusius calls it 
Ranunculus præcox 2. thalictri folio. It is the Aquilegia minor 
dalechampii in the Hist. Lugd.


Fig. 1403. Small Rough-Headed Crowfoot (7) 


7. This which (as Clusius saith) some call the Ranunculus of 
Apuleius, hath also a fibrous root, with small leaves divided into 
three parts, & cut about the edges, and they grow upon short 
footstalks; the stalks are some two handfuls high, commonly leaning 
on the ground, and on them grow such leaves as the former: and out of 
their bosoms come little footstalks carrying flowers of a pale yellow 
colour, made of five leaves apiece; which falling there succeed five 
or six sharp pointed rough cods, conteaining seed almost like that of 
the former.



CHAP. 372. Of Wolf's-Bane.

Fig.1404. Broad-Leaved Wolf's Bane (1) Fig. 1405. Mountain Wolf's-
Bane (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Wolf's-Bane: whereof some bring forth 
flowers of a yellow colour; others of a blue, or tending to purple: 
among the yellow ones there are some greater, others lesser; some 
with broader leaves, and others with narrower.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Aconite, of some called Thora, others add the 
the place where it growth in great abundance, which is the Alps, and 
call it Thora valdensium. This plant took his name of the Greek word 
Phthora, signifying corruption, poison, or death, which are the 
certain effects of this pernicious plant: for this they use very much 
in poisons, and when they mean to infect their arrow heads, the more 
speedily and deadly to dispatch the wild beasts, which greatly annoy 
those mountains of the Alps: to which purpose also it is brought into 
the mart towns near unto those places to be sold unto the hunters, 
the juice thereof being prepared by pressing forth, and so kept in 
horns and hoofs of beasts, for the most speedy poison of all the 
Aconites; for an arrow touched therewith, leaveth the wound 
uncureable (if it but only fetch blood where it entereth in) except 
that round about the wound the flesh be speedily cut away in great 
quantity: this plant therefore may rightly be accounted as first and 
chief of those that be called Sagittary or Aconites, by reason of the 
malignant qualities aforesaid. This that hath been said argueth also 
that Matthiolus hath unproperly called it Pseudoaconitum, that is, 
false or bastard Aconite; for without question there is no worse or 
more speedy venom in the world, nor no Aconite or toxical plant 
comparable hereunto. And yet let us consider the fatherly care and 
providence of God, who hath provided a conqueror and triumpher over 
this plant so venomous, namely his Antigonist, Antithora or to speak 
in shorter and fewer syllables, Anthora; which is the very antidote 
or remedy against this kind of Aconite. The stalk of plant is small 
and rushy, very smooth, two or three handfuls high: whereupon do grow 
two, three, or four leaves, seldom more, which be something hard, 
round, smooth, of a light green colour tending to blueness, like the 
colour of the leaves of Woad, nicked in the edges. The flowers grow 
at the top of the stalks, of a yellow colour, lesser than those of 
the Field Crowfoot, otherwise alike: in the place therof groweth a 
knop or round head, wherein is the seed: the root consisteth of nine 
or ten slender clogs, with some small fibres also, and they are 
fastened together with little things unto one head, like those of the 
white Asphodel.

2. Wolf's-Bane of the Mount Baldus hath one stalk, smooth and plain, 
in the middle whereof come forth two leaves and no more, wherein it 
differeth from the other of the Valdens, having likewise three or 
four sharp pointed leaves, narrow and somewhat jagged at the place 
where the stalk divideth itself into smaller branches; whereon do 
grow small yellow flowers like the precedent, but much lesser.

The Place.

These venomous plants do grow on the Alps, and the mountains of Savoy 
and Switzerland: the first grow plentifully in the country of the 
Valdens, who inhabit part of those mountains towards Italy. The other 
is found on Baldus, a mountain of Italy. They are strangers in 
England.

The Time.

They flower in March and April, their seed is ripe in June.
The Names.

This kind of Aconite or Wolf's-Bane is called Thora, Taura, and Tura, 
it is surnamed valdensis, that it may differ from Napellus, or Monk's 
Hood, which is likewise named Thora.

Avicenna maketh mention of a certain deadly herb in his fourth book, 
sixth Fen. called Farsium; it is hard to affirm this same to be Thora 
valdensis.

Gesner judges this to be the Aconitum pardalianches of Dioscorides, 
and herein is followed by Bauhin.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The force of these Wolf's-Banes, is most pernicious and 
poisonsome, and (as it is reported) exceedeth the malice of Napellus, 
or any of the other Wolf's-Banes, as we have said.

B They say that it is of such force, that if a man especially, and 
then next any four footed beast be wounded with an arrow or other 
instrument dipped in the juice hereof, they die within half an hour 
after remediless.



CHAP. 373. Of Winter Wolf's-Bane.


Fig. 1406. Winter Wolf's-Bane. 

The Description.

This kind of Aconite is called Aconitum hyemale belgarum; of 
Dodonæus, Aconitum luteum minus: in English, Wolf's-Bane, or Small 
Yellow Wolf's-Bane, whose leaves come forth of the ground in the dead 
time of winter, many times bearing the snow upon their heads of his 
leaves and flowers; yea the colder the weather is, and the deeper 
that the snow is, the fairer and larger is the flower; and the warmer 
that the weather is, the lesser is the flower, and worse coloured: 
these leaves I say come forth of the ground immediately from the 
root, with a naked, soft, and slender stem, deeply cut or jagged on 
the leaves, of an exceeding fair green colour, in the midst of which 
cometh forth a yellow flower, in show or fashion like that of the 
common field Crowfoot: after which follow sundry cods full of brown 
seeds like the other kinds of Aconites: the root is thick, tuberous 
and knotty, like to the kinds of Anemone.

The Place.

It groweth upon the mountains of Germany: we have great quantity of 
it in our London gardens.

The Time.

It flowereth in January; the seed is ripe in the end of March.

The Names.

It is called, Aconitum hyemale, or hibernum, or winter Aconite: that 
it is a kind of Aconite or Wolf's-Bane, both the form of the leaves 
and cods, and also the dangerous faculties of the herb itself do 
declare.

It is much like to Aconitum theophrasti: which he describeth in his 
ninth book, saying, it is a short herb having no superfluous thing 
growing on it, and is without branches as this plant is: the root, 
saith he, is like to a nut, or else to a dry fig, only the leaf 
seemeth to make against it, which is nothing at all like to that of 
Succory, which he compareth it unto.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. This herb is counted to be very dangerous and deadly, hot and dry 
in the fourth degree, as Theophrastus in plain words doth testify 
concerning his own Aconite; for which he saith that there was never 
found his antidote or remedy: whereof Athenæus and Theopompus write, 
that this plant is the most poisonous herb of all others, which moved 
Ovid to say Quæ quia nascuntur dura vivacia caute:["They spring from 
the hard rock" Ovid, Metamorphoses Bk. VII. l. 418] notwithstanding 
it is not without his peculiar virtues. Ioachimus Camerarius now 
living in Nuremberg saith, the water dropped into the eyes ceaseth 
the pain and burning: it is reported to prevail mightily against the 
bitings of scorpions, and is of such force, that if the scorpion pass 
by where it groweth and touch the same, presently he becometh dull, 
heavy, and senseless, and if the same scorpion by chance touch the 
White Hellebore, he is presently delivered from his drowsiness.



CHAP. 374. Of Mithridate Wolf's-Bane.


Fig. 1407. Mithridate or Wholesome Wolf's-Bane

The Description.

This plant called Anthora, being the antidote against the poison of 
Thora, Aconite or Wolf's-Bane, hath slender hollow stalks, very 
brittle, a cubit high, garnished with fine cut or jagged leaves, very 
like to Nigella romana, or the common Larkspur, called Consolida 
regalis: at the top of the stalks do grow fair flowers, fashioned 
like a little helmet, of an overworn yellow colour; after which come 
small blackish cods, wherein is contained black shining seed like 
those of Onions: the root consisteth of divers knobs or tuberous 
lumps, of the bigness of a man's thumb.

The Place.

This plant which in Greek we may term Antithora groweth abundantly in 
the Alps, called Rhetici, in Savoy, and in Liguria. The Ligurians of 
Turin, and those that dwell near the lake Lemane, have found this 
herb to be a present remedy against the deadly poison of the herb 
Thora and the rest of the Aconites, provided that when it is brought 
into the garden there to be kept for physic's use, it must not be 
planted near to any of the Aconites: for through his attractive 
quality, it will draw unto itself the malign and venomous poison of 
the Aconite, whereby it will become of the like quality, that is, to 
become poisonous likewise: but being kept far off, it retaineth his 
own natural quality still.

The Time.

It flowereth in August, the seed is ripe in the end of September.

The Names.

The inhabitants of the lake of Geneva, & the Piemontoise do calt it 
Anthora, and the common people Anthoro. Avicenna calleth a certain 
herb which is like to Monk's-Hood, as a remedy against the poison 
thereof, by the name of Napellus moysis, in the 500th chap. of his 
second book, and in the 745th chap. he saith, that Zedoaria doth grow 
with Napellus or Monk's-Hood, and that by reason of the nearness of 
the same, the force and strength thereof is dulled and made weaker, 
and that it is a treacle, that is, a counterpoison against the Viper, 
Monk's-hood, & all other poisons: and hereupon it followeth, that it 
is not only Napellus moysis, but also Zedoaria avicennæ: 
notwithstanding the apothecaries do sell another Zedoaria differing 
from Anthora, which is a root of a longer form, which not without 
cause is thought to be Avicenna's and Serapia's Zerumbeth, or 
Zurumbeth.

It is called Anthora, as though they should say Antithora, because it 
is an enemy to Thora, and a counterpoison to the same. Thora and 
Anthora, or Tura and Antura, seem to be new words, but yet they are 
used in Marcellus Empericus, an old writer, who teacheth a medicine 
to be made of Tura and Antura, against the pin and web in the eyes: 
in English, Yellow Monks-hood, Yellow Helmet flower, and Aconites 
mithridate.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Anthora is wonderful bitter, it is an enemy to all 
poisons: it is good for purgations; for it voideth by the stool both 
watery and slimy humours, killeth and driveth forth all manner of 
worms of the belly.

B. Hugo Solerius saith, that the roots of Anthora do largely purge, 
not only by the stool, but also by vomit: and that the measure 
thereof is taken to the quantity of Faselus (which is commonly called 
a bean) in broth or wine, and is given to strong bodies.

C. Antonius Guanerius doth show in his treatise of the plague, the 
second difference, the third chapter, that Anthora is of great force, 
yea and that against the plague: and the root is of like virtues, 
given with Dittany, which I have seen, saith he, by experience: and 
he further saith, it is an herb that groweth hard by that herb Thora, 
of which there is made a poison, wherewith they of, the more speedily 
to kill the wild goats, and other wild beasts of the Alpish 
mountains. And this root Anthora is the Bezoar or counterpoison to 
that Thora, which is of so great a venom, as that it killeth all 
living creatures with his poisonsome quality: and thus much 
Guanerius.

D. Simon Ianuensis hath also made mention of Anthora, and Arnoldus 
Villanovanus in his treatise of poisons: but their writings do 
declare that they did not well know Anthora.



CHAP. 375. Of Yellow Wolf's-Bane.


Fig. 1408. Yellow Wolf's-Bane

The Description.

The yellow kind of Wolf's-Bane called Aconitum luteum ponticum, or 
according to Dodonæus Aconitum lycoctonon luteum maius: in English, 
Yellow Wolf's-Bane, whereof this our age hath found out sundry sorts 
not known to Dioscorides, (although some of the sorts seem to stand 
indifferent between the kinds of Ranunculi, Helleborus, and 
Napellus:) this yellow kind I say hath large shining green leaves 
fashioned like a vine, and of the same bigness, deeply indented or 
cut, not much unlike the leaves of Geranium fuscum, or black Crane's-
Bill: the stalks are bare or naked, not bearing his leaves upon the 
same stalks, one opposite against another, as in the other of his 
kind: his stalks grow up to the height of three cubits, bearing very 
fine yellow flowers, fantastically fashioned, and in such manner 
shaped, that I can very hardly describe them unto you. They are 
somewhat like unto the Helmet Monk's-Hood, open and hollow at one 
end, firm and shut up at the other: his roots are many, compact of a 
number of thready or black strings, of an overworn yellow colour, 
spreading far abroad every way, folding themselves one within another 
very confusedly. This plant groweth naturally in the dark hilly 
forests, and shadowy woods, which are not travelled nor haunted, but 
by wild and savage beasts, and is thought to be the strongest and 
next unto Thora in his poisoning quality, of all the rest of the 
Aconites, or Wolf's-Banes; insomuch that if a few of the flowers be 
chewed in the mouth, and spit forth again presently, yet forthwith it 
burneth the jaws and tongue, causing them to swell, and making a 
certain swimming or giddiness in the head. This calleth to my 
remembrance an history of a certain gentleman dwelling in 
Lincolnshire, called Mahewe, the true report whereof my very good 
friend Mr. Nicholas Belson, sometimes fellow of King's College in 
Cambridge, hath delivered unto me: Mr Mahewe dwelling in Boston, a 
student in physic, having occasion to ride through the Fens of 
Lincolnshire, found a root that the hogs had turned up, which seemed 
unto him very strange and unknown, for that it was in the spring 
before the leaves were out: this he tasted, and it so inflamed his 
mouth, tongue, and lips, that it caused them to swell very extremely, 
so that before he could get to the town of Boston he could not speak, 
and no doubt had lost his life if that the Lord God had not blessed 
those good remedies which presently he procured and used. I have here 
thought good to express this history, for two especial causes; the 
first is, that some industrious and diligent observer of nature may 
be provoked to seek forth that venemous plant, or some of his kinds: 
for I am certainly persuaded that it is either the Thora valdensium, 
or Aconitum luteum, whereof this gentleman tasted, which two plants 
have not at any time been thought to grow naturally in England: the 
other cause is, for that I would warn others to beware by that 
gentleman's harm. Thus saith our author, but I am of opinion that 
this root which Mr. Mahewe tasted was of the Ranunculus flammeus 
maior, described in the first place of the 370th chapter aforegoing; 
for that grows plentifully in such places, and is of a very hot taste 
and hurtful quality.

The Place.

The Yellow Wolf's-bane groweth in my garden, but not wild in England, 
or in any other of these Northerly regions.

The Time.

It flowereth in the end of June, somewhat after the other Aconites.

The Names.

This Yellow Wolf's-Bane is called of Lobel, Aconitum luteum ponticum 
or Pontic Wolf's-Bane. There is mention made in Dioscorides his 
copies of three Wolf's-Banes, of which the hunters use one, and 
physicians the other two. Marcellus Virgilius holdeth opinion that 
the use of this plant is utterly to be refused in medicine.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. The faculty of this Aconite, as also of the other Wolf's-Banes, is 
deadly to man, and likewise to all other living creatures.

B. It is used among the hunters which seek after wolves, the juice 
whereof they put into raw flesh, which the wolves devour, and are 
killed.



CHAP. 376. Of Other Wolf's-Banes and Monk's-Hoods.

Fig. 1409. Lark's-Heel Wolf's-Bane (1) Fig. 1410. Small Blue Wolf's-
Bane (2) 
 The Description.

1. This kind of Wolf's-Bane (called Aconitum lycoctonum: and of 
Dodonæus, Aconitum lycoctonon flore delphinii, by reason of the shape 
and likenes that the flower hath with Delphinium, or Larkspur: and in 
English it is called Black Wolf's-Bane) hath many large leaves of a 
very deep green or overworn colour, very deeply cut or jagged: among 
which riseth up a stalk two cubits high; whereupon do grow flowers 
fashioned like a hood, of a very ill favoured bluish colour, and the 
thrums or threads within the hood are black: the seed is also black 
and three-cornered, growing in small husks: the root is thick and 
knobby.

2. This kind of Wolf's-Bane, called Lycoctonon cæruleum pavum, facie 
napelli: in English Small Wolf's-Bane, or Round Wolf's-Bane, hath 
many slender brittle stalks two cubits high, beset with leaves very 
much jagged, and like unto Napellus, called in English, Helmet-
Flower. The flowers do grow at the top of the stalks, of a bluish 
colour, fashioned also like a hood, but wider open than any of the 
rest: the cods and seed are like unto the other: the root is round 
and small, fashioned like a pear or small Rape or Turnip: which moved 
the Germans to call the same Rapen bloemen, which is in Latin, Flos 
rapaceus: in English, Rape-Flower.

Fig. 1411. Blue Helmet-Flower, or Monk's-Hood (3) Fig. 1412. A 
Wolf's-Bane depicted in the Emperor's Book (4) 

3. This kind of Wolf's-Bane, called Napellus verus, in Englih, 
Helmet-Flower, or the great Monk's-Hood, beareth very fair and goodly 
blue flowers in shape like an helmet; which are so beautiful, that a 
man would think they were of some excellent virtue, but non est 
semper fides habenda fronti ["appearances are not always 
trustworthy"] This plant is universally known in our London gardens 
and elsewhere; but naturally it it groweth in the mountains of 
Rhaetia, and in sundry places of the Alps, where you shall find the 
grass that groweth round it eaten up with cattle, but no part of the 
herb itself touched, except by certain flies, who in such abundant 
measure swarm about the same that they cover the whole plant: and 
(which is very strange) although these flies do with great delight 
feed hereupon, yet of them there is confected an Antidote or most 
available medicine against the deadly bite of the spider called 
Tarantula, or any other venomous beast whatsoever; yea, an excellent 
remedy not only against the Aconites, but all other poisons 
whatsoever. The medicine of the foresaid flies is thus made: Take of 
the flies which have fed themselves as is above mentioned, in number 
twenty, of Aristolochia rotunda, and Bole Armoniac, of each a dram.

4. There is a kind of Wolf's-Bane which Dodonæus reports he found in 
an old written Greek book in the Emperor's Library at Vienna, under 
the the title of Aconitum lycoctonum, that answereth in all points 
unto Dioscorides his description, except in the leaves. It hath 
leaves (saith he) like unto the Plane tree, but lesser, and more full 
of jags or divisions; a slender stalk as Fern, of a cubit high, 
bearing his seed in long cods: it hath black roots in shape like 
crayfishes. Hereunto agreeth the Emperor's picture in all things 
saving in the leaves, which are not so large, nor so much divided, 
but notched or toothed like the teeth of a saw.


Fig. 1413. Kinds of  Monk's-Hood (5-8) 

5. Besides these mentioned by our author there are sundry other 
plants belonging to this pernicious tribe, whose history I will 
briefly run over: The first of these is that which Clusius hath set 
forth by the name of Aconitum lycoctonum flo. delphinii silesiacum: 
it hath stalks some two or three cubits high, smooth and hollow, of a 
greenish purple colour, and covered with a certain mealiness: the 
leaves grow upon long stalks, being rough, and fashioned like those 
of the Yellow Wolf's-Bane, but of a blacker colour: the top of the 
stalk ends in a long spike of spur-flowers, which before they be open 
resemble locusts or little lizards, with their long and crooking 
tails; but opening they show five leaves, two on the sides, two 
below, and one above, which ends in a crooked tail or horn: all these 
leaves are wrinkled, and purple on their outsides, but smooth, and of 
an elegant blue within. After the flowers are past succeed three 
square cods, as in other Aconites, wherein is contained an unequal 
brownish wrinkled seed: the root is thick, black, and tuberous. This 
grows naturally in some mountains of Silesia, and flowers in July and 
August.

6. The leaves of this are somewhat like, yet less than those of our 
common Monk's-Hood, blackish on the upper side and shining. The stalk 
is some cubit and half high, firm, full of pith, smooth, and shining, 
divided towards the top into some branches carrying few flowers, like 
in form to those of the vulgar Monk's-Hood, of a most elegant and 
deep violet colour: the seeds are like the former, and roots round, 
thick, and short, with many fibres. It grows upon the hills nigh 
Salzburg, where it flowers in July: but brought into gardens it 
flowers sooner than the rest of this kind, to wit in May. Clusius 
calls this Aconitum lycoctonum 4. tauricum.

7. This hath leaves broader than those of our ordinary Monk's-Hood, 
yet like them; the stalk is round, straight, and firm, and of some 
three cubits height, and oft times toward the top divided into many 
branches, which carry their flowers spike-fashion, of a purple colour 
absolutely like those of the common sort, but that the thrummy matter 
in the midst of the flowers is of a duskier colour. The root and rest 
of the parts are like those of the common kind: it grows naturally 
upon the Styrian Alps, whereas it flowers somewhat after the common 
kind, to wit, in July. Clusius hath it by the name of Aconitum 
lycoctonum 5. neubergense.

8. The leaves of this are also divided into five parts, and snipped 
about the edges, and do very much resemble those of the small Wolf's-
Bane described in the second place, but that the leaves of that 
shine, when as these do not: the stalk is two cubits high, not very 
thick, yet firm and straight, of a greenish purple colour; and at the 
top carries five or six flowers, the largest of all the Monk's-Hoods, 
consisting of four leaves as in the rest of this kind, with a very 
large helmet over them, being sometimes an inch long, of an elegant 
bluish purple colour: the seed-vessels, seeds, and roots are like the 
rest of this kind. This grows on Judenberg, the highest hill of all 
Styria, and flowers in August; in gardens about the end of July. 
Clusius names it Aconitum Lycoctonum 9. Iudenbergense.


Fig. 1414. Nodding Monk's-Hood (9) 


9. This rises up to the height of three cubits with a slender round 
stalk which is divided into sundry branches, and commonly hangs down 
the head; whence Clusius calls it Aconitum lycoctonum 8. coma 
nutante. The flowers are like those of the common Monk's-Hood, but of 
somewhat a lighter purple colour. The leaves are larger and long, and 
much more cut in or divided than any of the rest. The roots, seeds, 
and other particles are nor unlike those of the rest of this kind.

The Place.

Divers of these Wolf's-Banes grow in some gardens, except Aconitum 
lycoctonon, taken forth of the Emperors book.

The Time.

These plants do flower from May unto the end of August.

The Names.

The first is Lycoctoni species, or a kind of Wolf's-Bane, and is as 
hurtful as any of the rest, and called of Lobel, Aconitum flore 
delphinii, or Larkspur Wolf's-Bane. Avicenna speaketh hereof in his 
second book, and afterwards in his fourth book, Fen. 6, the first 
Treatise: having his reasons why and wherefore he hath separated this 
from Canach adip, that is to say, the wolf's stangler, or the wolf's 
bane.

The later and barbarous herbarists call the third Wolf's-Bane in 
Latin Napellus, of the figure and shape of the roots of Napus, or 
Navet, or Navew Gentle: it is likewise Aconiti lycoctoni species, or 
a kind of Wolf's-bane: also it may be called Toxicum; for Toxicum is 
a deadly medicine wherewith the hunters poison their spears, darts, 
and arrows, that bring present death: so named of arrows which the 
barbarians call Toxcumata, and Toxa. Dioscorides setting down the 
symptoms or accidents caused by Toxicum, together with the remedies, 
reckoneth up almost the very same that Avicenna doth concerning 
Napellus: notwithstanding Avicenna writes of Napellus and Toxicum 
severally; but not knowing what Toxicum is, as he himself confesseth: 
so that it is not to be marvelled, that havting written of Napellus, 
he should afterward reat again of Toxicum.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. All these plants are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and of a 
most venomous quality. The force and faculty of Wolf's-Bane is deadly 
to man and all kinds of beasts. The same was tried of late in 
Antwerp, and is as yet fresh in memory, by an evident experiment, but 
most lamentable; for when the leaves hereof were by certain ignorant 
persons served up in salads, all that did eat thereof were presently 
taken with most cruel symptoms, and so died.

B. The symptoms that follow those that do eat of these deadly herbs 
are these; their lips and tongues swell forthwith, their eyes hang 
out, their thighs are stiff, and their wits are taken from them, as 
Avicenna writeth in his fourth book. The force of this poison is 
such, that if the points of darts or arrows be touched with the same, 
it bringeth deadly hurt to those that are wounded therewith.

C. Against so deadly a poison. Avicenna reckoneth up certain 
remedies, which help after the poison is vomited up; and among these 
he maketh mention of the mouse (as the copies everywhere have it) 
nourished and fed up with Napellus, which is altogether an enemy to 
the poisonsome nature thereof; and delivereth him that hath taken it 
from all peril and danger.

D. Antonius Guanerius of Pavia, a famous physician in his age, in his 
treaty of poisons is of opinion, that it is not a mouse that Avicenna 
speaks of, but a fly: for he telleth of a certain philosopher that 
did very carefully and diligently make search after this mouse, and 
neither could find at any time either mouse, or the root of Wolf's-
Bane gnawn or bitten. as he had read; but in searching he found many 
flies feeding on the leaves, which the same philosopher took, and 
made of them an antidote or counterpoison, which he found to be good 
and effectual against other poisons, but especially the poison of 
Wolf's-Bane.

E. This composition consisteth of two ounces of Terra lemnia, as many 
of the berries of the Bay tree, and the like weight of Mithridate, 24 
of the flies that have taken their repast upon Wolf's-bane, of honey 
and oil olive a sufficent quantity.

F. The same opinion that Guanerius is of, Petrus Pena and Matthias de 
Lobel do also hold; who affirm, that there was never seen at any time 
any mouse feeding thereon, but that there be flies which resort unto 
it by swarms, and feed not only upon the flowers, but on the herb 
also.

The Danger.

There hath been little heretofore set down concerning the virtues of 
the Aconites, but much might be said of the hurts that have come 
hereby, as the woeful experience of the lamentable example at 
Antwerp, yet fresh in memory, doth declare, as we have said.



CHAP. 377. Of Black Hellebore.


Fig. 1415. Kinds of Black Hellebore (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The first kind of Black Hellebore Dodonæus setteth forth under 
this title Veratrum nigram; and it may properly be called in 
Englislh, Black Hellebore, which is a name most fitly agreeing unto 
the true and undoubted Black Hellebore, for the kinds and other sorts 
hereof which hereafter follow are false and bastard kinds thereof. 
This plant hath thick and fat leaves of a deep green colour, the 
upper part whereof is somewhat bluntly nicked or toothed, having 
sundry divisions or cuts; in some leaves many, in others fewer, like 
unto the female Peony, or Smyrnium creticum. It beareth Rose-
fashioned flowers upon slender stems, growing immediately out of the 
ground an handful high; sometimes very white, and oftentimes mixed 
with a little show of purple: which being faded, there succeed small 
husks full of black seeds; the roots are many, with long black 
strings coming from one head.

2. The second kind of Black Hellebore, called of Pena, 
Helleborastrum; and of Dodonæus, Veratrum secundum (in English, 
Bastard Hellebore) hath leaves much like the former, but narrower and 
blacker, each leaf being much jagged or toothed about the edges like 
a saw. The stalks grow to the height of a foot or more, dividing 
themselves into other branches toward the top; whereon do grow 
flowers not much unnlike to the former in show, save that they are of 
a greenish herby colour. The roots are small and thready, but not so 
black as the former.

3. The third kind of Black Hellebore, called of Pena, Helleboraster 
maximus, with this addition, flore et semine pregnans, that is, full 
both of flowers and seed, hath leaves somewhat like the former wild 
Hellebore, save that they be greater, more jagged, and deeply cut. 
The stalks grow up to the height of two cubits, dividing themselves 
at the top into sundry small branches, whereupon grow little round 
and bottle-like hollow green flowers; after which come forth seeds 
which come to perfect maturiry and ripeness. The root consisteth of 
many small black strings, inuvolved or wrapped one within another 
very intricately.

4. The fourth kind of Black Hellebore (called of Pena and Lobel, 
according to the description of Cordus and Ruellius, Sesamoides 
magnum, and Consiligo: in English, Ox-Heel, or Setter-Wort; which 
names are taken from his virtues in curing oxen and such like cattle, 
as shall be showed afterward in the names thereof) is so well known 
unto the most sort of people by the name of Bear-Foot, that I shall 
not have cause to spend much time about the description. (Indeed it 
was not much needful for our author to describe it, for it was the 
last thing he did; for both these two last are of one plant, both 
figures and descriptions; the former of these figures expressing it 
in flower, and the later in seed: but the former of our author was 
with somewhat broader leaves, and the later with narrower.) 
The Place.

These Hellebores grow upon rough and craggy mountains: the last grows 
wild in many woods and shadowy places in England: we have them all in 
our London gardens.

The Time.

The first flowereth about Christmas, if the winter be mild and warm: 
the others later.

The Names.

It is agreed among the later writers, that these plants are Veratra 
nigra: in English, Black Hellebore: in Italian, Elleoro nero: in 
Spanish, Verdegambre negro: of divers, Melampodium, because it was 
first found by Melampos, who was first thought to purge therewith 
Prætus his mad daughters and to restore them to health. Diorcorides 
writeth, that this man was a shepherd: others, a sooth-sayer. In High 
Dutch it is called Christwurtz, that is, Christ's herb, or Christmas 
herb: in low Dutch, Heylich kerst cruyt: and that because it 
flowereth about the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The third kind was called of Fuchsius, Pseudohelleborus, and Veratrum 
nigrum adulterinum, which is in English, false or bastard Black 
Hellebore. Most name it Consiligo, because the husbandmen of our time 
do herewith cure their cattle, no otherwise than the old farriers or 
horse-leeches went wont to do, that is, they cut a slit or hole in 
the dew-lap, as they term it (which is an empty skin under the throat 
of the beast) wherein they put a piece of the root of Setterwort or 
Bear-Foot, suffering it there to remain for certain days together: 
which manner of curing they do call settering of their cattle, and is 
a manner of rowelling, as the said horse-leeches do their horses with 
horse hair twisted, or such like, and as in surgery we do use with 
silk, which instead of the word seton, a certain physician called it 
by the name rowell; a word very unproperly spoken of a learned man, 
because there would be some difference betwixt men and beasts. This 
manner of settering of cattle helpeth the disease of the lungs, the 
cough, and wheezing. Moreover, in the time of pestilence or murrain, 
or any other diseases affecting cattle, they put the root into the 
place aforesaid, which draweth unto it all the venomous matter, and 
voideth it forth at the wound. The which Absyrtus and Hierocles the 
Greek horse-leeches have at large set down. And it is called in 
English, Bear-Foot, Setter-Wort, and Setter-Grass.

The second is named in the German tongue, Lowszkraut, that is, 
Pedicularis, or lousy grass: for it is thought to destroy and kill 
lice, and not only lice, but sheep and other cattle: and may be 
reckoned among the Bear-Foots, as kinds thereof.

The Temperature.

Black Hellebore, as Galen holdeth opinion, is hotter in taste than 
the white Hellebore: in like manner hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Black Hellebore purgeth downwards phlegm, choler, and also 
melancholy especially, and all melancholy humours, yet not without 
trouble and difficulty: therefore it is not to be given but to 
robustious and strong bodies, as Mesues teacheth. A purgation of 
Hellebore is good for mad and furious men, for melancholy, dull, and 
heavy persons, for those that are troubled with the falling sickness, 
for lepers, for them that are sick of a quartan ague, and briefly, 
for all those that are troubled with black choler, and molested with 
melancholy.

B. The manner of giving it (meaning the first Black Hellebore) saith 
Actuarius in his first book, is three scruples, little more or less.

C. It is given with wine of raisins or oxymel, but for pleasantness' 
sake some sweet; and odoriferous seeds must be put unto it: but if 
you would have it stronger, add thereunto a grain or two of Scammony. 
Thus much Actuarius.

D. The first of these kinds is best, then the second; the rest are of 
less force.

E. The roots take away the morphew and black spots in the skin, 
tetters, ring-worms, leprosies and scabs.

F. The root sodden in pottage with flesh, openeth the bellies of such 
as have the dropsy.

G. The root of bastard Hellebore, called among our English women 
Bear-Foot, steeped in wine and drunken, looseth the belly even as the 
true Black Hellebore, and is good against all the diseases whereunto 
Black Hellebore serveth, and killeth worms in children.

H. It doth his operation with more force and might, if it be made 
into powder, and a dram thereof be received in wine.

I. The same boiled in water with Rue and Agrimony, cureth the 
jaundice, and purgeth yellow superfluities by siege.

K. The leaves of Bastard Hellebore dried in an oven, after the bread 
is drawn out, and the powder thereof taken in a fig or raisin, or 
strewed upon a piece of bread spread with honey and eaten, killeth 
worms in children exceedingly.



CHAP. 378. Of Dioscorides his Black Hellebore.


Fig. 1416. Black Masterwort, or Dioscorides' Black Hellebore

The Description.

This kind of Black Hellebore, set forth by Lobel under the name of 
Astrantia nigra, agreeth very well in shape with the true Astrantia, 
which is called Imperatoria: nevertheless by the consent of 
Dioscorides and other authors, who have expressed this plant for a 
kind of Veratrum nigrum, or Black Hellebore, it hath many blackish 
green leaves parted or cut into four or five deep cuts, after the 
manner of the vine leaf, very like unto those of Sanicle, both in 
greenness of colour, and also in proportion. The stalk is even, 
smooth, and plain: at the top whereof grow flowers in little tufts or 
umbels, set together like those of Scabious, of a whitish light green 
colour, dashed over as it were with a little dark purple: after which 
come the seed like unto Carthamus or bastard Saffron. The roots are 
many blackish threads knit to one head or master root.

The Place.

Black Hellebore is found in the mountains of Germany, and in other 
untilled and rough places: it prospereth in gardens.

Dioscorides writeth, That Black Hellebore groweth likewise in rough 
and dry places: and that is the best which is taken from such like 
places; as that (saith he) which is brought out of Anticyra a city in 
Greece. It groweth in my garden.

The Time.

This Black Hellebore flowereth not in winter, but in the summer 
months. The herb is green all the year through.

The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists, Astrantia nigra: of others, 
Sanicula fmina: notwithstanding it differeth much from Astrantia, an 
herb which is also named Imperatoria, or Masterwort. The vulgar 
people call it Pellitory of Spain, but untruly: it may be called 
Black Masterwort, yet doubtless a kind of Hellebore, as the purging 
faculty doth show: for it is certain, that divers experienced 
physicians can witness, that the roots hereof do purge melancholy and 
other humours, and that they themselves have perfectly cured mad 
melancholy people being purged herewith. And that it hath a purging 
quality, Conradus Gesnerus doth likewise testify in a certain epistle 
written to Adolphus Occo, in which he showeth, that Astrantia nigra 
is almost as strong as White Hellebore, and that he himself was the 
first that had experience of the purging faculty thereof by siege: 
which things confirm that it is Dioscorides his Black Hellebore.

Dioscorides hath also attributed to this plant all those names that 
are ascribed to the other Black Hellebores. He saith further, that 
the seed thereof in Anticyra is called Sesamoides the which is used 
to purge with, if so be that the text be true, and not corrupted. But 
it seemeth not to be altogether perfect; for if Sesamoides, as Pliny 
saith, and the word itself doth show; hath his name of the likeness 
of Sesamum, the seed of this Black Hellebore shall unproperly be 
called Sesamoides being not like that of Sesamum, but of Cnicus or 
bastard Saffron. By these proofs we may suspect, that these words are 
brought into Dioscorides from some other author.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The faculties of this plant we have already written to be by trial 
found like to those of the other Black Hellebore: notwithstanding 
those that are described in the former chapter are to be accounted of 
greater force.



CHAP. 379. Of Herb Christopher.


Fig. 1417. Herb Christopher

The Description.

Although Herb Christopher be none of the Bindweeds, or of those 
plants that have need of supporting or underpropping wherewith it may 
climb or ramp, yet because it beareth grapes, or clusters of berries; 
it might have been numbred among the Ampeloi, or those that grow like 
Vines. It brings forth little tender stalks a foot long, or not much 
longer; whereupon do grow sundry leaves set upon a tender footstalk, 
which do make one leaf somewhat jagged or cut about the edges, of a 
light green colour: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, in 
spoky tufts consisting of four little white leaves apiece: which 
being past, the fruit succeeds, round, somewhat long, and black when 
it is ripe, having upon one side a strreaked furrow or hollowness 
growing near together as do the clusters of grapes. The root is 
thick, black without, and yellow within like Box, with many trailing 
strings flexed thereto, creeping far abroad in the earth, whereby it 
doth greatly increase, and lasteth long.

The Place.

Herb Christopher groweth in the North parts of England, near unto the 
house of the right worshipful Sir William Bowes. I have received 
plants thereof from Robinus of Paris, for my garden, where they 
flourish.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth in May and June, and the fruit is ripe 
in the end of summer.

The Names.

It is called in our age Christophoriana, and S. Christophori herba: 
in English, Herb Christopher: some there be that name it Costus 
niger: others had rather have it Aconitum bacciferum: it hath no 
likeness at all nor affinity with Costus, as the simplest may 
perceive that do know both. But doubtless it is of the number of the 
Aconites, or Wolf's-Banes, by reason of the deadly and pernicious 
quality that it hath, like unto Wolf's-Bane, or Leopard's-bane.

The Temperature.

The temperature of Herb Christopher answereth those of the Aconites, 
as we have said.

The Virtues.

I find little or nothing extant in the ancient or later writers, of 
any one good property wherewith any part of this plant is possessed: 
therefore I wish those that love new medicines to take heed that this 
be none of them, because it is thought to be of a venomous and deadly 
quality.



CHAP. 380. Of Peony.

Fig. 1418. Male Peony (1) Fig. 1419. Male Peony in seed
The Kinds.

There be three Peonies, one male, and two females, described by the 
ancients: the later writers have found out four more; one of the 
female kind, called Pæonia pumila, or Dwarf Peony; and another called 
Pæonia promiscua sive neutra, bastard, misbegotten, or neither of 
both, but as it were a plant participating of the male and female; 
one double Peony with white flowers, and a fourth kind bearing single 
white flowers.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Peony (being the male, called Pæonia mas: in 
English, Male Peony) hath thick red stalks a cubit long: the leaves 
be great and large, consisting of divers leaves growing or joined 
together upon one slender stem or rib, not much unlike the leaves of 
the Walnut tree both in fashion and greatness: at the top of the 
stalks grow fair large red flowers very like roses, having also in 
the midst yellow threads or thrums like them in the rose called 
Anthera: which being faded and fallen away, there come in place three 
or four great cods or husks, which do open when they are ripe; the 
inner part of which cods is of a fair red colour, wherein is 
contained black shining and polished seeds as big as a pea, and 
between every black seed is couched a red or crimson seed, which is 
barren and empty. The root is thick; great, and tuberous, like unto 
the common Peony.

Fig. 1420. Female Peony (2) Fig. 1421. Double Red Peony (3) 	2. 
There is another kind of Peony, called of Dodoneus, Pæonia fmina 
prior: of Lobel, Pæonia fmina: in English, Female Peony, which is so 
well known unto all that it needeth not any description.

3. The third kind of Peony (which Pena setteth forth under the name 
Pæonia fmina polyanthus: Dodoneus, Pæonia fmina multiplex: in 
English, Double Peony) hath leaves, roots, and flowers like the 
common female Peony, sav that his leaves are not so much jagged, and 
are of a lighter green colour: the roots are thicker and more 
tuberous, and the flowers much greater, exceeding double, of a very 
deep red colour, in fashion very like the great double Rose of 
Provençe but greater and more double.


Fig. 1422. Kinds of Peony (4-7) 

4. There is found another sort of the double Peony, not differing 
from the precedent in stalks, leaves, or roots: this plant bringeth 
forth white flowers, wherein consisteth the difference.

5. There is another kind of Peony (called of Dodonæus, Pæonia fmina 
altera: but of Pena, Pæonia promiscua, sive neutra: in English, 
Maiden or Virgin Peony) that is like to the common Peony, saving that 
his leaves and flowers are much less, and the stalks shorter: it 
beareth red flowers and seed also like the former.

6. We have likewise in our London gardens another sort bearing 
flowers of a pale whitish colour, very single, resembling the female 
wild Peony, in other respects like the double white Peony, but lesser 
in all the parts thereof.

7. Clusius by seed sent him from Constantinople had two other 
varieties of single Peonies; the one had the leaves red when they 
came out of the ground; and the flower of this was of a deep red 
colour: the other had them of a whitish green, and the flowers of 
this were somewhat larger, and of lighter colour. In the leaves & 
other parts they resembled common double Peony.

The Place.

All the sorts of Peonies do grow in our London gardens, except that 
double Peony with white flowers, which we do expect from the Low 
Countries of Flanders.

The male Peony groweth wild upon a cony-berry in Betsome, being in 
the parish of Southfleet in Kent, two miles from Gravesend, and in 
the ground sometimes belonging to a farmer there called John Bradley.

I have been told that our author himself planted that Peony there, 
and afterwards seemed to find it there by accident: and I do believe 
it was so, because none before or since have ever seen or heard of it 
growing wild since in any part of this Kingdom.

The Time.

They flower in May: the seed is ripe in July.

The Names.

The Peony is called in Greek and Latin Pæonia, in Latin also 
Dulcifida: in shops, Pionia: in High Dutch, Peonien blumen: in Low 
Dutch, Mast bloemen: in French, Pinoine: in Spanish, Rosa del monte: 
in English, Peony. It hath also many bastard names, as Rosa fatuina, 
Herba casta: of some, Lunaris, or Lunaria Pæonia: because it cureth 
those that have the falling sickness, whom some men call lunaticos, 
or lunatic. It is called Idæus dactylus: which agreeth with the 
female Peony; the knobby roots of which be like to Dactyli idæi, and 
Dactyli idæi are certain precious stones of the form of a man's 
finger, growing in the Island of Candy: it is called of divers 
Aglaophotis, or brightly shining, taking his name of the shining and 
glittering grains, which are of the colour of scarlet.

There be found two Aglaophotides, described by Ælianus in his 14th 
book; one of the sea, in the 24th chapter: the other of the earth, in 
the 27th chapter. That of the sea is a kind of Fucus, or sea moss, 
which groweth upon high rocks, of the bigness of Tamarisk, with the 
head of Poppy; which opening in the summer solstice doth yield in the 
night-time a certain fiery, and as it were sparkling brightness or 
light.

That of the earth, saith he, which by another name is called 
Cynospastus, lieth hid in the day time among other herbs, and is not 
known at all, and in the night time it is easily seen: for it shineth 
like a star, and glittereth with a fiery brightness.

And this Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, is Pæonia: for 
Apuleius saith, that the seeds or grains of Peony shine in the night 
time like a candle, and that plenty of it is in the night season 
found out and gathered by the shepherds. Theophrastus and Pliny do 
show that Peony is gathered in the night; which Ælianus also 
affirmeth concerning Aglaophotis.

This Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, is called of Josephus 
the writer of the Jews' War, in his seventh book, 25th chapter, 
Baaras, of the place wherein it is found; which thing is plain to him 
that conferreth those things which Ælianus hath written of 
Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, with those which Josephus 
hath set down of Baaras: for Ælianus saith, that Cynospastus is not 
plucked up without danger; and that it is reported how he that first 
touched it, not knowing the nature thereof, perished. Therefore a 
string must be fastened to it in the night, and a hungry dog tied 
thereto, who being allured by the smell of roasted flesh set towards 
him may pluck it up by the roots. Josephus also writeth, that Baara 
doth shine in the evening like the day-star, and that they who come 
near, and would pluck it up, can hardly do it, except that either a 
woman's urine, or her menses be poured upon it, and that so it may be 
plucked up at the length.

Moreover, it is set down by the said author, as also by Pliny and 
Theophrastus, that of necessity it must be gathered in the night; for 
if any man shall pluck off the fruit in the day-time, being seen of 
the woodpecker, he is in danger to lose his eyes; and if he cut the 
root, it is a chance if his fundament fall not out. The like fabulous 
tale hath been set forth of Mandrake, the which I have partly touched 
in the same chapter. But all these things be most vain and frivolous: 
for the root of Peony, as also the Mandrake, may be removed at any 
time of the year, day or hour whatsoever.

But it is no marvel, that such kinds of trifles, and most 
superstitious and wicked ceremonies are found in the books of the 
most ancient writers; for there were many things in their time very 
vainly feigned and cogged in for ostentation sake, as by the 
Egyptians and other counterfeit mates; as Pliny doth truly testify: 
an imitator of whom in times past, was one Andreas a physician, who, 
as Galen saith, conveyed into the art of physic, lies and subtle 
delusions. For which cause Galen commanded his scholars to refrain 
from the reading of him, and of all such-like lying and deceitful 
sycophants. It is reported that these herbs took the name of Peony, 
or Pæin, of that excellent physician of the same name, who first 
found out and taught the knowledge of this herb unto posterity.

The Temperature.

The root of Peony, as Galen saith, doth gently bind with a kind of 
sweetness: and hath joined with it a certain bitterish sharpness: it 
is in temperature not very hot, little more than meanly hot; but it 
is dry, and of subtle parts.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that the root of the Peony being dried, is 
given to women that be not well cleansed after their delivery, being 
drunk in mead or honeyed water to the quantity of a bean; for it 
scoureth those parts, appeaseth the griping throws and torments of 
the belly, and bringeth down the desired sickness.

B. Galen addeth, that it is good for those that have the yellow 
jaundice, and pain in the kidneys and bladder, it cleanseth the liver 
and kidneys that are stopped.

C. It is found by sure and evident experience made by Galen, that the 
fresh root tied about the necks of chilren, is an effectual remedy 
against the falling sickness; but unto those that are grown up in 
more years, the root thereof must also be ministered inwardly.

D. It is also given, saith Pliny, against the disease of the mind. 
The root of the male Peony is preferred in this cure.

E. Ten or twelve of the red berries or seeds drunk in wine that is 
something harsh or sour, and red, do stay the inordinate flux and are 
good for the stone in the beginning.

F. The black grains (that is the seed) to the number of fifteen taken 
in wine or mead, helps the strangling and pains of the matrix or 
mother, and is a special remedy for those that are troubled in the 
night with the disease called Ephialtes or Nightmare, which is as 
though a heavy burden were laid upon them, and they oppressed 
therewith, as if they were overcome by their enemies, or overpressed 
with some great weight or burden; and they are also good against 
melancholic dreams.

G. Syrup made of the flowers of Peony helpeth greatly the falling 
sickness: likewise the extraction of the roots doth the same.



CHAP. 381. Of Toothed Violets or Coralworts.

Fig. 1423. Dog's-Tooth Violet (1) Fig. 1424. Coral-Toothed Violet (2) 
The Description.

The first kind of Dentaria (called in Latin Dentaria baccifera: of 
Dodonæus, Dentaria prior: in English, Dog's-Tooth Violet) hath a 
tuberous and knobby root, toothed, or as it were kneed like unto the 
crags of Coral, of an unpleasant savour, and somewhat sharp in taste: 
from which spring forth certain small and slender stalks a foot high, 
which have leaves very much cut or jagged, like unto those of Hemp, 
of the form and fashion of Ash leaves: at the top of the stalks do 
grow small white flowers, in shape like Violæ matronales, that is, 
Queen's Gillyflowers, or rather like Stock-Gillyflowers, of a white 
yellow colour, laid over with a light sprinkling of purple: among 
which come forth small knobs growing upon the stalks among the 
leaves, such as are to be seen upon the Chimists Martagon which being 
ripe, do fall upon the ground, whereof many other plants are 
engendered.

2. The second kind of Dog's-Tooth Violet bringeth forth small round 
stalks, firm and stiff, a foot high, beset with leaves much broader, 
rounder, and greener than the former, bearing at the top many little 
flowers consisting of four small leaves, of a pale herby colour; 
which being past, there succeed long and slender cods somewhat like 
the cods of Queen's Gillyflowers, wherein is contained small brackish 
seed: the root is like the former, but not in every respect much 
resembling Coral, yet white and tuberous notwithstanding.

Fig. 1425. Seven-Leaved Toothed Violet (3) Fig. 1426. Five-Leaved 
Toothed Violet (4) 	3. The third kind of Dog's-Tooth Violet is 
called of Clusius, Dentaria heptaphyllos, that is, consisting of 
seven leaves fastened upon one rib, sinew, or small stem: of Lobel 
with this title, Alabastrites altera, or Dentaria altera: but Cordus 
calleth it Coralloides altera: in English, Coral Violet; it hath 
stalks, flowers, and roots like unto the first of his kind, saving 
that the flowers are much fairer, and white of colour, and the roots 
have a greater resemblance of Coral than the other.

4. The fourth kind of Dog's-tooth violet, called in English Codded 
Violet (which Clusius setteth forth under the title Dentaria 
matthioli pentaphyllos; which Pena doth also express under the title 
of Nemoralis alpina herbariorus alabstrites; Cordus calleth it 
Coralloides, and may very well be called in English Cinquefoil 
Violet) hath leaves so like the greater Cinquefoil, that it is hard 
to know one from another; therefore it might very well have been 
reckoned among the herbs called Pentaphylla, that is, five-leaved 
herbs. This plant groweth in the shadowy forest about Turin, and the 
mountain Savena called Calcaris, and by the Rhine not far from Basel. 
The stalks grow to the height of a cubit, beset with a tuft of 
flowers at the top like to that of the first, but of a deeper purple 
colour: which being faded, there succeed long and flat cods like unto 
Rocket, or the great Celandine, wherein is contained a small seed. 
All the whole plant is of a hot and bitter taste. The roots are like 
unto Coral, of a pale whitish colour: the leaves are rough and harsh 
in handling, and of a deep green colour.

5. Clusius gives us another variety of Dentaria pentaphyllos, whose 
roots are more uneven and knobby than the last described: the stalk 
is some foot high: the leaves five upon a stalk, but not so rough, 
nor of so deep a green as those of the former; yet the flowers are of 
a deep purple colour, like those of the last described.

The Place.

They grow on divers shadowy and dark hills. Valerius Cordus writeth, 
that they are found about the forest Hercynia, not far from 
Nordhausen, most plentifully, in a fat soil that hath quarries of 
stone in it. The first I have in my garden.

The Time.

They flower especially in April and May: the seed cometh to 
perfection in the end of August.

The Names.

The toothed Violet, or after some, Dog's-Tooth Violet, is commonly 
called Dentaria: of Cordus, Coralloides, of the root that is in form 
like to Coral. Matthiolus placeth it inter Solidagines & Symphyta, 
among the Confounds and Comfreys. We had rather call them Violæ 
dentariæ, of the likeness the flowers have with Stock-Gillyflowers. 
They may be called in English, Toothed Violets, or Coralworts.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. I have read of few or no virtues contained in these herbs, saving 
those which some women have experienced to be in the first kind 
thereof, and which Matthiolus ascribeth unto Pentaphylla dentaria the 
fourth kind, in the fourth book of his Commentaries upon Dioscorides 
and in the chapter conterning Symphytum where he saith that the root 
is used in drinks which are made against enterocoele and inward 
wounds, but especially those wounds and hurts which have entered into 
the hollowness of the breast.



CHAP. 382. Of Cinquefoil, or Five-Finger Grass


Fig. 1428. Kinds of Cinquefoil (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The first kind of Cinquefoil hath many long slender stalks lying 
spread upon the ground, out whereof grow leaves made of five longish 
snipped leaves fastened to one long footstalk; the flowers also grow 
upon the like footstalks, and are composed of five yellow leaves. The 
root is pretty large, of a reddish colour, and round; but dried, it 
becomes square.

2. The second kind of Cinquefoil or Quinquefoile hath round and small 
stalks of a cubit high; the leaves are large, and very much jagged 
about the edges, very like the common Cinquefoil: the flowers grow at 
the top of the stalks, in fashion like the common kind, but much 
greater, and of a pale or bleak yellow or else whitish colour: the 
root is black without, and full of strings annexed thereto, and of a 
woody substance.

 3. The third kind of Cinquefoil hath leaves like those of the last 
described, and his flowers are of a purple colour; which being past, 
there succeedeth a round knop of seed like a strawberry before it be 
ripe: the stalks are creeping upon the ground: the root is of a woody 
substance, full of black strings appendant thereto. This differs not 
from the last described, but in the colour of the flowers.

4. The fourth kind of Cinquefoil is very like unto the other, 
especially the great kind: the stalks are a cubit high, and of a 
reddish colour: the leaves consist of five parts, somewhat snipped 
about the edges: the flowers grow at the tops of the stalks like unto 
the other Cinquefoils, saving that they be of a dark red colour: the 
root is of a woody substance, with some fibres or thready strings 
hanging thereat.


Fig. 1429. Kinds of Cinquefoil (5-8) 


5. The fifth kind of Cinquefoil groweth upon the cold mountains of 
Savoy, and in the valley of Austensy, and in Narbonne in France, and 
(if my memory fail not) have seen the same growing upon Beeston 
Castle in Cheshire: the leaves hereof are few, and thin set, 
consining of five parts like the other Cinquefoils, oftentimes six or 
seven set upon one footstalk, not snipped about the edges as the 
other, but plain and smooth; the leaf is of a shining white silver 
colour, very soft and shining: the flowers grow like stars, upon 
slender stalks by tufts and bunches, of white colour, and sometimes 
purple, in fashion like the flowers of Alchemilla, or Lady's Mantle: 
the root is thick and full of strings, and of a brown purple colour.

6. This plant, whose figure our author formerly gave for Fragaria 
sterilis & in his description confounded with it, to avoid confusion, 
I think fit to give you here amongst the Cinquefoils, and in that 
place the Fragaria sterilis, as most agreeable thereto. This seems to 
challenge kindred of three several plants, that is, Cinquefoil, 
Tormentil, and Silverweed, for it hath the upper leaves, the yellow 
flowers, creeping branches, and root of Cinquefoil, but the lower 
leaves are of a dark green, and grow many upon one middle rib like 
those of Silverweed;the fruit is like an unripe strawberry. Lobel 
calls this Pentaphyllum supinum tormentila facie: and 
Tabernomontanus, Qinquefolium fragiferum repens.

7. The seventh kind of Cinquefoil, Pena that diligent searcher of 
simples found in the Alps of Rhaetia, near Chiavenna, and at the 
first sight supposed it to be a kind of Tormentilla, or Pentaphyllum, 
save that it had a more thready root, rather like Geranium; it is of 
a dark colour outwardly, having some sweet smell, representing 
Garyophyllata in the savour of his roots: in leaves and flowers it 
resembles Cinquefoil and Tormentil, and in shape of his stalks and 
roots Avens or Garyophyllata, participating of them all: 
notwithstanding it approacheth nearest unto the Cinquefoils, having 
stalks a foot high, whereupon grow leaves divided into five parts, 
and jagged round about the edges like the teeth of a saw, having the 
pale yellow flowers of Pentaphyllum or Tormentilla; within which are 
little mossy or downy threads, of the colour of saffron, but lesser 
than the common Avens.

8. The eighth kind of Cinquefoil (according to the opinion of divers 
learned men, who have had the view thereof, and have judged it to be 
the true Leucas of Dioscorides, agreeable to Dioscorides his 
description) is all hoary, whereupon it took the addition incanum. 
The stalks are thick, woody, and somewhat red, wrinkled also, and of 
a brown colour; which rise unequal from the root, spreading 
themselves into many branches, shadowing the place where it groweth, 
beset with thick and notched leaves like Scordium, or Water 
Germander, which according to the judgement of the learned is thought 
to be of no less force against poison than Pentaphyllon, or 
Tormentilla, being of an astringent and drying quality. Hereupon it 
may be that some trying the force hereof, have yielded it up for 
Leucas dioscoridis. This rare plant I never found growing naturally; 
but in the hollowness of the peakish mountains, and dry gravelly 
valleys.

Fig. 1430. Small Hoary Creeping Cinquefoil (9) Fig. 1431. White Wood 
Cinquefoil (10) 	9. This hath the like creeping purple branches as the 
last described: the leaves are narrower, more hairy and deeper cut 
in; the flowers are also of a more golden colour, in other respects 
they are alike.

10. The Wood Cinquefoil hath many leaves spread upon the ground, 
consisting of five parts; among which rise up other leaves, set upon 
very tall footstalks, and long in respect of those that did grow by 
the ground, and somewhat snipped about the ends, and not all alongst 
the edges. The flowers grow upon slender stalks, consisting of five 
white leaves. The root is thick, with divers fibres coming from it.
Fig. 1432. Small White Wood Cinquefoil (11) Fig. 1433. Small Golden 
Cinquefoil (12) 	11. This also from such a root as the last described 
sends forth many slender branches not creeping, but standing upright, 
and set with little hoary leaves, snipped only at the ends, like as 
those of the last described: the tops of the branches carry pretty 
white flowers like those of the last described, whereof it seems to 
be a kind, yet less in each respect.

12. This from a black and fibrous root, sends forth creeping 
branches, set with leaves like the common Cinquefoil, but less, 
somewhat hoary and shining; the stalks are some handful high, and on 
their tops carry large flowers in respect of the smallness of the 
plant, and these of a fair golden colour, with saffron coloured 
threads in their middle; the seeds grow after the manner of other 
Cinquefoils: this flowers in June, and it is Clusius his 
Quinquefolium 3. aureo flore.

Fig. 1434. Strawberry Cinquefoil (13) 

13. There is one of the mountain Cinquefoils that hath divers slender 
brittle stalks, rising immediately out of the ground; whereupon are 
set by equal distances certain jagged leaves, not unlike to the 
smalllest leaves of Avens: the flowers are white and grow at the top, 
having in them threads yellow of colour, and like to the other 
Cinquefoils, but altogether lesser. The root is thick, tough, and of 
a woody substance. The seeds grow clustering together like little 
strawberries, whence Clusius calls it Quinquefolium fragiferum.

The Place.

They grow in low and moist meadows, upon banks and by highways' 
sides: the second is only to be found in gardens.

The third groweth in the woods of Chiavenna and Narbonne, but not in 
England. The fourth groweth in a marsh ground adjoining to the land 
called Bourne Ponds, half a mile from Colchester; from whence I 
brought four plants for my garden, where they flourish and prosper 
well.

The fifth groweth upon Beeston Castle in Cheshire: the sixth upon 
brick and stone walls about London, especially upon the brick wall in 
Liver Lane.

The place of the seventh and eighth is set forth in their 
descriptions.

The Time.

These plants do flower from the beginning of May to the end of June.

The Names.

Cinquefoil is called in Greek Pentaphyllon: in Latin, Quinquefolium: 
the apothecaries use the Greek name Pentaphyllon: and sometimes the 
Latin name. There be very many bastard names, wherewith I will not 
trouble your ears. In High Dutch, Funft fingerkraut; in Low Dutch, 
Vuif Vinger kruijt: in Italian, cinquefoglio: in French, Quinte 
feuille:in Spanish, Cinco en rama: in English, Cinquefoil, Five-
Finger Grass, Five-Leaved grass, and Sinkfield.

The Temperature.

The roots of Cinquefoil, especially of the first, do vehemently dry, 
and that in the third degree, but without biting: for they have very 
little apparent heat or sharpness.

The Virtues.

A.The decoction of the roots of Cinquefoil drunk, cureth the bloody 
flux, and all other fluxes of the belly, and stancheth all excessive 
bleeding.

B. The juice of the roots while they be young and tender, is given to 
be drunk against the diseases of the liver and lungs, and all poison.

C. The same drunk in Mead or honeyed water, or wine wherein some 
pepper hath been mingled, cureth the tertian or quartan fevers: and 
being drunken after the same manner for thirty days together it 
helpeth the falling sickness.

D. The leaves used among herbs appropriate for the same purpose, 
cureth ruptures and burstings of the rim, and guts falling into the 
cods.

E. The juice of the leaves drunken doth cure the jaundice, and 
comforteth the stomach and liver.

F. The decoction of the roots held in the mouth doth mitigate the 
pain of the teeth, stayeth putrefaction, and all putrefied ulcers of 
the mouth, helpeth the inflammations of the almonds, throat, and the 
parts adjoining, it stayeth the lask, and helpeth the bloody flux.

G. The root boiled in vinegar is good against the shingles, appeaseth 
the rage of fretting sores, and cankerous ulcers.

H. It is reported, that four branches hereof cureth quartan agues, 
three tertians, and one branch quotidians: which things are most vain 
and frivolous, as likewise many other such like, which are not only 
found in Dioscorides, but also in other authors, which we willingly 
withstand.

I. Ortolpho Morolto a learned physician, commended the leaves being 
boiled with water, and some Lignum vitæ added therto, against the 
falling sickness, if the patient be caused to sweat upon the taking 
thereof. He likewise commendeth the extraction of the roots against 
the bloody flux.



CHAP. 383. Of Septfoil, or Tormentil.


Fig. 1435. Septfoil

The Description.

This herb Tormentil or Septfoil is one of the Cinquefoils, it brings 
forth many stalks slender, weak, scarce able to lift itself up, but 
rather lieth down upon the ground: the leaves be lesser than 
Cinquefoil, but more in number, sometimes five, but commonly seven, 
whereupon it took his name Septfoil, which is seven leaves, and those 
somewhat snipped about the edges: the flowers grow on the tops of 
slender stalks, of a yellow colour, like those of the Cinquefoils. 
The root is black without, reddish within, thick, tuberous, or 
knobby.

The Place.

This plant loveth woods and shadowy places, and is likewise found in 
pastures lying open to the Sun, almost everywhere.

The Time.

It flowereth from May, unto the end of August.

The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists Tormentilla: some name it after 
the number of the leaves Septifolium: in English, Septfoil and 
Tormentil: in High Dutch, Birkwurtz: most take it to be Chrysogonon; 
whereof Dioscorides hath made a brief description.

The Temperature.

The root of Tormentil doth mightily dry, and that in the third 
degree, and is of thin parts: it hath in it very little heat, and is 
of a binding quality.

The Virtues.

A. Tormentil is not only of like virtue with Cinquefoil, but also of 
greater efficacy: it is much used against pestilent diseases: for it 
strongly resisteth putrefaction, and procureth sweat.

B. The leaves and roots boiled in wine, or the juice thereof drunken 
provoketh sweat, and by that means driveth all venom from the heart, 
expelleth poison, and preserveth the body in time of pestilence from 
the infection thereof, and all other infectious diseases.

C. The roots dried made into powder and drunk in wine doth the same.

D. The same powder taken as aforesaid, or in the water of a smith's 
forge or rather the water wherein hot steel hath been often quenched 
of purpose, cureth the lask and bloody flux, yea although the patient 
have adjoined unto his scouring a grievous fever.

E. It stoppeth the spitting of blood, pissing of blood, and all other 
issues of blood, as well in men as women.

F. The decoction of the leaves and roots, or the juice thereof drunk, 
is excellent good for all wounds, both outward and inward: it also 
openeth and healeth the stoppings of the liver and lungs, and cureth 
the jaundice.

G. The root beaten into powder, tempered or kneaded with the white of 
an egg and eaten, stayeth the desire to vomit, and is good against 
choler and melancholy.



CHAP. 384. Of Wild Tansy or Silverweed.


Fig. 1436. Silverweed, or Wild Tansy 

The Description.

Wild Tansy creepeth along upon the ground with fine slender stalks 
and clasping tendrils: the leaves are long made up of many small 
leaves, like unto those of the garden Tansy, but lesser; on the upper 
side green, and under very white. The flowers be yellow, and stand 
upon slender stems, as do those of Cinquefoil.

The Place.

It groweth in moist places near unto highways and running brooks 
everywhere.
The Time.

It flowereth in June and July.

The Names.

The later herbarists do call it Argentina, of the silver drops that 
are to be seen in the distilled water thereof when it is put into a 
glass which you shall easily see rolling and tumbling up and down in 
the bottom; I judge it rather so called of the fine shining silver 
coloured leaves. It is likewise called Potentilla: of divers, 
Agrimonia sylvestris, Anserina, and Tanacetum sylvestre: in High 
Dutch, Genserich: in Low Dutch; Ganserick: in French, Argentine: in 
English, Wild Tansy, and Silverweed.

The Temperature.

It is of temperature moderately cold, and dry almost in the third 
degree, having withal a binding faculty.

The Virtues.

A. Wild Tansy boiled in wine and drunk, stoppeth the lask and bloody 
flux, and all other flux of blood in man or woman.

B. The same boiled in water and salt and drunk, dissolveth clotted 
and congealed blood in such as are hurt or bruised with falling from 
some high place.

C. The decoction hereof made in water, cureth the ulcers and cankers 
of the mouth, if some honey and alum be added thereto in the boiling.

D. Wild Tansy hath many other good virtues, especially against the 
stone, inward wounds, and wounds of the privy or secret parts, and 
closeth up all green and fresh wounds.

E. The distilled water taketh away freckles, spots, pimples in the 
face and sun-burning; but the herb laid to infuse or steep in white 
wine is far better: but the best of all is to steep it in strong 
white wine vinegar, the face being often bathed or washed therewith.



CHAP. 385. Of Avens, or Herb Bennet.

Fig. 1437. Avens or Herb Bennet (1) Fig. 1438. Mountain Avens (2) 
The Description.

1. The common Avens hath leaves not unlike to Agrimony, rough, 
blackish, and much cloven or deeply cut into divers gashes: the stalk 
is round and hairy, a foot high, dividing itself at the top into 
divers branches, whereupon do grow yellow flowers like those of 
Cinquefoil or Wild Tansy: which being past, there follow round rough 
reddish hairy heads or knops full of seed, which being ripe will hang 
upon garments as the Burs do. The root is thick, reddish within, with 
certain yellow strings fastened thereunto, smelling like unto Cloves 
or like unto the roots of Cyperus.

2. The Mountain Avens hath greater and thicker leaves than the 
precedent, rougher, and more hairy, not parted into three, but rather 
round, nicked on the edges: among which riseth up slender stalks, 
whereon do grow little longish sharp pointed leaves: on the top of 
each stalk doth grow one flower greater than that of the former, 
which consisteth of five little leaves as yellow as gold: after which 
grows up the seeds among long hairy threads. The root is long, 
growing aslope, somewhat thick, with strings anexed thereto.


Fig. 1439. Kinds of Avens (3-5) 


3. Five-Finger Avens hath many small leaves spread upon the ground, 
divided into five parts, somewhat snipped about the edges like 
Cinquefoil, whereof it took his name. Among which rise up slender 
stalks divided at the top into divers branches, whereon do grow small 
yellow flowers like those of Cinquefoil: the root is composed of many 
tough strings of the smell of cloves, which makes it a kind of Avens; 
otherwise doubtless it must of necessity be one of the Cinquefoils.

4. This hath jointed stringy roots some finger thick, from whence 
rise up many large and hairy leaves, composed of divers little 
leaves, with larger at the top, and these snipped about the edges 
like as the common Avens: among these leaves grow up sundry stalks 
some foot or better high, whereon grow flowers hanging down their 
heads, and the tops of the stalks and cups of the flowers are 
commonly of a purplish colour: the flowers themselves are of a pretty 
red colour, and are of divers shapes, and grow divers ways; which 
hath been the reason that Clusius and other have judged them several 
plants, as may be seen in Clusius his Works, where he gives you the 
flowers, which you here find expressed, for a different kind. Now 
some of these flowers, even the greater part of them grow with fine 
red round pointed leaves, which never lie fair open, but only stand 
straight out, the middle part being filled with a hairy matter and 
yellowish threads: other some consist of seven, eight, nine, or more 
leaves; and some again lie wholly open with green leaves growing 
close under the cup of the flower, as you may see them represented in 
the figure; and some few now and then may be found composed of a 
great many little leaves thick thrust together, making a very double 
flower. After the flowers are fallen come such hairy heads as in 
other plants of this kind, amongst which lies the seed. Gesner calls 
this Geum rivale: Thalius, Caryophyllata major purpurea: Camerarius, 
Caryophyllata aquatica: Clusius, Caryophyllata montana prima, & 
tertia.

5. The root of this is also thick, fibrous, and whitish; from which 
arise many leaves three fingers high, resembling those of Agrimony, 
the little leaves standing directly opposite each against other, 
snipped about the edges, hairy, a little curle, and of a deep green 
colour: out of the midst of those, upon a short stalk grows commonly 
one single flower of a gold-yellow colour, much like the mountain 
Avens described in the second place. It flowers at the beginning of 
July, and groweth upon the Alps. Pona was the first that described 
it, and that by the name of Caryophyllata Alpina omnium minima.

The Place.

These kinds of Avens are found in high mountains and thick woods of 
the North parts of England: we have them in our London gardens, where 
they flourish and increase infinitely.

The red flowered mountain Avens was found growing in Wales by my much 
honoured friend Mr. Thomas Glynn, who sent some plants thereof to our 
herbarists, in whose gardens it thriveth exceedingly.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of May to the end of July.

The Names.

Avens is called Caryophyllata, so named of the smell of cloves which 
is in the roots, and divers call it Sanamunda, Herba benedicta, and 
Nardus rustica: in High Dutch, Benedicten wurtz: in French, Galiot: 
of the Wallons, Gloria filia: in English, Avens, and Herb Bennet: it 
is thought to be Geum plinii, which most do suspect, by reason he is 
so brief. Geum, saith Pliny, lib. 26. cap. 7, hath little slender 
roots, black, and of a good smell.

The other kind of Avens is called of the later herbarists, 
Caryophyllata montana, Mountain Avens: it might agree with the 
description of Baccharis, if the flowers were purple tending to 
whiteness; which as we have said are yellow, and likewise differ in 
that, that the roots of Avens smell of Cloves, and those of Baccharis 
have the smell of Cinnamon.

The Temperature.

The roots and leaves of Avens are manifestly dry, and something hot, 
with a kind of scouring quality.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Avens made in wine is commended against crudity 
or rawness of the stomach, pain of the colic, and the biting of 
venomous beasts.

B. The same is likewise a remedy for stitches and grief in the side, 
for stopping of the liver; it concocteth raw humours, scoureth away 
such things as cleave to the entrails, wasteth and dissolveth wind, 
especially being boiled with wine: but if it be boiled with pottage 
or broth it is of great efficacy, and of all other pot-herbs is 
chief, not only in physical broths, but commonly to Lbe used in all.

C. The leaves and roots taken in this manner dissolve and consume 
cluttered blood in any inward part of the body; and therefore they 
are mixed with potions which are drunk of those that are bruised, 
that are inwardly broken, or that have fallen from some high place.

D. The roots taken up in Autumn and dried, do keep garments from 
being eaten with moths, and make them to have an excellent good 
odour, and serve for all the physical purposes that Cinquefoils do.



CHAP. 386. Of Strawberries.

Fig. 1440. Red Strawberries (1) Fig. 1441. White Strawberries (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Strawberries; one red, another white, a 
third green; and likewise a wild Strawberry,which is altogether 
barren of fruit.

The Description.

1. The Strawberry hath leaves spread upon the ground, somewhat 
snipped about the edge; three set together upon one slender footstalk 
like the Trefoil, green on the upper side, and on the nether side 
more white: among which rise up slender stems, whereon do grow small 
flowers, consisting of five little white leaves, the middle part 
somewhat yellow, after which cometh the fruit, not unlike to the 
Mulberry, or rather the Raspis, red of colour, having the taste of 
wine, the inner pulp or substance whereof is moist and white, in 
which is contained little seeds: the root is thready, of long 
continuance, sending forth many strings, which disperse themselves 
far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.

2. Of these there is also a second kind; which is like to the former 
in stems, strings, leaves, and flowers. The fruit is something 
greater, and of a whitish colour, wherein is the difference.

There is another sort, which brings forth leaves,flowers, and strings 
like the other of his kind. The fruit is green when it is ripe, 
tending to redness upon that side that lieth to the Sun, cleaving 
faster to the stems, and is of a sweeter taste, wherein only 
consisteth the difference.

There is also kept in our gardens (only for variety) another 
Strawberry which in leaves and growing is like the common kind; but 
the flower is greenish, and the fruit is harsh, rough, and prickly, 
being of a greenish colour, with some show of redness. Mr. John 
Tradescant hath told me that he was the first that took notice of 
this Strawberry, and that in a woman's garden at Plymouth, whose 
daughter had gathered and set the roots in her garden instead of the 
common Strawberry: but she finding the fruit not to answer her 
expectation, intended to throw it away: which labour he spared her,in 
taking it and bestowing it among the lovers of such varieties, in 
whose gardens it is yet preserved. This may be called in Latin, 
Fragaria fructu hispido, The Prickly Strawberry.


Fig. 1442. Wild Strawberry (3) 

3. This wild Strawberry hath leaves like the other Strawberry, but 
somewhat less, and softer, slightly indented about the edges, and of 
a light green colour: among which rise up slender stems bearing such 
flowers as the common Strawberries do, but lesser, which do wither 
away, leaving behind a barren or chaffy head, in shape like a 
strawberry, but of no worth or value: the root is like the others.

The Place.

Strawberries do grow upon hills and valleys, likewise in woods and 
other such places that be somewhat shadowy: they prosper well in 
gardens, the first everywhere, the other two more rare, and are not 
to be found save only in gardens.
The barren one grows in divers places, as upon Blackheath, in 
Greenwich Park, &c.

The Time.

The leaves continue green all the year: in the Spring they spread 
further with their strings, and flower afterward: the berries are 
ripe in June and July. The barren one flowers in April and May, but 
never carries any berries.

The Names.

The fruit or berries are called in Latin by Virgil and Ovid, Fraga: 
neither have they any other name commonly known: they are called in 
High Dutch Erdbeeren: in Low Dutch, Eertberien: in French, Fraises: 
in English, Strawberries.

The Temperature.

The leaves and roots do cool and dry,with an astriction or binding 
quality: but the berries be cold and moist.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves boiled and applied in manner of a poultice taketh away 
the burning heat in wounds: the decoction thereof strengtheneth the 
gums, fasteneth the teeth, and is good to be held in the mouth, both 
against the inflammation or burning heat thereof, and also of the 
almonds of the throat: they stay the overmuch flowing of the bloody 
flux, and other issues of blood.

B. The berries quench thirst, and do allay the inflammation or heat 
of the stomach: the nourishment which they yield is little, thin, and 
waterish,and if they happen to putrefy in the stomach, their 
nourishment is naught.

C. The distilled water drunk with white wine is good against the 
passion of the heart, reviving the spirits, and making the heart 
merry.

D. The distilled water is reported to scour the face, to take away 
spots, and to make the face fair and smooth; and is likewise drunk 
with good success against the stone in the kidneys.

E. The leaves are good to be put into lotions or washing waters, for 
the mouth and the privy parts.

F. The ripe Strawberries quench thirst, cool heat of the stomach, and 
inflammation of the liver, take away (if they be often used) the 
redness and heat of the face.



CHAP. 387. Of Angelica.

Fig. 1443. Garden Angelica (1) Fig. 1444. Wild Angelica (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers kinds of Angelicas; the garden Angelica, that of the 
water, and a third sort wild growing upon the land.

The Description.

1. Concerning this plant Angelica there hath been heretofore some 
contention and controversy; Cordus calling it Smyrnium: some later 
writers, Costus niger: but to avoid cavil, the controversy is soon 
decided, sith it and no other doth assuredly retain the name 
Angelica. It hath great broad leaves, divided again into other 
leaves,which are indented or snipped about, much like to the 
uppermost leaves of Sphondylium, but lower, tenderer, greener, and of 
a stronger savour: among which leaves spring up the stalks, very 
great, thick, and hollow, six or seven foot high, jointed or kneed: 
from which joints proceed other arms or branches,at the top whereof 
grow tufts of whitish flowers like Fennel or Dill: the root is thick, 
great,and oilous, out of which issueth, if it be cut or broken, an 
oily liquor: the whole plant, as well leaves, stalks, as roots, are 
of a reasonable pleasant savour, not much unlike Petroleum.

There is another kind of true Angelica found in our English gardens 
(which I have observed) being like unto the former,saving that the 
roots of this kind are more fragrant, and of a more aromatic savour, 
and the leaves next the ground of a purplish red color, and the whole 
plant lesser.

2. The wild Angelica, which seldom grows in gardens, but is found to 
grow plentifully in water-soaken grounds and cold moist meadows, is 
like to that of the garden, save that his leaves are not so deeply 
cut or jagged; they be also blacker and narrower: The stalks are much 
slenderer and shorter, and the flowers whiter: the root much smaller, 
and hath more thready strings appendant thereunto, and is not so 
strong of savour by a great deal.


Fig. 1445. Great Wild Angelica (3) 


3. Matthiolus and Gesner have made mention of another kind of 
Angelica, but we are very slenderly instructed by their insufficient 
descriptions: notwithstanding for our better knowledge and more 
certain assurance I must needs record that which my friend Mr. 
Bredwell related to me concerning his sight thereof, who found this 
plant growing by the moat which compasseth the house of Mr. Munke of 
the parish of Iver, two miles from Colbrook; and since that I have 
seen the same in low fenny and marshy places of Essex, about Harwich. 
This plant hath leaves like unto the garden Angelica, but smaller, 
and fewer in number, set upon one rib a great stalk, gross and thick, 
whose joints and that small rib whereon the leaf grows are of a 
reddish colour, having many long branches coming forth of an husk or 
case, such as is in the common garden Parsnip: the flowers do grow at 
the top of the branches, and are of a white colour, and tuft fashion: 
which being past, there succeed broad long and thick seeds, longer 
and thicker than garden Angelica: the root is great, thick, white, of 
little savour, with some strings appendant thereto. This of our 
author's description seems to agree with the Archangelica of Lobel, 
Dodonæus, and Clusius; wherefore I have put their figure to it.

The Place.

The first is very common in our English gardens: in other places it 
grows wild without planting; as in Norway, and in an island of the 
North called Iceland, where it groweth very high. It is eaten of the 
inhabitants, the bark being peeled off, as we understand by some that 
have travelled into Iceland, who were sometimes compelled to eat 
hereof for want of other food; and they report that it hath a good 
and pleasant taste to them that are hungry. It groweth likewise in 
divers mountains of Germany, and especially of Bohemia.

The Time.

They flower in July and August, whose roots for the most part do 
perish after the seed is ripe: yet have I with often cutting the 
plant kept it from seeding, by which means the root and plant have 
continued sundry years together.

The Names.

It is called at the later age Angelica: in High Dutch, Angelick, 
Brustwurtz, or Des Heilighen Geyst Wurtzel, that is, Spiritus Sancti 
radix, the root of the Holy Ghost , as witnesseth Leonhartus 
Fuchsius: in Low Dutch, Angeliika in French, Angelic: in English also 
Angelica.

It seemeth to be a kind of Laserpitium; for if it be compared with 
those things which Theophrastus at large hath written concerning 
Silphium or Laserpitium in his sixth book Of the History of Plants, 
it shall appear to be answerable thereunto. But whether wild Angelica 
he that which Theophrastus calleth Magydaris, that is to say,another 
kind of Laserpitium, we leave to be examined and considered of by the 
learned physicians of our London College.

The Temperature.

Angelica, especially that of the garden, is hot and dry in the third 
degree; therefore it openeth, attenuateth or maketh thin, digesteth, 
and procureth sweat.

The Virtues.

A. The root of garden Angelica is a singular remedy against poison, 
and against the plague, and all infections taken by evil and corrupt 
air; if you do but take a piece of the root and hold it in your 
mouth, or chew the same between your teeth, it doth most certainly 
drive away the pestilential air, yea although that corrupt air have 
possessed the heart, yet it driveth it out again by urine and sweat, 
as Rue and treacle, and such like antipharmaca do.

B. Angelica is an enemy to poisons: it cureth pestilent diseases if 
it be used in season: a dram weight of the powder hereof is given 
with thin wine,or if the fever be vehement, with the distilled water 
of Carduus benedictus, or of Tormentil, and with a little vinegar, 
and by it self also, or with Treacle of Vipers added.

C. It openeth the liver and spleen: draweth down the terms, driveth 
out or expelleth the secondine.

D. The decoction of the root made in wine, is good against the cold 
shivering of agues.

E. It is reported that the root is available against witchcraft and 
enchantments, if a man carry the same about them, as Fuchsius saith.

F. It attenuateth and maketh thin, gross and tough phlegm: the root 
being used green, and while it is full of juice, helpeth them that be 
asthmatic, dissolving and expectorating the stuffings therein, by 
cutting off and cleansing the parts affected, reducing the body to 
health again; but when it is dry it worketh not so effectually.

G. It is a most singular medicine against surfeiting and 
loathsomeness to meat: it helpeth concoction in the stomach, and is 
right beneficial to the heart: it cureth the bitings of mad dogs, and 
all other venomous beasts.

H. The wild kinds are not of such force in working, albeit they have 
the same virtues attributed unto them.



CHAP. 388. Of Masterwort and Herb Gerard.

Fig. 1446. Masterwort (1) Fig. 1447. Herb Gerard (2) 
The Description.

1. Imperatoria or Masterwort hath great broad leaves not much unlike 
wild Angelica, but smaller, and of a deeper green colour, in savour 
like Angelica, and every leaf divided into sundry other little 
leaves: the tender knotted stalks are of a reddish colour, bearing at 
the top round spoky tufts with white flowers: the seed is like the 
seed of Dill: the root is thick, knotty and tuberous, of a good 
savour, and hot or biting upon the tongue, which hath moved the 
unskilful to call it Pellitory of Spain, but very unfitly and 
untruly.

2. Herba Gerardi, which Pena doth also call Imperatoria and 
Ostrutium: the Germans Podagraria, that is, Gout-wort: in English, 
Herb Gerard, or Wild Masterwort, and in some places after Lyte, 
Ashweed; is very like the other in leaves, flowers, and roots, saving 
that they be smaller, growing upon long stems: the roots tenderer, 
whiter, and not so thick or tuberous. The whole plant is of a 
reasonable good savour, but not so strong as Masterwort.

The Place.

Imperatoria groweth in dark woods and deserts; in my garden and 
sundry others very plentifully.

Herb Gerard groweth of itself in gardens without setting or sowing, 
and is so fruitful in his increase, that where it hath once taken 
root; it will hardly be gotten out again, spoiling and getting every 
year more ground, to the annoying of better herbs.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of June to the beginning of August.

The Names.

Imperatoria, or Astrantia, is called in English, Masterwort, or 
bastard Pellitory of Spain.

Herba Gerardi is called in English, Herb Gerard, Ashweed, and 
Goutwort: in Latin also Podagraria germanica.

The Nature.

Imperatoria, especially the root, is hot and dry in the third degree. 
The wild Imperatoria, or Herb Gerard, is almost of the same nature 
and quality, but not so strong.

The Virtues.

A. Imperatoria is not only good against all poison, but also singular 
against all corrupt and naughty air and infection of the pestilence, 
if it be drunken with wine.

B. The roots and leaves stamped, dissolve and cure pestilential 
carbuncles and botches, and such other apostumations and swellings, 
being applied thereto.

C. The root drunk in wine cureth the extreme and rigorous cold fits 
of agues, and is good against the dropsy, and provoketh sweat.

D. The same taken in manner aforesaid, comforteth and strengtheneth 
the stomach, helpeth digestion, restoreth appetite, and dissolveth 
all ventosities or windiness of the stomach and other parts.

E. It greatly helpeth such as have taken great squats, bruises, or 
falls from some high place, dissolving and scattering abroad 
congealed and clotted blood within the body: the root with his leaves 
stamped and laid upon the members infected, cureth the bitings of mad 
dogs, and of all other venomous beasts.

F. Herb Gerard with his roots stamped, and laid upon members that are 
troubled or vexed with the gout, asssuageth the pain, and taketh away 
the swellings and inflammation thereof, which occasioned the Germans 
to give it the name Podagraria, because of his virtues in curing the 
gout.

G. It cureth also the hæmorrhoids, if the fundament be bathed with 
the decoction of the leaves and roots, and the soft and tender sodden 
herbs laid thereon very hot.

H. False Pellitory of Spain attenuateth or maketh thin, digesteth, 
provoketh sweat and urine, concocteth gross and cold humours, wasteth 
away windiness of the entrails, stomach and matrix: it is good 
against the colic and stone.

I. One dram of the root in powder given certain days together, is a 
remedy for them that have the dropsy, and also for those that are 
troubled with convulsions, cramps, and the falling sickness.

K. Being given with wine before the fit come, it cureth the quartan 
ague, and is a remedy against pestilent diseases.

L. The same boiled in sharp or sour wine, easeth the toothache, if 
the mouth be washed therewith very hot.

M. Being chewed it draweth forth water and phlegm out of the mouth 
(which kind of remedies in Latin, are called apophlegmatismi) and 
disburdeneth the brain of phlegmatic humours, and are likewise used 
with good success in apoplexies, drowsy sleeps, and other like 
infirmities.



CHAP. 389. Of Hercules' Woundwort, or All-Heal.

Fig. 1448. Hercules' All-Heal (1) Fig. 1449. Hercules' Great 
Woundwort (2) 
The Kinds.

Panax is of sundry kinds, as witnesseth Theophrastus in his ninth 
book; one groweth in Syria, and likewise other three, that is to say, 
Chironium, Heraclium, and Æsculapium, or Chiron's All-Heal, Hercules' 
All-Heal, and Æsculapius' All-Heal. Besides these there is one 
Platyphyllon, or broad-leaved, so that in Theophrastus there are six 
kinds of Panax: but Dioscorides describeth only three, Heracleum, 
Asclepium, and Chironium: whereunto we have added another sort, whose 
virtues we found out by means of a husbandman, and for that cause 
have named it Panax coloni, or Clown's wort.

The Description.

1. Hercules' All-Heal or Woundwort hath many broad leaves spread upon 
the ground, very rough and hairy, of an overworn green colour, and 
deeply cut into divers sections like those of the Cow Parsnip, and 
not unlike to the Fig leaves: among the which riseth up a very strong 
stalk covered over with a rough hairiness, of the height of four or 
five cubits. Being wounded it yieldeth forth a yellow gummy juice, as 
doth every part of the plant, which is that precious gum called 
opopanax: at the top of which stalks stand great tufts or umbels of 
yellowish flowers, set together in spoky roundels like those of Dill, 
which turn into seed of a straw colour, sharp and hot in taste, and 
of a pleasing savour; the root is very thick, fat, and full of juice, 
and of a white colour.

2. The Great Woundwort, which the Venetians nourish in their gardens, 
hath great large leaves, somewhat rough or hairy, consisting of 
divers small leaves set together upon a middle rib, whih make one 
entire leaf joined together in one, whereof each collateral or side 
leaf is long and sharp pointed: among which riseth up a knotty stalk 
three or four cubits high, dividing itself into divers branches; on 
the tops whereof do grow spoky tufts or roundels like the precedent, 
but the flowers are commonly white: the seed is flat and plain: the 
root long, thick, and white, which being broken or wounded, yieldeth 
forth liquor like that of the former, of a hot and biting taste.

The Place.

These plants grow in Syria; the first of them also in my garden: but 
what Panax of Syria is, Theophrastus doth not express. Pliny in his 
12th book, chap. 26, saith, that the leaves are round, and of a great 
compass: but it is suspected that these are drawn from the 
description of Hercules' Panax.

Broad-Leaved Panax is thought to be the great Centaury: for Pliny 
witnesseth, that Panax which Chiron found out is surnamed Centaurium, 
Centaury.

Matthiolus saith it grows of itself in the tops of the hills 
Apennini, in the Cape Argentaria, in the sea coasts of Siena, and it 
is cherished in the gardens of Italy; but he cannot affirm, that the 
liquor hereof is gathered in Italy; for the liquor opopanax which is 
sold in Venice is brought, saith he, out of Alexandria a city in 
Egypt: it groweth also in Syria, Boetia, and in Phocide, cities of 
Arcadia.

The Time.

They flower and flourish from the first of May unto the end of 
September.

The Names.

That which is is called Panax in Greek, is likewise named Panax in 
Latin: and that Panax heraclium which Dioscorides setteth down is 
called in Latin, Panax heraculanum, or Herculeum, or Hercules' Panax: 
it may be called in English, Hercules his Woundwort or All-Heal, or 
Opopanax Wort, of the Greek name.

The Temperature.

The bark of the root of Hercules' Woundwort is hot and dry, yet less 
than the juice, as Galen teacheth.

The Virtues.

A. The seed beat to powder and drunk in Wormwood wine is good against 
poison, the biting of mad dogs, and the stinging of all manner of 
venomous beasts.

B. The leaf or root stamped with honey, and brought to the form of an 
unguent or salve, cureth wounds and ulcers of great difficulty, and 
covereth bones that are bare or naked without flesh.



CHAP. 390. Of Clown's Woundwort or All-Heal.


Fig. 1450. Clown's All-Heal.

The Description.

1. Clown's All-Heal, or the Husbandman's Woundwort, hath long slender 
square stalks of the height of two cubits, furrowed or chamfered 
along the same as it were with small gutters, and somewhat rough or 
hairy: whereupon are set by couples one opposite to another, long 
rough leaves somewhat narrow, bluntly indented about the edges like 
the teeth of a saw, of the form of the leaves of Spearmint, and of an 
overworn green colour: at the top of the stalks grow the flowers 
spike fashion, of a purple colour mixed with some few spots of white, 
in form like to little hoods. The root consisteth of many small 
thready strings, whereunto are annexed or tied divers knobby or 
tuberous lumps, of a white colour tending to yellowness: all the 
whole plant is of an unpleasant savour like Stachys or Stinking 
Horehound. The root in the winter time and the beginning of the 
spring is somewhat knobby, tuberous, and jointed, which after the 
stalks grow up become flaccid and hollow, and so the old ones decay, 
and then it putteth forth new ones.

The Place.

It groweth in moist meadows by the sides of ditches, and likewise in 
fertile fields that are somewhat moist, almost everywhere; especially 
in Kent about Southfleet, near to Gravesend, and likewise in the 
meadows by Lambeth near London.

The Time.

It flowereth in August, and bringeth his seed to perfection in the 
end of September.

The Names.

This plant by Gesner was called Stachys palustris, and Betonica 
ftida, and thought to be of the kind of Herba Iudaica, or Sideriti; 
to which indeed I should; and Thalius hath referred it, calling it 
Sideritis 1. gravis odoris: Cæsalpinus calls it Tertiola; and gives 
this reason, quod tertianas sanet, because it cures tertians. 
Tabernamontanus called it Stachys aquatica.

The Temperature.

This plant is hot in the seeond degree, and dry in the first.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves hereof stamped with Axungia or hog's grease, and 
applied unto green wounds in manner of a poultice, healeth them in 
short time, and in such absolute manner, that it is hard for any that 
have not had the experience thereof to believe: for being in Kent 
about a patient, it chanced that a poor man in mowing of peas did cut 
his leg with a scythe, wherein he made a wound to the bones, and 
withal very large and wide, and also with great effusion of blood; 
the poor man crept unto this herb, which he bruised with his hands, 
and tied a great quantity of it unto the wound with a piece of his 
shirt, which presently stanched the bleeding, and ceased the pain, 
insomuch that the poor man presently went to his day's work again, 
and so did from day to day, without resting one day until he was 
perfectly whole, which was accomplished in a few days, by this herb 
stamped with a little hog's grease, and so laid upon in manner of a 
poultice, which did as it were glue or solder the lips of the wound 
together, and heal it according to the first intention, as we term 
it, that is, without drawing or bringing the wound to suppuration or 
matter; which was fully performed in seven days, that would have 
required forty days with balsam itself. I saw the wound, and offered 
to heal the same for charity; which he refused, saying I could not 
heal it so well as himself: a clownish answer I confess, without any 
thanks for my goodwill; whereupon I have named it Clown's Woundwort, 
as aforesaid. Since which time myself have cured many grievous 
wounds, and some mortal, with the same herb; one for example done 
upon a gentleman of Gray's Inn in Holborn, Mr. Edmund Cartwright, who 
was thrust into the lungs, the wound entering in at the lower part of 
the thorax, or the breast-blade, even through that cartilaginous 
substance called mucronata cartilago, insomuch that from day to day 
the frothing and puffing of the lungs did spew forth of the wound 
such excrements as it was possessed of; besides the gentleman was 
most dangerously vexed with a double quotidian fever; whom by God's 
permission I perfectly cured in very short time, and with this 
clown's experiment, and some of my foreknown helps, which were as 
followeth.

B. First I framed a slight unguent hereof thus: I took four handfuls 
of the herb stamped, and put them into a pan, whereunto I added four 
ounces of barrow's grease, half a pint of oil Olive, wax three 
ounces, which I boiled unto the consumption of the juice (which is 
known when the stuff doth not bubble at all) then did I strain it, 
putting it to the fire again, adding thereto two ounces of 
turpentine, the which I suffered to boil a little, reserving the same 
for my use.

C. The which I warmed in a saucer, dipping therein small soft tents, 
which I put into the wound, defending the parts adjoining with a 
plaster of Calcitheos, relented with oil of roses: which manner of 
dressing and preserving I did even until the wound was perfectly 
whole: notwithstanding once in a day I gave him two spoonfuls of this 
decotion following.

D. I took a quart of good claret wine, wherein I boiled an handful of 
the leaves of Solidago saracenica, or Saracen's Confound, and four 
ounces of honey, whereof I gave him in the morning two spoonfuls to 
drink in a small draught of wine tempered with a little sugar.

E. In like manner I cured a shoe-maker's servant in Holborn, who 
intended to destroy himself for causes known unto many now living: 
but I deemed it better to cover the fault, than to put the same in 
print, which might move such a graceless fellow to attempt the like: 
his attempt was thus; First, he gave himself a most mortal wound in 
the throat, in such sort, that when I gave him drink it came forth at 
the wound, which likewise did blow out the candle: another deep and 
grievous wound in the breast with the said dagger, and also two 
others in Abdomine or the nether belly, so that the Zirbus or fat, 
commonly called the caul, issued forth, with the guts likewise: the 
which mortal wounds, by God's permission, and the virtues of this 
herb, I perfectly cured within twenty days: for the which the name of 
God be praised.



CHAP. 391. Of Magydare, or Laserwort.


Fig. 1451. Laserwort

The Description.

It seemeth that neither Dioscorides nor yet Theophrastus have ever 
seen Laserpitium, Sagapenum, or any other of the gummiferous roots, 
but have barely and nakedly set down their judgments upon the same, 
either by hearsay, or by reading of other men's works. Now then 
seeing the old writers be unperfect herein, it behooveth us in this 
case to search with more diligence the truth hereof; and the rather, 
for that very few have set forth the true description of that plant 
which is called Laserpitium, that is indeed the true Laserpitium, 
from the roots whereof flow that sap or liquor called laser. This 
plant, as Pena and Lobel themselves say, was found out not far from 
the isles which Dioscorides calls Stchades, over against Massilia, 
among sundry other rare plants. His stalk is great and thick like 
Ferula, or Fennel Giant: The leaves are like unto the common 
Smallage, and of an unpleasant savour. The flowers grow at the top of 
the stalks, tuft-fashion like Ferula or Fennel: which being past, 
there succeed broad and flat seeds like Angelica, of a good savour, 
and of the colour of Box. The roots are many, coming from one head or 
chief root, and are covered over with a thick and fat bark. These 
roots and stalks being scarified or cut, there floweth out of them a 
strong liquor, which being dried is very medicinable, and is called 
laser.

The Place.

There be sundry sorts of laser, flowing from the roots and stalks of 
Laserpitium, the goodness or quality whereof varieth according to the 
country or climate wherein the plant groweth. For the best groweth 
upon the high mountains of Cyrene and Africa, and is of a pleasant 
smell: in Syria also, Media, Armenia, and Libya; the liquor of which 
plant growing in these places is of a most strong and detestable 
savour. Lobel reporteth, that Jacobus Rainaudus an apothecary of 
Massilia was the first that made it known or brought the plants 
thereof to Montpellier in France, unto the learned Rondeletius, who 
right well beholding the same, concluded, that of all the kinds of 
Ferula that he had ever seen, there was not any so answerable unto 
the true Laserpitium as this only plant.

The Time.

This plant flowereth in Montpellier about midsummer.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Laserpitium: in English, Laserwort, and 
Magydare: the gum or liquor that issueth out of the same is called 
laser, but that which is gathered from those plants that do grow in 
Media and Syria, is called Asaftida.

The Nature.

Laserpitium, especially the root, is hot and dry in the third degree: 
laser is also hot and dry in the third degree, but it exceedeth much 
the heat of the leaves, stalks, and roots of Laserpitium.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Laserpitium well pounded, or stamped with oil, 
scattereth clotted blood, taketh away black and blue marks that come 
of bruises or stripes, cureth and dissolveth the King's Evil, and all 
hard swellings and botches, the places being anointed or plastered 
therewith.

B. The same root made into a plaster with the oil of Ireos and wax, 
doth both assuage and cure the sciatica, or gout, of the hip or 
huckle bone.

C. The same holden in the mouth and chewed, doth assuage the 
toothache; for they are such roots as draw from the brain a great 
quantity of humours.

D. The liquor or gum of Laserpitium, especially the laser of Cyrene 
broken and dissolved in water and drunken, taketh away the hoarseness 
that cometh suddenly: and being supped up with a near egg, cureth the 
cough: and taken with some good broth or supping, is good against an 
old pleurisy.

E. Laser cureth the jaundice and dropsy, taken with dried figs: also 
being taken in the quantity of scruple, with a little pepper and 
myrrh, is very good against shrinking of sinews, and members out of 
joint.

F. The same taken with honey and vinegar, or the syrup of vinegar, is 
very good against the falling sickness.

G. It is good against the flux of the belly coming of the debility 
and weakness of the stomach (called in Latin Cliacus morbus) if it 
be taken with raisins of the Sun.

H. It driveth away the shakings and shiverings of agues, being drunk 
with wine, pepper, & white Frankincense. Also there is made an 
electuary thereof called Antidotus ex succo Cyrenaico, which is a 
singular medicine against fever quartans.

I. It is excellent against the bitings of all venomous beasts, and 
venomous shot of darts or arrows, not only taken inwardly, but also 
applied outwardly upon wounds.

K. It bringeth to maturation, and breaketh all pestilential 
imposthumes, botches and carbuncles, being applied thereto with Rue, 
saltpetre, and honey: after the same manner it taketh away corns 
after they have been scarified with a knife.

L. Being laid to with copperas and verdigris, it taketh away all 
superfluous outgrowings of the flesh, the polypus that happeneth in 
the nose, and all scurvy manginess.

M. If it be applied with vinegar, pepper and wine, it cureth the 
naughty scurf of the head, and falling off of the hair.

N. The gum or liquor of Laserpitium which groweth in Armenia, Lybia, 
and sundry other places, is that stinking and loathsome gum called of 
the Arabian physicians asa and assa, as also with us in shops 
asaftida: but the Laserpitium growing in Cyrene is the best, and of 
a reasonable pleasant smell, and is called laser to distinguish and 
make difference between the two juices; though asaftida be good for 
all purposes aforesaid, yet is it not so good as laser of Cyrene: it 
is good also to smell unto, and to be applied unto the navels of 
women vexed with the choking, or rising of the mother.



CHAP. 392. Of Common Lovage.


Fig. 1452. Common Lovage

The Description.

Ancient writers have added unto this common kind of Lovage, a second 
sort, yet knowing that the plant so supposed is the true Siler 
montanum, and not Levisticum, though others have also deemed it 
Laserpitium. These two suppositions are easily answered, sith they be 
sundry kinds of plants, though they be very near in shape and 
faculties one unto another.  This plant being our common garden 
Lovage, hath large and broad leaves almost like to Smallage. The 
stalks are round, hollow and knotty, 3 cubits high, having spoky 
tufts, or bushy roundels; and at the top of the stalks of a yellow 
colour, a round, flat, and brown seed, like the seed of Angelica: the 
root is long and thick, and bringeth forth every year new stems.

The Place.

The right Levisticum or Lovage groweth in sundry gardens, and not 
wild (as far as I know) in England.

The Time.

Lovage flowereth most commonly in July and August.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Levisticum: and by some, Ligusticum: of other 
some, Siler montanum, but not truly: in High Dutch, Libstokel: in 
French, Livische: in Low Dutch, Lavetse: in English, Lovage.

The Nature.

This plant is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Lovage are very good for all inward diseases, driving 
away ventosities or windiness, especially of the stomach.

B. The seed thereof warmeth the stomach, helpeth digestion; wherefore 
the people of Gennes in times past did use it in their meats, as we 
do pepper, according to the testimony of Ant. Musa.

C. The distilled water of Lovage cleareth the sight, and putteth away 
all spots, lentils, freckles, and redness of the face, if they be 
often washed therewith.



CHAP. 393. Of Cow Parsnip.


Fig. 1453. Cow Parsnip

The Description.

This plant Sphondylium groweth in all countries, and is known by the 
name of wild Parsnip or Sphondylium, whereunto it effectually 
answereth, both in his grievous and rank savour, as also in the 
likeness of the root, whereupon it was called Sphondylium; and of the 
Germans, Acanthus, but untruly: the leaves of this plant are long and 
large, not much unlike the leaves of wild Parsnip, or Panax 
heracleum; deeply notched or cut about the edges like the teeth of a 
saw, and of an overworn green colour. The flowers grow in tufts or 
roundels, like unto wild Parsnips: the root is like to Henbane: this 
herb in each part thereof hath an evil savour, and differeth from the 
right Acanthium, not only in faculties, but even in all other things.

The Place.

This plant groweth in fertile moist meadows, and feeding pastures, 
very commonly in all parts of England, or elsewhere, in such places 
as I have travelled.

The Time.

Sphondylium flowereth in June and July.
The Names.

It is called in Greek and Latin Sphondylium: in the shops of High and 
Low Germany Branca ursina, who unadvisedly in times past have used it 
in clysters, instead of Brank Ursine, and thereupon have named it 
Bernclaw: in English, Cow Parsnip, Meadow Parsnip, and Madnip.

The Nature.

Cow Parsnip is of a manifest warm complexion.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of this plant do consume and dissolve cold swellings if 
they be bruised and applied thereto.

B. The people of Polonia and Lithuania use to make drink with the 
decoction of this herb, and leaven or some other thing made of meal, 
which is used instead of beer and other ordinary drink.

C. The seed of Cow Parsnip drunken, scoureth out phlegmatic matter 
through the guts, it healeth the jaundice, the falling sickness, the 
strangling of the mother, and them that are short-winded.

D. Also if a man be fallen into a dead sleep, or a swoon, the fume of 
the seed will waken him again.

E. If a frantic or melancholic man's head be anointed with oil 
wherein the leaves and roots have been sodden, it helpeth him very 
much, and such as be troubled with the headache and the lethargy, or 
sickness called the forgetful evil.



CHAP. 394. Of Herb Frankincense


Fig. 1454. Kinds of Herb Frankincense (1-4) 

The Description.

1. There hath been from the beginning divers plants of sundry kinds, 
which men have termed by this glorious name Libanotis, only in 
respect of the excellent and fragrant smell which they have yielded 
unto the senses of man, somewhat resembling frankincense. The scent 
and smell Dioscorides doth ascribe to the root of this first kind; 
which bringeth forth a long stalk with joints like Fennel, whereon 
grow leaves almost like Chervil or Hemlocks, saving that they be 
greater, broader, and thicker: at the top of the stalks grow spoky 
tassels bearing whitish flowers, which do turn into sweet smelling 
seed, somewhat flat, and almost like the seed of Angelica. The root 
is black without, and white within, hairy above, at the parting of 
the root and stalk like unto Meum or Peucedanum, and savoureth like 
unto rosin, or frankincense.

2. The second kind of Libanotis hath also a straight stalk, full of 
knots and joints: the leaves are like unto Smallage: the flowers grow 
in tassels like unto the former, and bring forth great, long and 
uneven seed, of a sharp taste: the root is like the former, and so is 
the whole plant very like, but lesser.

3. The third kind of Libanotis differeth somewhat from the others in 
form and shape; yet it agreeth with them in smell, which in some sort 
is like frankincense: the leaves are whiter, longer, and rougher than 
the leaves of Smallage: the stalks do grow to the height of two 
cubits, bearing at the top the spoky tufts of Dill, somewhat yellow: 
the root is like the former, but thicker, neither wanteth it hairy 
tassels at the top of the root, which the others also have, before 
rehearsed.

4. I cannot find among all the plants called Libanotides, any one 
more agreeable to the true and right Libanotis of Dioscorides than 
this herb, which ariseth up to the height of five or six cubits with 
the clear shining stalks of Ferula; dividing itself from his knotty 
joints into sundry arms or branches, set full of leaves like Fennel, 
but thicker and bigger, and fatter than the leaves of Cotula ftida, 
of a greyish green colour, bearing at the top of the stalks the tufts 
of Ferula, or rather of Carrots, full of yellow flowers: which being 
past there succeedeth long flat seed like the seed of the Ash tree, 
smelling like rosin, or frankincense, which being chewed filleth the 
mouth with the taste of frankincense, but sharper: all the rest of 
the plant is tender, and somewhat hot, but not unpleasant: the plant 
is like unto Ferula, and aboundeth with milk as Ferula doth, of a 
reasonable good savour.

The Place.

I have the two last kinds growing in my garden; the first and second 
grow upon the high deserts and mountains of Germany.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in July and August.
The Names.

This herb is called in Latin, Rosmarinus; the first may be Englished 
Great Frankincense Rosemary; the second Small Frankincense Rosemary; 
Mr Lite calleth the third in English, Black Hartwort, the fourth 
White Hartwort: the seed is called Cachrys or Canchrys.

The Nature.

These herbs with their seeds and roots are hot and dry in the second 
degree, and are of a digestling, dissolving, and mundifying quality.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Libanotis pounded, stop the flux of the hæmorrhoides 
or piles, and supple the swellings and inflammations of the fundament 
called condilomata, concoct the swellings of the throat called 
struma, and ripen botches that will hardly be brought to suppuration 
or to ripeness.

B. The juice of the leaves and roots mixed with honey, and put into 
the eyes, doth quicken the sight, and cleareth the dimness of the 
same.

C. The seed mingled with honey, doth scour and cleanse rotten ulcers, 
and being applied unto cold and hard swellings consumeth and wasteth 
them.

D. The leaves and roots boiled until they be soft, and mingled w ith 
the meal of Darnel and vinegar, assuageth the pain of the gout, if 
they be applied thereto.

E. Moreover being received in wine and pepper, it helpeth the 
jaundice, and provoketh sweat, and being put into oil and used as an 
ointment, it cureth ruptures also.

F. It purgeth the disease called in Latin, vitiligo, or impetigo, 
that is, the white spottiness of the skin, chaps, or rifts in the 
palms of the hands and soles of the feet, and by your patience cousin 
german to the scab of Naples, transported or transferred into France, 
and prettily well sprinkled over our Northern coasts.

G. When the seed of Libanotis is put into receipts, you must 
understand, that it is not meant of the seed of Cachris, because it 
doth with his sharpness exasperate or make rough the gullet; for it 
hath a very heating quality, and doth dry very vehemently, yea this 
seed being taken inwardly, or the herb itself, causeth to purge 
upward and downward very vehemently.



CHAP. 395. Of Coriander.

Fig. 1455 Coriander (1) Fig. 1456. Bastard Coriander (2) 
The Description.

1. The first or common kind of Coriander is a very stinking herb, 
smelling like the stinking worm called in Latin Cimex: it hath a 
round stalk full of branches, two foot long. The leaves are of a 
faint green colour, very much cut or jagged: the leaves that grow 
lowest, and spring first, are almost like the leaves of Chervil or 
Parsley, but those which come forth afterward, and grow upon the 
stalks, are more jagged, almost like the leaves of Fumitory, though a 
great deal smaller, tenderer, and more jagged. The flowers are white, 
and do grow in round tassels like unto Dill. The seed is round, 
hollow within, and of a pleasant scent and savour when it is dry. The 
root is hard, and of a woody substance, which dieth when the fruit is 
ripe, and soweth itself from year to year, whereby it mightily 
increaseth.

2. There is a second kind of Coriander very like unto the former, 
saving that the bottom leaves and stalks are smaller: the fruit 
thereof is greater, and growing together by couples, it is not so 
pleasant of savour nor taste, being a wild kind thereof, unfit either 
for meat or medicine.

The Place.

Coriander is sown in fertile fields and gardens, and the first doth 
come of itself from time to time in my garden, though I never sowed 
the same but once.

The Time.

They flower in June and July, and deliver their seed in the end of 
August.

The Names.

The first is called in Latin Coriandrum: in English, Corianders. The 
second, Coriandrum alterum, wild Corianders.

The Temperature.

The green and stinking leaves of Corianders are of complexion cold 
and dry, and very naught, unwholesome and hurtful to the body.

The dry and pleasant well savouring seed is warm, and very convenient 
to sundry purposes.
The Virtues.

A. Coriander seed prepared and covered with sugar, as comfits, taken 
after meat closeth up the mouth of the stomach, stayeth vomiting, and 
helpeth digestion.

B. The same parched or roasted, or dried in an oven, and drunk with 
wine, killeth and bringeth forth worms, stoppeth the lask, and bloody 
flux, and all other extraordinary issues of blood.
The manner how to prepare Coriander, both for meat and medicine.

C. Take the seed well and sufficiently dried, whereupon pour some 
wine and vinegar, and so leave them to infuse or steep four and 
twenty hours, then take them forth and dry them, and keep them for 
your use.

D. The green leaves of Coriander boiled with the crumbs of bread or 
barley meal, consumeth all hot swellings and inflammations: and with 
bean meal dissolveth the King's Evil, wens, and hard lumps.

E. The juice of the leaves mixed and laboured in a leaden mortar with 
ceruse, litharge of silver, and oil of roses, cureth St. Anthony's 
fire, and taketh away all inflammations whatsoever.

F. The juice of the green Coriander leaves, taken in the quantity of 
four drams, killeth and poisoneth the body.

G. The seeds of Coriander prepared with sugar, prevail much against 
the gout, taken in some small quantity before dinner upon a fasting 
stomach, and after dinner the like without drinking immediately after 
the same, or in three or four hours. Also if the same be taken after 
supper it prevaileth the more, and hath more superiority over the 
disease.

H. Also, if it be taken with meat fasting, it causeth good digestion, 
and shutteth up the stomach, keepeth away fumes from rising up out of 
the same: it taketh away the sounding in the ears, drieth up the 
rheum, and cureth the squinancy.



CHAP. 396. Of Parsley.


Fig. 1457. Parsley

The Description.

1. The leaves of Garden Parsley are of a beautiful green, consisting 
of many little ones fastened together, divided most commonly into 
three parts and also snipped round about the edges: the stalk is 
above one cubit high, slender, something chamfered, on the top 
whereof stand spoked roundels, bringing forth very fine little 
flowers, and afterwards small seeds somewhat of a fiery taste: the 
root is long and white, and good to be eaten.

2. There is another garden Parsley in taste and virtue like unto the 
precedent: the only difference is that this plant bringeth forth 
leaves very admirably crisped or curled like fans of curled feathers, 
whence it is called Apium crispum, sive multifidum; Curled Parsley.

3. There is also kept in same gardens another Parsley called Apium 
sive petrosilinum virginianum, or Virginian Parsley; it hath leaves 
like the ordinary, but rounder, and of a yellowish green colour, the 
stalks are some three foot high, divided into sundry branches whereon 
grow umbels of whitish flowers: the seeds are like, but larger than 
those of the common Parsley, and when they are ripe they commonly sow 
themselves, and the old roots die, and the young ones bear seed the 
second year after their sowing.

The Place.

It is sown in beds in gardens; it groweth both in hot and cold 
places, so that the ground be either by nature moist, or be 
oftentimes watered: for it prospereth in moist places, and is 
delighted with water, and therefore it naturally cometh up near to 
fountains or springs: Fuchsius writeth that it is found growing of 
itself in divers fenny grounds in Germany.

The Time.

It may be sown betime, but it slowly cometh up: it may oftentimes be 
cut and cropped: it bringeth forth his stalks the second year: the 
seeds be ripe in July or August.

The Names.

Every one of the Parsleys is called Apium Hortense: the apothecaries 
and common herbarists name it Petroselinum: in High Dutch, 
Petersilgen: in low Dutch, Trimen Peterselie: in French, du Persil: 
in Spanish, Perixil Iulivert, and Salsa: in Italian, Petrosilio: in 
English, Persele, Parsley, common Parsley, and garden Parsley. Yet is 
it not the true and right Petroselinum which groweth among rocks and 
stones, whereupon it took his name, and whereof the best is in 
Macedonia: therefore they are deceived who think that garden Parsley 
doth not differ from stone Parsley, and that the only difference is, 
for that Garden Parsley is of less force than the wild; for wild 
herbs are more strong in operation than those of the garden.

The Temperature.

Garden Parsley is hot and dry, but the seed is more hot and dry, 
which is hot in the second degree, and dry almost in the third: the 
root is also of a moderate heat.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves are pleasant in sauces and broth, in which besides that 
they give a pleasant taste, they be also singular good to take away 
stoppings, and to provoke urine: which thing the roots likewise do 
notably perform if they be boiled in broth: they be also delightful 
to the taste, and agreeable to the stomach.

B. The seeds are more profitable for medicine; they make thin, open, 
provoke urine, dissolve the stone, break and waste away wind, are 
good for such as have the dropsy, draw down menses, bring away the 
birth, and after-birth: they be commended also against the cough, if 
they be mixed or boiled with medicines made for that purpose: lastly 
they resist poisons, and therefore are mixed with treacles.

C. The roots or the seeds of any of them boiled in ale and drunken, 
cast forth strong venom or poison, but the seed is the strongest part 
of the herb.

D. They are also good to be put into clysters against the stone or 
torments of the guts.



CHAP. 397. Of Water Parsley, or Smallage.


Fig. 1458. Smallage

The Description.

Smallage hath green smooth and glittering leaves, cut into very many 
parcels, yet greater and broader than those of common Parsley: the 
stalks be chamfered and divided into branches on the tops whereof 
stand little white flowers; after which do grow seeds something 
lesser than those of common Parsley: the root is fastened with many 
strings.

The Place.

This kind of Parsley delighteth to grow in moist places, and is 
brought from thence into gardens. It grows wild abundantly upon the 
banks in the salt marshes of Kent and Essex.

The Time.

It flourishes when the garden Parsley doth, and the stalk likewise 
cometh up the next year after it is sown, and then also it bringeth 
forth seeds which are ripe in July and August.
The Names.

It is called of Gaza, Paludapium: in shops, Apium, absolutely without 
any addition: in Latin, Palustre Apium, and Apium rusticum: in High 
Dutch, Epfsich: in low Dutch, Eppe, and of divers Jouffrouwmerk: in 
Spanish and Italian, Apia: in French, de l'ache: in English, 
Smallage, Marsh Parsley, or water Parsley.

The Temperature.

This Parsley is like in temperature and virtues to that of the 
garden, but it is both hotter and drier, and of more force in most 
things: this is seldom eaten, neither is it counted good for sauce, 
but it is very profitable for medicine.

The Virtues.

A. The juice thereof is good for many things, it cleanseth, openeth, 
attenuateth or maketh thin; it removeth obstructions and provoketh 
urine, and therefore those syrups which have this mixed with them, as 
that which is called Syrupus Bizantinus, open the stoppings of the 
liver and spleen, and are a remedy for long lasting agues; whether 
they be tertians or quartans, and all other which proceed both of a 
cold cause and also of obstrctions or stoppings, and are very good 
against the yellow jaundice.

B. The same juice doth perfectly cure the malicious and venomous 
ulcers of the mouth, and of the almonds of the throat with the 
decoction of Barley and Mel Rosarum, or honey of Roses added, if the 
parts be washed therewith: it likewise helpeth all outward ulcers and 
foul wounds: with honey it is profitable also for cankers 
exulcerated, for although it cannot cure them, yet it doth keep them 
from putrefaction, and preserveth them from stinking: the seed is 
good for those things for which that of the Garden Parsley is: yet is 
not the use thereof so safe, for it hurteth those that are troubled 
with the falling sickness, as by evident proofs it is very well 
known.

C. Smallage, as Pliny writeth, hath a particular virtue against the 
biting of venomous spiders.

D. The juice of Smallage mixed with honey and bean flour, doth make 
an excellent mundificative for old ulcers and malignant sores, and 
stayeth also the weeping of the cut or hurt sinews in simple members, 
which are not very fatty or fleshy, and bringeth the same to perfect 
digestion.

E. The leaves, boiled in hog's grease, and made into the form of a 
poultice, take away the pain of felons and whitlows in the fingers, 
and ripen and heal them.



CHAP. 398. Of Mountain Parsley.


Fig. 1459. Mountain Parsley

The Description.

The stalk of Mountain Parsley, as Dioscorides writeth, is a span 
high, growing from a slender root; upon which are branches and little 
heads like those of Hemlock, yet much slenderer: on which stalks do 
grow the seed, which is long, of a sharp or biting taste, slender, 
and of a strong smell, like unto Cumin: but we cannot find that this 
kind of Mountain Parsley is known in our age: the leaves of this we 
here give are like those of Common Parsley, but greater and broader, 
consisting of many slender footstalks fastened unto them; the stalk 
is short, the flowers on the spoked tufts be white; the seed small: 
the root is white, and of a mean length or bigness, in taste somewhat 
biting and bitterish, and of a sweet smell.

The Place.

Dioscorides writeth, that mountain Parsley groweth upon rocks and 
mountains. And Dodonæus affirmeth that this herb described grows on 
the hills which divide Silesia from Moravia, called in times past the 
country of the Marcomans: also it is said to be found on other 
mountains and hills in the North parts of England.

The Names.

The Latins do call it Apium montanum, and Montapium: in English 
Mountain Parsley: but Dioscorides maketh Petroselinum or Stone 
Parsley to differ from Mountain Parsley; for, saith he, we must not 
be deceived, taking Mountain Parsley to be that which groweth on 
rocks: for Rock Parsley is another plant, of some it is called, 
Veelgutta: in Latin, Multibona, (in English, much good:) for it is so 
named because it is good, and profitable for many things: and this is 
not altogether unproperly termed Oreoselinum, or Mountain Parsley; 
for it groweth as we have said on mountains, and is not unlike to 
Stone Parsley: the seed is not like to that of Cumin, for if were so, 
who would deny it to be Oreoselinum, or Dioscorides his Mountain 
Parsley.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Oreoselinum, or Mountain Parsley is, as Galen saith, like in 
faculty unto Smallage, but more effectual; Dioscorides writeth that 
the seed and root being drunk in wine provoke urine, bring down the 
menses, and that they are mixed with counterpoisons, diuretic 
medicines, and medicines that are hot.

B. The root of Veelgutta, or Much Good, is also hot and dry, and that 
in the later end of the second degree, it maketh thin, it cureth, 
openeth, provoketh, breaketh the stone and expelleth it, openeth the 
stoppings of the liver and spleen, and cureth the yellow jaundice: 
being chewed it helpeth the toothache, and bringeth much water out of 
the mouth.



CHAP. 399. Of Stone Parsley of Macedonia.

Fig. 1460. Bastard Stone Parsley (1) Fig. 1461. True Parsley of 
Macedonia (2) 
The Description.

Of Stone Parsley very little is written of the old writers, 
Dioscorides only saith that this hath seed like to that of Ameos, but 
of a more pleasant smell, sharp, aromatical, or spiced; touching the 
form of the leaves, the colour of the flowers, and fashion of the 
root he writeth nothing at all: and Pliny is more brief; as for 
Theophrastus he doth not so much as name it, making mention only of 
Parsley, Alexander, Smallage, and Mountain Parsley.

1. For Stone Parsley Leonhartus Fuchsius hath set down a plant, 
having leaves not spread and cut after the manner of garden Parsley, 
but long, and snipped round about, made up and fastened to a rib or 
stem in the midst, something like, but yet not altogether, to the 
first leaves of the lesser Saxifrage; the stalk is slender, and a 
cubit and a half high; the roots on the spoky tufts are white: the 
seed something black, like to that of Ameos, and Garden Parsley, very 
sweet of smell, something sharp or biting: the root is slender and 
full of strings.

2. Lobel also instead of the right Stone Parsley describeth another, 
which the Venetians call Stone Parsley of Macedonia: this hath leaves 
like those of garden Parsley, or rather of the Venetian Saxifrage 
which is the Black Herb Frankincense formerly described: the stalk is 
a cubit high; the spoky tufts something white: the seed small, 
quickly fading (as he saith) inferior to that of garden Parsley in 
temperature and virtues: but whether this be the true and right Stone 
Parsley, he added, he is ignorant.

The Place.

It groweth on craggy rocks, and among stones: but the best in 
Macedonia, whereupon it beareth the surname macedonicum, of 
Macedonia.

The Time.

It flowereth in the summer months.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Petrapium, and Petroselinum macedonicum: in 
English, Stone Parsley: the apothecaries know it not: they are far 
deceived that would have the herb which Fuchsius pictureth to be 
Amomum: for Amomum differeth from this, as it is very plain by the 
description thereof in Dioscorides: but we hold this for the true 
Stone Parsley, till such time as we may learn some other more like in 
leaves to the Parsleys, and in seed, such as that of Stone Parsley 
ought to be: and the very seed itself may cause us to hold this 
opinion, being so agreeing to the description as no herb more; for it 
is sharp and biting, and of a sweeter smell than is that of Ameos, 
and of a more spicy scent; yet do not the leaves gainsay it, which 
though they have not the perfect form of other Parsleys, yet 
notwithstanding are not altogether unlike. The first of these is 
thought by Anguillara, Tarner, Gesner, Cordus, and others, to be the 
Sison of Dioscorides, and Tragus calls it, Amomon germanicum, and the 
seeds in shops retain the name of Sem. Amomi. The second is thought 
by Columna to be the second Daucus of Dioscorides.

The Temperature.

The seed of Stone Parsley which is most commonly used, is hot and 
dry, having withal a cutting quality.

The Virtues.

A. It provoketh urine, and bringeth down the flowers: it is 
profitable against wind in the stomach, and colic gut, and gripings 
in the belly: for it is, as Galen saith, a waster or consumer of 
wind: it is a remedy against pain in the sides, kidneys and bladder, 
it is also mixed in counterpoisons: Dioscorides.



CHAP. 400. Of Corn Parsley, or Honewort.


Fig. 1462. Honewort.

The Description.

This herb cometh up at the first from seed like Parsley, with two 
small long narrow leaves, the next that spring are two small round 
smooth leaves nicked about the edges, and so for two or three couples 
of leaves of the next growth there are such round leaves growing on a 
middle rib by couples, and one round one, also at the top; after as 
more leaves spring up, so the fashion of them also change, that is to 
say, every leaf hath about eight or nine small smooth green leaves, 
growing on each side of a middle rib one opposite against another, 
and one growing by itself at the top, and are finely snipped or 
indented about the edges, in form resembling those of Sium odoratum 
tragi, but not so big, long, or at all brownish; amongst which rise 
up many small round streaked stalks or branches, about two foot long, 
now and then above twenty from one root, sometimes growing upright, 
sometimes creeping not far from the ground, jointed or kneed, and 
dividing themselves into very many branches, at every joint groweth 
one leaf smaller than the former, which together with the lowermost 
perish, so that there is seldom one green leaf to be seen on this 
herb when the seed is ripe; the flowers are white, and grow most 
commonly at the tops of the branches, sometimes at most of the joints 
even from the earth, in uneven or unorderly umbels, every flower 
having five exceeding small leaves, flat, and broad at the top, and 
in the middle very small chives with purple tops, the whole flower 
not much exceeding the bigness of a small pin's head, which being 
past there cometh up in the place of every flower two small grey 
crooked streaked seeds, like Parsley seeds, but bigger, in taste hot 
and aromatical. The root is small and whitish, with many threads not 
so big as Parsley roots. It beginneth to flower about the beginning 
of July, & so continues flowering a long time; part of the seed is 
ripe in August, and some scarce in the beginning of October, 
meanwhile some falleth, whereby it reneweth itself, and groweth with 
flourishing green leaves all the winter.

I took the description of this herb the year, 1620, but observed it 
long before, not knowing any name for it: first I refered it to Sium 
calling it, Sium terrestre, and Sium segetum & agrorum; afterwards 
upon sight of Selinum peregrinum primum clusii, which in some 
respects resembleth this herb, I named it Selinum sii foliis; yet 
wanting an English name, at length about the year 1625, I saw 
Mistress Ursula Leigh (then servant to Mistress Bilson of Mapledurham 
in Hampshire, and now (5 March 1632) wife to Master William Mooring 
schoolmaster of Petersfield, a town near the said Mapledurham) gather 
it in the wheat earshes about Mapledurham aforesaid (where in such 
like grounds it still groweth, especially in clay grounds) who told 
me it was called Honewort, and that her mother Mistress Charity Leigh 
late of Brading in the Isle of Wight deceased, taught her to use it 
after the manner here expressed, for a swelling which she had in her 
left cheek, which for many years would once a year at the least arise 
there, and swell with great heat, redness, and itching, until by the 
use of this herb it was perfectly cured, and rose no more nor 
swelled, being now (5 March 1632) about twenty years since, only the 
scar remaineth to this day. This swelling her mother called by the 
name of a Hone, but asking whether such tumors werein the said Isle 
usually called Hones she could not tell, by reason she was brought 
from Brading aforesaid young, and not being above twelve years old 
when she used this medicine.

The Virtues.

A. Take one handful of the green leaves of this Honewort, and stamp 
them, put to it about half a pint or more of beer, strain it, and 
drink it, and so continue to drink the like quantity every morning 
fasting till the swelling doth abate, which with or in her was 
performed in the space of two weekes at the most. August 18, 1620. 
John Goodyer.



CHAP. 401. Of Alexanders.


Fig. 1463. Alexanders

The Description.

The leaves of Alexanders are cut into many parcels like those of 
Smallage, but they be much greater and broader, smooth also, and of a 
deep green colour: the stalk is thick, oftentimes a cubit high: the 
flowers be white, and grow upon spoky tufts: the seed is thick, long, 
black, something bitter, and of an aromatical or spicy smell: the 
root is thick, black without, white within, like to a little Radish, 
and is good to be eaten. out of which being broken or cut, there 
issueth forth a juice that quickly waxeth thick; having in it a sharp 
bitterness, like in taste unto Myrrh: which thing also Theophrastus 
hath noted, there issueth out of it, saith he, a juice like Myrrh.

The Place.

Alexanders or great Parsley groweth in most places of England.

The Time.

The seed waxeth ripe the second year, in the month of August.

The Names.

It is called in Greek, of the greatness wherein it excelleth the 
other Parsleys, Ipposelinon or Horse Parsley; of Gaza, Equapium. It 
is also named Olus atrum, or the black pot-herb, and of divers 
Sylvestre Apium; or wild Parsley; of Galen and certain others, 
Smyrnion, by reason of the juice that issfueth forth thereof, that 
is, as we have said, like unto Myrrh, which is called in Greek 
Smyrnion: there is also another Smyrnium of mount Aman, of which we 
do write in the 404th chapter: the apothecaries call it Petrosilinum 
macedonicum: others, Petroselinum alexandrinum: the Germans, Grosz 
Epffich: the Low Country-men, Peterselie van Macedonion: in Spanish, 
Perexil macedonico: the French, Alexandre: and Englishmen, 
Alexanders.

The Temperature.

The seed & root of Alexanders, are no less hot and dry than are those 
of the Garden Parsley, they cleanse and make thin, being hot and dry 
in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that the leaves and stalks are boiled and 
eaten, and dressed alone by themselves, or with fishes: that they are 
preserved raw in pickle: that the root eaten both raw and sod, is 
good for the stomach: the root hereof is also in our age served to 
the table raw for a salad herb.

B. The seeds bring down the flowers, expel the secondine, break and 
consume wind, provoke urine, and are good against the strangury: the 
decoction also of the root doth the same, especially if it be made 
with wine.



CHAP. 402. Of Wild Parsley.


Fig. 1464. Wild Parsley

The Description.

This is like to the kinds of Parsleys in the sundry cuts of the 
leaves, and also in the bigness, for they be broad and cut into 
divers parcels: the stalks are round, chamfered, set with certain 
joints, hollow within, a cubit high or higher, two or three coming 
forth together out of one root, and in the nether part many times of 
a dark reddish colour. The flowers be white, and grow upon spoky 
tufts: the seed is round, flat, like that of Dill: the root is white 
within, and divided into many branches and strings. This plant in 
what part soever it be cut or broken, yieldeth forth a milky juice.

The Place.

It is found by ponds sides in moist and dankish places, in ditches 
also, having in them standing waters, and oftentimes by old stocks of 
Alder trees. Thus our author, but I have not as yet observed this 
plant growing wild with us.

The Time.

It flowereth and bringeth forth seed in June and July.

The Names.

The shops of the Low countries have miscalled it in times past by the 
name of Meum, and used it for the right Meu, or Spignel-Wort. The 
Germans name it Disenich: Valerius Cordus, Olsenichium: divers in the 
Low Countries call it Wilde Eppe, that is to say in Latin, Apium 
sylvestre, or Wild Parsley, and some Water Eppe, that is, 
Hydroselinon, or Apium aquatile, water Parsley: and oftentimes is it 
named, as we have already written, Eleoselinum, and Sium. It may be 
more rightly termed in Latin, Apium sylvestre, and in English, Wild 
Parsley.

Dioscorides hath made mention of Wild Parsley in the chapter of 
Daucus or Wild Carrot: and Theophrastus in his seventh book, where he 
maketh the Parsleys to differ both in leaves and stalks, and showeth 
that some have white stalks, others purple, or else of sundry 
colours, and that there is also a certain wild Parsley; for he saith 
that those which have the purple stalks, and the stalks of divers 
colours, come nearest of all to the wild Parsley. And therefore 
seeing that Olsenichium, or wild Parsley, hath the lower part of the 
stalk of a purplish colour, and like in leaves to Parsley, which in 
times past we thought good rather to call Apium sylvestre, or Wild 
Parsley, than to err with the apothecaries, and to take it for Meu. 
And after when we now know that it was held to be Thysselium plinii, 
and that we could allege nothing to the contrary, we also setled our 
selves to be of their opinon; and the rather, because the faculties 
are agreeable. Thyssellium, saith Pliny, lib. 25. chapter 11, is not 
unlike to Parsley: the root hereof purgeth phlegm out of the head; 
which thing also the root of Olsenichium doth effectually perform, as 
we will forthwith declare.

The Temperature.

The root hereof is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The root being chewed bringeth by the mouth phlegm out of the 
head, and is a remedy for the toothache, and there is no doubt but 
that it also makes thin, cutteth and openeth, provoketh urine and 
bringeth down the flowers, and doth likewise no less but more 
effectually perform those things that the rest of the Parsleys do.



CHAP. 403. Of Bastard Parsley.


Fig. 1465. Kinds of Parsley (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The first kind of Bastard Parsley is a rough hairy herb, not much 
unlike to Carrots; the leaves are like to those of Corianders, but 
parted into many small jags: at the top of the branches do grow 
shadowy umbels, or spoky roundels, consisting of many small white 
flowers: the seed is long and rough, like the seed of Carrots, but 
greater: the root is straight and single, growing deep into the 
ground, of a white colour, and in taste like the Parsnip.

2. There is another sort like unto the former, saving that the leaves 
thereof are broader, and the flowers are of a reddish colour: there 
hath great controversy risen about the true determination of 
Caucalis, because the Latin interpretation of Dioscorides is greatly 
suspected, containing in itself much superfluous matter, not 
pertinent to the history: but we deem that this plant is the true 
Caucalis, the notes set down declare it so to be: the flowers, saith 
he, are reddish: the seeds covered with a rough husk set about with 
prickles, which cleave unto garments that it toucheth, as do Burs; 
which roughness being peeled off, the seed appears like unto hulled 
oats, not upleasant in taste, all which do show it to be the same.

3. There is likewise another sort that hath a long single root, 
thrummed about the upper end with many thrummy threads of a brown 
colour: from which riseth up divers stalks full of joints or knees, 
covered with a sheath or skinny film like unto that of Meum: the 
leaves are finely cut or jagged, resembling the leaves of our English 
Saxifrage: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks in spoky 
roundels like Fennel: the seed is small like that of Parsley.

4. Clusius under the name of Caucalis maior hath described and 
figured this, which hath many crested straight stalks some two cubits 
high or more, which are divided into sundry branches, and at each 
joint send forth large & winged leaves somewhat like those of 
Angelica, but rougher, and of a darker green; at the tops of the 
branches grow umbels of whitish flowers, being of somewhat a purplish 
or flesh colour underneath; and these are succeeded by broad seed 
almost like those of the Cow Parsnip, but that they are rougher, and 
forked at the top, and prickly: the root is white, hard and woody. It 
flowers in June, ripens the seed in July and August, and then the 
root dies, and the seed must be sown in September, and so it will 
come up and continue green all the winter.

Fig. 1466. Hedge Parsley (5) Fig. 1467. Knotted Parsley (6) 

5. Besides these formerly described there are two others growing wild 
with us: the first of these, which I have thought good to call Hedge, 
or Field Parsley, (because it grows about hedges, and in ploughed 
fields very plentifully everywhere) hath crested hollow stalks 
growing up to some cubit and half high, whereon stand winged leaves 
made of sundry little longish ones, set one against another, snipped 
about the edges, and ending in a long and sharp pointed leaf: these 
leaves as also the stalks are somewhat rough and harsh, and of a dark 
green colour: the flowers are small and reddish, and grow in little 
umbels, and are succeeded by longish little rough seed of somewhat a 
strong and aromatic taste and smell. It is an annual plant, and 
flowers commonly in July, and the seeds are ripe in August. Cordus 
and Thalius call it Daucoides minus; and Bauhin, Caucalis semine 
aspeo flosculis subrubentibus. There is a bigger and lesser variety 
or sort or this plant, for you shall find it growing to the height of 
two cubits, with leaves and all the upper parts answerable, and you 
may again observe it not to exceed the height of half a foot.

6. This other, which Bauhin hath first set forth in writing by the 
name of Caucalis nodosa echinato semine, hath a white and long root, 
from which it sends up sundry small crested and rough branches which 
commonly lie along upon the ground, and they are commonly of an 
unequal length, some a cubit long, other some scarce two handfuls: 
the leaves are small, rough, winged, and deeply jagged, and at the 
setting on of each leaf close to the stalks usually upon very short 
footstalks grow small little flowers of colour white, or reddish, and 
made of five little leaves apiece: after these follow the seed, 
round, small and rough, and they grow close to the stalks. It flowers 
in June and July, and grows wild in sundry places, as in the fields, 
and upon the banks about St. James, and Piccadilly. Fabius Columna 
judges it to be the true Scandix of the ancients.

There is likewise one of these found in Spain, called Caucalis 
hispanica, like the first: but it is an annual plant, which perishes 
at the first approach of winter, the which I have sown in my garden, 
but it perished before the seed was perfected.

The Place.

These plants do grow naturally upon rocks and stony grounds: we have 
the first and the third in our pastures in most places of England: 
that with red flowers is a stranger in England. So saith our author, 
but I have not heard that the third grows wild with us, but the 
second was found growing in the corn fields on the hills about Bath, 
by Mr. Bowles. 

The Time.

They flower and flourish from May to the end of August.

The Names.

Bastard Parsley is called in Greek and Latin Caucalis: of some, 
Daucus sylvestris: amonng the bastard names in Latin, Pes 
Gallinaceus, Pes Pulli: the Egyptians name it Seselis: the countrymen 
of Etruria, Petrosello salvatico: in English, Bastard Parsley, and 
Hen's Foot.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that bastard Parsley is a pot-herb which is 
eaten either raw or boiled, and provoketh urine.

B. Pliny doth reckon it up also among the pot-herbs: Galen addeth, 
that it is preserved in pickle for salads in winter.

C. The seed of Bastard Parsley is evidently hot and dry, and that in 
the second degree: it produceth urine, and bringeth down the desired 
sickness: it dissolveth the stone and driveth it forth.

D. It taketh away the stoppings of the liver, spleen, and kidneys: it 
cutteth and concocteth raw and phlegmatic humours: it comforteth a 
cold stomach, dissolveth wind, it quickeneth the sight, and 
refresheth the heart, if it be taken fasting.

E. Matthiolus in his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, the second book, 
attributeth unto it many excellent virtues, to provoke venery and 
bodily lust, and erection of the parts.



CHAP. 404. Of Candy Alexanders.


Fig 1468. Candy Alexanders

The Description.

Dioscorides and Pliny have reckoned Smyrnium among the kinds of 
Parsley, whose judgements while this plant is young, and not grown up 
to a stalk, may find with very good reason, for that the young leaves 
next the ground are like to Parsley, but somewhat thicker and larger, 
among which riseth up a stalk a cubit high, and sometimes more, 
garnished with round leaves, far different from those next the 
ground, enclosing the stalk about like Thoroughwax, or Perfoliata; 
which leaves are of a yellow colour, and do rather resemble the 
leaves, of Foalfoot than Parsley: at the top of the stalks do grow 
round spoky tufts of a yellow colour, after which cometh round and 
black seed like Coleworts, of a sharp and bitter taste like Myrrh: 
the root is white and thick, contrary to the opinion of Dodonæus, who 
saith it is black without, but I speak that which I have seen and 
proved.

The Place.

Smyrnium groweth naturally upon the hills and mountains of Candy, and 
in my garden also in great plenty: also upon the mountain Amanus in 
Cilicia.

The Time.

Smyrnium flowereth in June, and the reed is ripe in August.

The Names.

This plant is called in Latin, Smyrnium, in Cilicia, Petroselinum, 
and as Galen testifieth, some have called it, Hipposelinum agreste: 
in English, Candy Alexanders, or Through-bored Parsley.

The Nature.

Smyrnium is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Smyrnium dissolve wens and hard swellings, dry up 
ulcers and excoriations, and glue wounds together.

B. The seeds are good against the stoppings of the spleen, kidneys, 
and bladder.

C. Candy Alexanders hath force to digest and waste away hard 
swellings, in other things it is like to garden Parsley, and Stone 
Parsley, and therefore we use the seed hereof to provoke the desired 
sickeness, and urine, and to help those that are stuffed in the 
lungs, as Galen writeth.

D. The root is hot, so is the herb and seed, which is good to be 
drunk against the biting of serpents: it is a remedy for the cough, 
and profitable for those that cannot take their breath unless they do 
sit or stand upright: it helpeth those that can hardly make their 
water: the seed is good against the infirmity of the spleen or milt, 
the kidneys and bladder: it is likewise a good medicine for those 
that have the dropsy, as Dioscorides writeth.



CHAP. 405. Of Parsnips.

Fig. 1469. Garden Parsnip (1) Fig. 1470. Wild Parsnip (2) 
The Description.

1. The leaves of the tame or Garden Parsnips are broad, consisting of 
many small leaves fastened to one middle rib like those of the ash 
tree: the stalk is upright, of the height of a man: the flowers stand 
upon spoky tufts, of colour yellow; after which cometh the seed flat 
and round, greater than those of Dill: the root is white, long, 
sweet, and good to be eaten.

2. The Wild Parsnip is like to that of the Garden, in leaves, stalk, 
tuft, yellow flowers, flat and round seed, but altogether lesser: the 
root is small, hard, woody, and not fit to be eaten.

The Place.

The Garden Parsnip requireth a fat and loose earth, and that that is 
digged up deep.

The Wild Parsnip groweth in untoiled places, especially in the salt 
marshes, upon the banks and borders of the same: the seed whereof 
being gathered and brought into the garden, and sowed in fertile 
ground, do prove better roots, sweeter and greater than they that are 
sown of seeds gathered from those of the garden.

The Time

They flower in July and August, and seed the second year after they 
be sown.

The Names.

The herbarists of our time do call the garden Parsnips Pastinaca, and 
therefore we have surnamed it Latifolia, or broad-leaved, that it may 
differ from the other garden Parsnip with narrow leaves, which is 
truly and properly called Staphylinus, that is, the garden Carrot. 
Some physicians doubting, and not knowing to what herb of the 
ancients it should be referred, have feigned the wild kind hereof to 
be Panaci species, or a kind of All-Heal: divers have named it 
Baucia; others, Branca leonina, but if you diligently mark and confer 
it with Elaphoboscum of Dioscorides, you shall hardly find any 
difference at all: but the plant called at Montpellier Pabulum 
cervinum: in English, Hart's Fodder, supposed there to be the true 
Elaphoboscum, differeth much from the true notes thereof. Now Baucia, 
as Jacobus Manlius reporteth in Luminari maiore, is Dioscorides', and 
the old writers' Pastinaca, that is to say, Tenuifolia, or Carrot: 
but the old writers, and especially Dioscorides have called this wild 
Parsnip by the name of Elaphoboscum and we do call them Parsnips and 
Mypes.

The Temperature.

The Parsnip root is moderately hot, and more dry than moist.

The Virtues.

A. The Parsnips nourish more than do the Turnips or the Carrots, and 
the nourishment is somewhat thicker, but not faulty nor bad; 
notwithstanding they be somewhat windy: they pass through the body 
neither slowly nor speedily: they neither bind nor loose the belly: 
they provoke urine, and lust of the body: they be good for the 
stomach, kidneys, bladder, and lungs.

B. There is a good and pleasant food or bread made of the roots of 
Parsnips, as my friend Mr Plat hath set forth in his book of 
experiments, which I have made no trial of; nor mean to do.

C. The seed is hotter and drier even unto the second degree, it 
moveth urine, and consumeth wind.

D. It is reported, saith Dioscorides, that deer are preserved from 
bitings of serpents, by eating of the herb Elaphoboscum, or Wild 
Parsnip, whereupon the seed is given with wine against the bitings 
and stingings of Serpents.



CHAP. 406. Of Skirret.


Fig. 1471. Skirret.

The Description.

The leaves of the Skirret do likewise consist of many small leaves 
fastened to one rib, every particular one whereof is something nicked 
in the edges, but they are lesser, greener and smoother than those of 
the Parsnip. The stalks be short, and seldom a cubit high; the 
flowers in the spoked tufts are white, the roots be many in number, 
growing out of one head an hand breadth long, most commonly not a 
finger thick, they are sweet, white, good to be eaten, and most 
pleasant in taste.

The Place and Time.

This Skirret is planted in gardens, and especially by the root, for 
the greater and thicker ones being taken away, the lesser are put 
into the earth again: which thing is best to be done in March or 
April, before the stalks come up, and at this time the roots which be 
gathered are eaten raw, or boiled.

The Names.

This herb is called in Latin Sisarum, and also in Greek Sisaron; the 
Latins do likewise call it Siser; and divers of the later Herbari 
sts, Servillum or Chervillum, or Servilla: the Germans name it 
Sierlin: Tragus, Zam gartern rapunkelen: in the Low Countries, Zuyker 
wortelen, that is to say, Sugar roots, and oftentimes Serillen: in 
Spanish, Cherinia: Italian, Sisaro: in French, Chervy: in English, 
Skirret and Skirwort. And this is that Siser or Skirret which 
Tiberius the Emperor commanded to be conveyed unto him from Gelduba a 
castle about the river of Rhine, as Pliny reporteth in lib. 19. cap. 
5. The Skirret is a medicinable herb, and is the same that the 
foresaid Emperor did so much commend, insomuch that he desired the 
same to be brought unto him every year out of Germany. It is not, as 
divers suppose, Serapio his Secacul, of which he hath written in his 
89th chapter: for Secacul is described by the leaf of Iulben, that is 
to say, of the Pea, as Matthiolus Sylvaticus expoundeth it and it 
bringeth forth a black fruit of the bigness of a Chickpea, full of 
moisture, and of a sweet taste, which is called Granum culcul: but 
the Skirret hath not the leaf of the Pea, neither doth it bring forth 
fruit like to the Chickpea; whereupon it is manifest, that the 
Skirret doth very much differ from Serapio his Secacul: so far is it 
from being the same.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. The roots of the Skirret be moderately hot and moist; they be 
easily concocted; they nourish meanly, and yield a reasonable good 
juice: but they are something windy, by reason whereof they also 
provoke lust.

B. They be eaten boiled, with vinegar, salt, and a little oil, after 
the manner of a salad, and oftentimes they be fried in oil and 
butter, and also dressed after other fashions, according to the skill 
of the cook, and the taste of the eater.

C. The women in Swabia, saith Hieronymus Heroldus, prepare the roots 
hereof for their husbands, and know full well wherefore and why, &c.

D. The juice of the roots drunk with goat's milk stoppeth the lask. 
The same drunk with wine putteth away windiness out of the stomach, 
and gripings of the belly, and helpeth the hicket or yexing. They 
stir up appetite, and provoke urine.



CHAP. 407. Of Carrots.

Fig. 1472. Yellow Carrot (1) Fig. 1473. Red Carrot (2) 
The Description.

1. The leaves of the garden Carrots are of a deep green colour, 
composed of many fine Fennel-like leaves, very notably cut or jagged, 
among which riseth up a stalk straight and round, four cubits high, 
somewhat hairy and hollow, having at the top round spoked tufts, in 
which do grow little white flowers: in their places cometh the seed, 
rough and hairy, of a sweet smell when it is rubbed. The root is 
long, thick and single, of a fair yellow colour, pleasant to be 
eaten, and very sweet in taste.

2. There is another kind hereof like to the former in all parts and 
differeth from it only in the colour of the root, which in this is 
not yellow, but of a blackish red colour.

The Place.

These Carrots are sown in the fields, and in gardens where other pot 
herbs are: they require a loose and well manured soil.

The Time.

They are to be sown in April; they bring forth their flowers and seed 
the year after they be sown.

The Names.

The plant which is termed in Latin by the name of Pastinaca latiori 
folii, or the Garden Parsnip, is described of the old writers by 
another name: this Carrot is called in Latin likewise, Pastinaca 
sativa, but with this addition tenuifolia, that it may differ from 
the garden Parsnip with broad leaves, and white roots. Theophrastus 
in the ninth book of his history of plants nameth this Staphylinus, 
or Carrot, Daukos, and writeth that it groweth in Arcadia, and saith 
that the best is found in Spartensi Achaia, but doubtless he meant 
that Daucus which we call cretensis, that may be numbered among the 
Carrots: Galen in his book Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines doth 
also make it to be Daucus, but yet not simply Daucus; for he addeth 
also Staphilinus or Pastinaca: in High Dutch it is called Geel ruben: 
in Low Dutch, Geel Peen, Geel Pooten and Geel Worten: in French, 
Carrotte, and Racine iaulne: in Italian, Pastinaca: in Spanish, 
Canahoria: in English, Yellow Carrots: the other is called Red 
Carrot, and Black Carrot.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The root of the Yellow Carrot is most commonly boiled with fat 
flesh and eaten: it is temperately hot and something moist. The 
nourishment which cometh thereof is not much, and not very good: it 
is something windy, but not so much as be the Turnips, and doth not 
so soon as they pass through the body.

B. The Red Carrot is of like faculty with the yellow. The seed of 
them both is hot and dry, it breaketh and consumeth windiness, 
provoketh urine, as doth that of the wild Carrot.



CHAP. 408. Of Wild Carrot.


Fig. 1474. Wild Carrot

The Description.

The leaves of the wild Carrot are cut into divers slender narrow 
parcels, very like unto those of the garden Carrots, but they be 
somewhat whiter, and more hairy: the stalks be likewise hairy and 
somewhat rough: the flowers are little, and stand upon broad spoked 
tufts, of a white colour, of which tuft of flowers the middlemost 
part is of a deep purple: the whole tuft is drawn together when the 
seed is ripe, resembling a bird's nest; whereupon it hath been named 
of some Bird's-Nest: the root slender, and of a mean length.

The Place.

It groweth of itself in untoiled places, in fields, and in the 
borders thereof, almost everywhere.

The Time.

It flowers and flourishes in June and July, the seed is ripe in 
August.

The Names.

The wild Carrot is called in Latin, Pastinaca sylvestre tenuifolia: 
in shops, Daucus: and it is used instead of the true Daucus, and not 
amiss, nor unprofitably: for Galen also in his time doth testify that 
it was taken for Daucus, or Bastard Parsley, and is without doubt 
Daucus sylvestris genus, or a wild kind of bastard Parsley, so called 
of Theophrastus: in high Dutch it is named Wild Pastenen, Vogol nest: 
in Low Dutch Vogels nest, and Wilde Caroten Crookens cruyt: in 
French, Pastena de Sauvage: in English, Wild Carrot, and after the 
Dutch, Bird's-Nest, and in same places Bees-Nest.

Athenæus citing Diphilus for his author, saith, that the Carrot is 
called Philipon, because it serveth for love matters; and Orpheus, as 
Pliny writeth, said, that the use hereof winneth love: which things 
be written of wild Carrot, the root whereof is more effectual than 
that of the garden, and containeth in it, as Galen saith, a certain 
force to procure lust.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The seed of this wild Carrot, and likewise the root is hot and dry 
in the second degree, and doth withal open obstructions.

B. The root boiled and eaten, or boiled with wine, and the decoction 
drunk; provoketh urine, expelleth the stone, bringeth forth the 
birth; it also procureth bodily lust.

C. The seed drunk bringeth down the desired sickness, it is good for 
them that can hardly make water, it breaketh and dissolveth wind, it 
remedieth the dropsy, it cureth the colic and stone, being drunk in 
wine.

D. It is also good for the passions of the mother, and helpeth 
conception: it is good against the bitings of all manner of venomous 
beasts: it is reported, saith Dioscorides, that such as have first 
taken of it are not hurt by them.



CHAP. 409. Of Candy Carrots.


Fig. 1475. Candy Carrots

The Description.

This Daucus cretensis, being the true Daucus of Dioscorides, doth not 
grow in Candy only, but is found upon the mountains of Germany, and 
upon the hills and rocks of Jura about Geneva, from whence it hath 
been sent and conveyed by one friendly herbarist unto another, into 
sundry regions: it beareth leaves which are small, and very finely 
jagged, resembling either Fennel or Wild Carrot: among which riseth 
up a stalk of a cubit high, having at the top white spoky tufts, and 
the flowers of Dill: which being past, there come great plenty of 
long seed, well smelling, not unlike the seed of Cumin, save that it 
is whitish, with a certain mossiness, and a sharp taste, and is in 
greater use than any part of the plant. The root also is right good 
in medicine, being lesser than the root of a Parsnip, but hotter in 
taste, and of a fragrant smell.

The Time.

This flowers in June and July, his seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

There is sufficient spoken in the description as touching the name.

The Nature.

These plants are hot and dry, especially the seed of Daucus creticus, 
which is hot and dry in the third degree: but the seed of the wild 
Carrot is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Daucus drunken is good against the strangury, and 
painful making of water, it prevaileth against the gravel and stone, 
and provoketh urine.

B. It asssuageth the torments and gripings of the belly, dissolveth 
windiness, cureth the colic, and ripeneth an old cough.

C. The same being taken in wine, is very good against the bitings of 
beasts, and expelleth poison.

D. The seed of Daucus creticus is of great efficacy and virtue being 
put into treacle, mithridate, or any antidotes, against poison or 
pestilence.

E. The root thereof drunk in wine stoppeth the lask, and is also a 
sovereign remedy against venom and poison.



CHAP. 410. Of Stinking and Deadly Carrots.

Fig. 1476. Great Stinking Carrot (1) Fig. 1477. Small Stinking 
Carrot(2) 
The Description.

1. The great Stinking Carrot hath very great leaves, spread abroad 
like wings, resembling those of Fennel Giant (whereof some have taken 
it to be, a kind, but unproperly) of a bright green colour, somewhat 
hairy: among which riseth up a stalk of the height of two cubits, and 
of the bigness of a man's finger; hollow, and full of a spongeous 
pith; whereupon are set at certain joints, leaves like those next the 
ground, but smaller. The flowers are yellow, standing at the top of 
the stalks in spoky roundels, like those of Dill: after which cometh 
the seed, flat and broad like those of the Parsnip, but much greater 
and broader. The root is thick garnished at the top with certain 
capillaments or hairy threads, black without, white within, full of 
milky juice, of a most bitter, sharp, and loathsome taste and smell, 
insomuch that if a man do stand where the wind doth blow from the 
plant, the air doth exulcerate and blister the face, and every other 
bare or naked place that may be subject to his venomous blast, and 
poisonous quality.

2. This small kind of Stinking or Deadly Carrot is like to the last 
described in each respect, saving that the leaves are thinner and 
more finely minced or jagged, wherein consists the difference.


Fig. 1478. Deadly Carrot (3) 

3. The common Deadly Carrot is like unto the precedent, saving that 
he doth more nearly resemble the stalks and leaves of the Garden 
Carrot, and is not garnished with the like bush of hair about the top 
of the stalks: otherwise in seed, root, and evil smell, taste and 
quality like.

The Place.

These pernicious plants delight in stony hills and mountains: they 
are strangers in England.

The Time.

They flower in August, or somewhat after.

The Names.

The French physicians have accepted the root of Thapsia for a kind of 
Turpeth, calling it Turpetum cineritium; notwithstanding upon better 
considcration they have left the use thereof, especially in purging, 
for it mightily hurteth the principal parts, and doth often cause 
cruel gripings in the guts and belly, with convulsions and cramps; 
nevertheless the venomous quality may be taken away with those 
correctives which are used in mitigating the extreme heat and 
virulent quality of Sarcocolla, Hammoniacum, and Turpetum: but where 
there be so many wholesome simples, and likewise compounds, they are 
not to be used.

Of some it is called Turpetum griseum: it is called Thapsis, as some 
think, of the island Thapsus, where it was first found; or as we 
deem, of the likeness it hath with Carrots.

Of the people of Sicilia and Apulia it is called Ferulacoli, where it 
doth grow in great abundance.

The Temperature and Faculties.

The temperature and faculties in working have been touched in the 
description, and likewise in the names.



CHAP. 411. Of Fennel.


Fig. 1479. Fennel

The Description.

1. The first kind of Fennel, called in Latin Fniculum is so well 
known amongst us, that it were but lost labour to describe the same.

2. The second kind of Fennel is likewise well known by the name of 
Sweet Fennel, so called because the seeds thereof are in taste sweet 
like unto Anise seeds, resembling the common Fennel, saving that the 
leaves are larger and fatter, or more oleous: the seed greater and 
whiter, and the whole plant in each respect greater.

The Place.

These herbs are set and sown in gardens, but the second doth not 
prosper well in this country: for being sown of good and perfect 
seed, yet in the second year after his sowing, it will degenerate 
from the right kind, and become common Fennel

The Time.

They flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in the end of 
August.

The Names.

Fennel is called in Latin, Marathrum, and Fniculum: in high Dutch, 
Fenckell: in Low Dutch, Venckell: in Italian, Finocchio: in Spanish, 
Hinoio: in French, Fenoil: in English, Fennel, and Fenckell.

The Nature.

The seed of Fennel is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The powder of the seed of Fennel drunk for certain days together 
fasting preserveth the eyesight: whereof was written this Distichon 
following:

Fniculus, Rosa, Verbena, Chelidonia, Ruta,
Ex his fit aqua quæ lumina reddit acuta.
Of Fennel, Rose, Vervain, Rue,and Celandine,
Is made a water good to clear the sight of eyen.[eyes]


B. The green leaves of Fennel eaten, or the seed drunken made into a 
tisane, do fill women's breasts with milk.

C. The decoction of Fennel drunk easeth the pains of the kidneys, 
causeth one to avoid the stone, and provoketh urine.

D. The roots are as effectual, and not only good for the intents 
aforesaid,but against the dropsy also, being boiled in wine and 
drunken.

E. Fennel seed drunk assuageth the pain of the stomach, and wambling 
of the same, or desire to vomit, and breaketh wind.

F. The herb, seed, and root of Fennel are very good for the lungs, 
the liver, and the kidneys, for it openeth the obstructions or 
stoppings of the same, and comforteth the inward parts.

G. The seed and herb of sweet Fennel is equal in virtues with Anise 
seed.



CHAP. 412. Of Dill.


Fig. 1480. Dill

The Description.

Dill hath a little stalk of a cubit high, round and jointed ; 
whereupon do grow leaves very finely cut, like to those of Fennel, 
but much smaller : the flowers be little and yellow, standing in a 
spoky tuft or roundel: the seed is round, flat and thin : the whole 
plant is of a strong smell: the root is thready.

The Place.

It is sown in gardens, and is also sometimes found wild.

The Time.

It bringeth forth flowers and seed in August.

The Names.

Dill is called in Latin Anethum, and Anetum: in High Dutch Dyllen: in 
Low Dutch Dille: in Italian, Anetho: in Spanish, Eneldo: in French, 
Anet: in English, Dill, and Anet.

The Temperature.

Dill, as Galen saith, is hot in the end of the second degree, and dry 
in the beginning of the same, or in the end of the first degree.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the tops of dried Dill, and likewise of the seed, 
being drunk, engendereth milk in the breasts of nurses, allayeth 
gripings and windiness, provoketh urine, increaseth seed, stayeth the 
yex, hicket, or hicquet, as Dioscorides teacheth.

B. The seed likewise if it be smelled unto stayeth the hicket, 
especially if it be boiled in wine, but chiefly if it be boiled in 
wormwood wine, or wine and a few branches of wormwood, and rose 
leaves, and the stomach bathed therewith.

C. Galen saith, that being burnt and laid upon moist ulcers, it 
cureth them, especially those in the secret parts, and likewise those 
sub præputio,[under the foreskin] though they be old and of long 
continance.

D. Common oil, in which Dill is boiled or sunned, as we do oil of 
Roses, doth digest, mitigate pain, procureth sleep, bringeth raw and 
unconcocted humours to perfect digestion, and provoketh bodily lust.

E. Dill is of great force or efficacy against the suffocation or 
strangling of the mother, if the woman do receive the fume thereof 
being boiled in wine, and put under a close stool or hollow seat fit 
for the purpose.



CHAP. 413. Of Caraway.
xxxxxxxxxx

Fig. 1481. Caraway

The Description.

Caraways have an hollow stalk four-square of two cubits high, full of 
knots or joints; from which proceed sundry other small branches, set 
full of leaves very finely cut or jagged, like unto those of Carrots 
or Dill: at the top of the stalks grow spoky white tufts like those 
of Dill: after which cometh the seed, sharp in eating, yet of a 
pleasant taste: the root is like that of Parsley, often white, seldom 
yellow, and in taste like unto the Carrot.

The Place.

It groweth almost everywhere in Germany and in Bohemia, in fat and 
fruitful fields, and in meadows that are now and then overrun with 
water: it groweth also in Caria, as Dioscorides showeth, from whence 
it took his name.

The Time.

It flowereth and seedeth from May to the end ofAugust.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Carum and Careum: in shops, Carui. Simeon 
Zethy calleth it Carnabadion: in High Dutch, Kym, and Kymmel: in Low 
Dutch, Caruy saet: in French, du Carvy: in Italian, Caro: in Spanish, 
Caravea, and an article being joined unto it, Alkaravea: in English, 
Caraway, and the seed is called Caraway seed.

The Temperature.

The seed of Caraways, as Galen saith, is hot and dry in the third 
degree, and hath a moderate biting quality.

The Virtues.

A. It consumeth wind, it is delightful to the stomach and taste, it 
helpeth concoction, provoketh urine, and is mixed with 
counterpoisons: the root may be sodden, and eaten as the Parsnip or 
Carrot is.

B. The seeds confected, or made with sugar into comfits, are very 
good for the stomach, they help digestion, provoke urine, assuage and 
dissolve all windiness: to conclude in a word, they are answerable to 
Anise seed in operation and virtues.



CHAP. 414. Of Anise.

Fig. 1482. Anise (1) Fig. 1483. Star Anise (2) 
The Description.

1. The stalk of Anise is round and hollow, divided into divers small 
branches, set with leaves next the ground somewhat broad and round: 
those that grow higher are more jagged, like those of young Parsley, 
but whiter: on the top of the stalks do stand spoky roundels or tufts 
of white flowers, and afterward seed, which hath a pleasant taste as 
every one doth know.

2. This other Anise (whose umbels Clusius had out of England from 
Master Morgan the Queen's apothecary, and James Garret; and which 
were brought from the Philippines by Mr. Thomas Cavendish in his 
voyage when he encompassed the world) is thus described by Clusius: 
The umbels were large, no less than those of the Archangelica, made 
of divers thick stiff footstalks, each whereof carried not double 
seed as the common Anise, but more, in a round head some inch over, 
made of cods set star-fashion, six, 8, or more, of a dusky colour, 
wrinkled, divided into two equal parts, and open above: most of these 
husks were empty, yet some of them contained one smooth shining ash-
coloured seed, of the bigness of that of Orobus; the taste and smell 
was the same with our common Anise seed, wherefore they which sent it 
to Clusius called it Anise: yet in the place where it grew it was 
called Damor; for Mr. Cavendish had the name so written in the China 
characters, after their manner of writing.

The Place.

It groweth plentifully in Candy, Syria, Egypt, and other countries of 
the East. I have often sown it in my garden, where it hath brought 
forth his ripe seed when the year hath fallen out to be temperate.

The Time.

It is to be sown in these cold regions in the month of May: the seed 
is ripe in August.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Anisum: in High Dutch, Anisz: in Low Dutch, 
Anissaet: in Italian, Aniso: in Spanish, Matahalva: in French, Anis: 
in English, Anise, and Anise seed.

The Temperature.

Galen writeth, That the seed of Anise is hot and dry in the third 
degree: after others, it is hot in the second degree, and much less 
than dry in the second degree; for it engendereth milk, which it 
could not do if it were very dry, as Galen in his chapter of Fennel 
doth whether he will or no declare and testify; in that it doth 
engender milk, his opinion is that it is not hot above the first 
degree: which thing also may be in Anise seed, both by this reason, 
and also because it is sweet. Therefore to conclude, Anise seed is 
dry in the first degree, and hot in the second.

The Virtues.

A. The seed wasteth and consumeth wind, and is good against belchings 
and upbraidings of the stomach, allayeth gripings of the belly, 
provoketh urine gently, maketh abundance of milk, and stirreth up 
bodily lust: it stayeth the lask, and also the white flux in women.

B. Being chewed it makes the breath sweet, and is good for them that 
are short winded, and quencheth thirst, and therefore it is fit for 
such as have the dropsy: it helpeth the yexing or hicket, both when 
it is drunken or eaten dry: the smell thereof doth also prevail very 
much.

C. The same being dried by the fire and taken with honey cleanseth 
the breast very much from phlegmatic superfluities; and if it be 
eaten with bitter almonds it doth help the old cough.

D. It is to be given to young children and infants to eat which are 
like to have the falling sickness, or to such as have it by patrimony 
or succession.

E. It taketh away the Squinancy or Quinsy (that is, a swelling in the 
throat) being gargled with honey, vinegar, and a little Hyssop gently 
boiled together.



CHAP. 415. Of Bishop's Weed, Herb-William, or Ameos.

Fig. 1484. Bishop's Weed (1) Fig. 1485. Candy Bishop's Weed (2) 
The Description.

1. The common Ameos, especially with us here in England, hath round 
green stalks, with divers boughs and branches, and large long leaves, 
divided into divers other narrow, long and small leaves, dented or 
snipped about the edges, having at the top of the stalk white flowers 
in great spoky tufts, which bring forth a little sharp and bitter 
seed: the root thereof is white and thready.

2. This excellent and aromatical Ameos of Candy hath tufts and leaves 
like Daucus creticus, and a root like unto the garden Carrot, of a 
yellow colour, and hot seed like Origanum, of an excellent spicy 
savour or smell, growing in spoky tufts or roundels like Carum: it 
hath been brought from Candy and Syria into Venice, and from Venice 
into France, Flanders, and England, where we have often sown it; but 
without doubt we have been beguiled therein by the deceitful 
drugmasters, who have first boiled it, or used some other false and 
deceitful device, to bring greater admiration unto the Venice 
treacle, for the confection whereof this seed is a chief and most 
principal ingredient.


Fig. 1486. Small Bishop's Weed (3) 

3. There is another kind of Ameos, which is an herb very small and 
tender, having stalks a foot and a half high, very small and tender, 
beset with leaves like unto Dill, finely jagged, and somewhat 
slender; and at the top of the stalks grow little tufts or spoky 
white roundels, which afterwards do turn into small grey seed, hot 
and sharp in taste. The root is small and slender.

The Place.

These plants do all grow in my garden, except Ammi creticum, whereof 
hath been sufficiently spoken in the description.

The Time.

They flower in June and July, and yield their seed in the end of 
August.

The Names.

The Greeks and Latins call it Ammi: divers call it Cuminum 
æthiopicum; others, Cuminum regium, or Cumin Royal: in shops, Ammios, 
or Ameos in the genitive case: the Germans, Amey: in English, Ameos, 
or Ammi: of some, Herb-William, Bull-Wort, and Bishop's-weed.

The Temperature.

The seed of Ameos is hot and dry in the later end of the third 
degree.

The Virtues.

A. It availeth against gripings of the belly, in making of urine, 
against the bitings of serpents taken in wine, and also it bringeth 
down the flowers: being applied with honey it taketh away black and 
blue spots which come of stripes: the seed of Sison doth also the 
like, for it is hot and dry, and that in the third degree; likewise 
of thin parts, provoking urine, arid bringing down the desired 
sickness.

B. The seed of Ameos is good to be drunken in wine against the biting 
of all manner of  beasts, and hath power against all manner of poison 
& pestilent fevers, or the plague, and is used in the correcting of 
Cantharides, whereby those flies are made medicinable to be applied 
to the body without danger.

C. Ameos brayed and mingled with honey scattereth congealed blood, 
and putteth away black and blue marks which come by stripes or falls, 
if it be applied thereto in manner of a plaster.



CHAP. 416. Of Chervil.

Fig 1487. Common Chervil (1) Fig. 1488. Hedge Chervil (2) 
The Description.

1. The leaves of Chervil are slender, and diversly cut, something 
hairy, of a whitish green; the stalks be short, slender, round, and 
hollow within, which at the first together with the leaves are of a 
whitish green, but tending to a red when the seeds are ripe: the 
flowers be white, and grow upon scattered tufts. The seed is long, 
narrow, slender, sharp pointed: the root is full of strings.

2. There is found in June and July, almost in every hedge, a certain 
plant which Tabernamontanus and Bauhin fitly call Chærophyllum, or 
Cerefolium sylvestre: It hath a whitish woody root, from which arise 
round red and hairy stalks some two cubits high, sometimes more, and 
oft times somewhat big and swollen about the joints, and they are not 
hollow but full of pith: toward the top it is divided into sundry 
branches, which on their tops carry umbels of small pure white little 
flowers, which are succeeded by longish seeds. The leaves are usually 
parted into three chief parts, and these again subdivided into five, 
and they are snipped about the edges, soft and hairy, of a dark green 
or else reddish colour. It flowereth in June and July, and then 
ripens the seed.

Fig. 1489. Great Chervil (3) Fig. 1490. Small Sweet Chervil (4) 	3. 
Great Chervil hath large leaves deeply cut or jagged, in show very 
like unto Hemlocks; of a very good and pleasant smell and taste like 
unto Chervil, and something hairy, which hath caused us to call it 
Sweet Chervil. Among these leaves riseth up a stalk somewhat crested 
or furrowed, of the height of two cubits, at the top whereof grow 
spoky tufts or roundels with white flowers, which do turn into long 
brown crested and shining seed, one seed being as big as four Fennel 
seeds, which being green do taste like Anise seed. The root is great, 
thick, and long, as big as Enula campana, exceeding sweet in smell, 
and tasting like unto Anise seeds.

4. There is found in some parts of the Alps, as about Geneva and in 
other places, another Myrrhis, which in the leaves and umbels is like 
that of the last described, but the whole plant is less; the seed is 
long, small, smooth, and shaped like an Oat, and in taste somewhat 
like that of the Daucus creticus. Lobel hath this by the same name as 
we here give it you.

5. About mud walls, highways, and such places, here about London, and 
in divers other places, is found growing a small plant, which in all 
things but the smell and height agrees with that referred to this 
kind by Fabius Columna, and called Myrrha æquicolorum nova. The root 
hereof is small and white, perishing every year when it hath 
perfected his seed: the stalks are slender, hollow, smooth, and not 
hairy, seldom exceeding the height of a cubit, or cubit and half; it 
is divided into sundry branches, upon the sides whereof against the 
setting on of the leaves, or out oftheir bosoms, grow forth the 
stalks, which carry umbels of small white flowers: after which follow 
the seeds, growing two together, and these longish, rough, round, and 
hairy, about the bigness of Anise seeds. The leaves are small, and 
finely cut or divided like those of Hemlock, but of a whitish colour, 
and hairy: it comes up in March, flowers in May, and ripens his seed 
in June. In Italy they eat the young leaves in salads, and call it 
wild Chervil: we may in English for distinction's sake call it Small 
Hemlock Chervil.

6. To these we may fitly add that plant which in the Hist. Lugd. is 
called Cicutaria alba, and by Camerarius, Cicutaria palustris; for it 
flowers at the same time with the last mentioned, and is found in 
flower and seed in May and June very frequently almost in all places; 
but afterwards his stalks die down, yet his roots live, and the 
leaves are green all the year. The root of this is very large, and 
divided into sundry parts, white also and spongy, of a pleasing 
strong smell, with a hot and biting taste: the stalks grow up in good 
ground to be some three cubits high, and they are hollow, jointed, 
pretty thick; green, and much crested, sending forth of the bosoms of 
the leaves many branches, which upon their tops carry umbels composed 
of many white flowers, each flower consisting of five little leaves, 
whereof the lowest is twice as big as the rest, the two side ones 
less, and the uppermost the least of all. The leaves are large like 
those of Myrrhis, but of a dark green colour, and. and those that 
grow about the tops of the stalks are commonly divided into into 
three parts; and these subdivided into sundry long sharp pointed and 
snipped leaves like as in Myrrhis. The seeds grow two together, being 
longish, round, sharp pointed, black, and shining. We may fitly term 
this plant, wild Cicely, for that it so much resembles the Myrrhis or 
garden Cicely, not only in shape, but (if I be not deceived) in 
virtues also.

The Place.

The common Chervil groweth in gardens with other pot-herbs: it 
prospers in a ground that is dunged and somewhat moist. The great 
sweet Chervil groweth in my garden, and in the gardens of other men 
who have been diligent in these matters.

The Time.

Thest herbs do flower in May, and their seed is ripe in July.

The Names.

Chervil is commonly called in Latin, Cerefolium, and as divers 
affirm, Chærofolium, with o in the second syllable. Columna nameth it 
Chærophyllum, and it is thought to be so called because it delighteth 
to grow with many leaves, or rather in that it causeth joy and 
gladness: in High Dutch, Korffelkraut: in Low Dutch, Kervell: in 
Italian, Cerefoglio: in French, Du Cerfueil: in English, Chervell, 
and Chervil.

Myrrhis is also called Myrrha, taken from his pleasant savour of 
Myrrh: of some, Conila, as it is found noted among the bastard names. 
It is also by reason of the similitude it hath with Hemlock, called 
by most late writers, Cicutaria. Of this, Pliny maketh mention lib. 
14. cap. 16, where he reporteth that it is called Smyrrhiza: in 
English it is called Chervil, Sweet Chervil, or Sweet Cicely.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Chervil is held to be one of the pot-herbs, it is pleasant to the 
stomach and taste: it is of a temperate heat and moderate dryness, 
but nothing so much as the Parsleys.

B. It provoketh urine, especially being boiled in wine, and applied 
hot to the share or nethermost part of the belly, and the wine drunk 
in which it was boiled.

C. It hath in it a certain windiness, by means whereof it procureth 
lust.

D. It is used very much among the Dutch people in a kind of loblolly 
or hot-pot which they do eat, called Warmus.

E. The leaves of sweet Chervil are exceeding good, wholesome, and 
pleasant, among other salad herbs, giving the taste of Anise seed 
unto the rest.

F. The root, saith Galen, is hot in the second degree, having a 
thinness of substance joined with it.

G. Dioscorides teacheth, that the root drunk in wine is a remedy 
against the bitings of the venomous spiders called in Latin 
Phalangia; and that it bringeth down the menses and secondines, and 
being boiled and drunk it is good for such as have the phthisic or 
consumption of the lungs.

H. The seeds eaten as a salad while they are yet green, with oil, 
vinegar, and pepper, exceed all other salads by many degrees, both in 
pleasantness of taste, sweetness of smell, and wholesomeness for the 
cold and feeble stomach.

I. The roots are likewise most excellent in a salad, if they be 
boiled and after served as the cunning cook knoweth how better than 
myself: notwithstanding I do use to eat them with oil and vinegar, 
being first boiled; which is very good for old people that are dull 
and without courage; it rejoiceth and comforteth the heart, and 
increaseth their lust and strength.



CHAP. 417. Of Shepherd's Needle or Wild Chervil.

Fig. 1491. Shepherd's Needle (1) Fig. 1492. Small Shepherd's Needle 
(2) 
The Description.

1. Scandix, or Pecten veneris, doth not much differ in the quantity 
of the stalks, leaves, and flowers, from Chervil; but Scandix hath no 
such pleasant smell as Chervil hath: the leaves be lesser, more 
finely cut, and of a brown green colour: the flowers grow at the top 
of the stalks in small white tufts; after which come up long seeds 
very like unto pack-needles, orderly set one by another like the 
great teeth of a comb, whereof it took the name Pecten veneris, or 
Venus' comb, or Venus' needle: the root is white, a finger long.

2. This from a slender long and whitish root sends up many small 
leaves like those of the last described, but of a pleasing smell and 
taste something like that of the common Chervil; amongst these leaves 
grow up slender stalks a little hairy, divided into short green and 
slender branches carrying little umbels, consisting of five, six, 
seven, or eight small white flowers, composed of five leaves apiece, 
with a dark purplish chive in the middle: the flowers are succeeded 
by, or rather grow upon long slender cods, which become some inch 
long, and resemble those of the last described. It flowers in June, 
as Clusius affirmeth, who gives us the history of it; and he received 
it from Honorius Bellus out of Candy; who writes, that in the 
springtime it is much used in salads, and desired, for that it much 
excites to venery. He also thinks this plant to be the Anthriscus of 
Pliny, and by the same name Clusius sets it forth, Columna hath 
called it Aniso-marathrum, because the smell and taste is between 
that of Anise and Fennel.
The Place.

It groweth in most corn fields in England, especially among wheat and 
barley.

The Time.

It flowereth in May: the seed is ripe in August with corn.

The Names.


The Latins call it Scandix, having borrwed that name of the Grecians: 
we find among the bastard words, that the Romans did call it 
Scanaria, and Acula, of the seed that is like unto a needle. Ruellius 
describeth it under the name Pecten veneris: of others, Acus veneris, 
and Acus pastoris, or Shepherd's Needle, Wild Chervil, and Lady's 
Comb: in High Dutch, Naelde Karnel: This is that he (saith Pliny, 
lib. 22. cap. 22) which Aristophanes objected in sport to the poet 
Euripides, that his mother was wont to sell no right pot-herb but 
Scandix, or Shepherd's Needle, meaning, as I take it, Visnaga; 
wherewith the Spaniards do pick their teeth when they have eaten no 
meat at all except a few oranges or such a like trifle, called also 
Scandix.

The Temperature.

Shepherd's Needle, saith Galen, is an herb somewhat binding, and 
bitter in taste, insomuch that it is hot and dry either in the later 
end of the second degree, or in the beginning of the third.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith it is eaten both raw and boiled, and that it is 
an wholesome pot-herb among the Greeks; but in these days it is of 
small estimation or value, and taken but for a wild wort, as 
appeareth by Aristophanes taunting of Euripides, as aforesaid.

B. The decoction thereof is good for the bladder, kidneys, and liver; 
but as I deem he meant Chervil, when he set the same down to be used 
in physic.



CHAP. 418. Of Toothpick Chervil.

Fig. 1493. Broad Toothpick Chervil (1) Fig. 1494. Spanish Toothpick 
Chervil (2) 
The Description.

1. The first of these Toothpick Chervils beareth leaves like wild 
Turnips, a round stalk furrowed, jointed, blackish, and hairy, 
divided into many branches, on the tops whereof grow spoky tufts, 
beset round about with many small leaves. The flowers thereof are 
whitish: after cometh the the seed, which being once ripe do cluster 
and are drawn together, in a round thick tuft like a small bird's 
nest, as be those of the wild Carrot; whose seeds whoso toucheth, 
they will cleave and stick to his fingers, by reason of the glutinous 
or slimy matter they are possessed with. The root is small and 
whitish, bitter in taste, as is all the rest of the plant.

2. The Spanish Toothpick hath leaves, flowers, and knobby stalks like 
unto wild carrots, saving that the leaves are somewhat finer, cut or 
jagged thicker, and tenderer, but not rough or hairy at all as is the 
former, of a bitter taste, and a reasonable good smell: among which 
rise up bushy roundels or spoky tufts like those of the wild Carrot 
or Bird's Nest, closely drawn together when the seed is ripe; at what 
time also the sharp needles are hardened, fit to make toothpicks and 
suchlike, for which purpose they do very fitly serve.

The Place.

Both of them grow in Syria, and most commonly in Cilicia: the later 
is to be found likewise in Spain almost everywhere; and I have it 
likewise in my garden in great plenty.

The Time.

They flower in my garden about August, and deliver their seed in 
October.

The Names.

The Latins do name it Gingidium: and it is called in Syria Lepidium: 
yet is there another Lepidium. It is reported among the bastard names 
to be called by the Romans, Bisacutum, of which name some show 
remains among the Syrians, who commonly call the later, Gingidium, 
Visnaga; this is named in English, Toothpick Chervil.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. There is, saith Galen, great increase of Gingidium in Syria, and 
it is eaten no otherwise than Scandex is with us at Pergamum: it is, 
saith he, very wholesome for the stomach, whether it be eaten raw or 
boiled; notwithstanding it is evident that it is a medicine rather 
than a nourishment. As it is bitter and binding, so is it likewise of 
a temperate heat and dryness. The heat is not very apparent, but it 
is found to be dry in the later end of the second degree, as also the 
said author allegeth in his discourse Of the Faculties of Simple 
Medicines.

B. Dioscorides doth also write the same: This pot-herb (saith he) is 
eaten raw, sodden, and preserved, with great good to the stomach: it 
provoketh urine, and the decoction thereof made with wine and drunk, 
is profitable to scour the bladder, provoketh urine, and is good 
against the gravel and stone.

C. The hard quills whereon the seeds do grow are good to cleanse the 
teeth and gums, and do easily take away all filth and baggage 
sticking in them, without any hurt unto the gums, as followeth after 
many other toothpicks, and they leave a good scent or savour in the 
mouth.



CHAP. 419. Of Meadow-Sweet, or Queen of the Meadows.


Fig. 1495. Meadow-Sweet (1) 

The Description.

1. This herb hath leaves like those of Agrimony, consisting of divers 
leaves set upon a middle rib like those of the Ash tree, every small 
leaf slightly snipped about the edges, white on the inner side, and 
on the upper side crumpled or wrinkled like unto those of the Elm 
Tree; whereof it took the name Ulmaria, of the similitude or likeness 
that the leaves have with the Elm leaves. The stalk is three or four 
foot high, rough, and very fragile or easy to be broken, of a reddish 
purple colour: on the top whereof are very many little flowers 
clustering and growing together; of a white colour tending to 
yellowness, and of a pleasant sweet smell, as are the leaves 
likewise: after which come the seeds, small, crookedly turning or 
winding one with another, made into a fine little head. The root hath 
a sweet smell, spreading far abroad, black without, and of a darkish 
red colour within.

2. There is also another which by Fuchsius, Tragus, Lonicerus, 
Gesner, and others, is called Barba capri: it hath large woody roots, 
leaves of the bigness, and growing somewhat after the manner of the 
wild Angelica: the stalks are crested, and divided into sundry 
branches, which carry long bending spikes or ears of white flowers & 
seeds somewhat like those of the common kind. This flowers at the 
same time as the former, and I have not yet heard of it wild with us, 
but only seen it growing with M. Tradescant.

The Place.

It groweth in the brinks of watery ditches and river's sides, and 
also in meadows: it liketh watery and moist places, and groweth 
almost everywhere.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth in June, July, and August.

The Names.

It is called of the later age Regina prati, & Barba capri: of some, 
Ularia, a foliorum ulmi smilitudine, from the likeness it hath with 
the Elm tree leaf: in High Dutch, Scisbart. It is called Barba hirci, 
which name belongeth to the plant which the Grecians do call 
Tragopogon: of Anguillara, Potentilla maior. It hath some likeness 
with Rhodora plinii, but yet we cannot affirm it to be the same. It 
is called in low Dutch Reijnette: in French, Barbe de Chevre, Reine 
des Praiz: in English, Meads-Sweet, Meadow-sweet, and Queen of the 
Meadows. Camerarius of Nuremberg saith it is called of the Germans 
his countrymen, Wurme kraut: because the roots, saith he, seem to be 
eaten with worms. I rather suppose they call it so, because the 
ancient hackney men and horse-leeches do give the decoction thereof 
to their horses and asses, against the bots and worms, for the which 
it is greatly commended.

The Temperature.

Meadow-Sweet is cold and dry, with an evident binding quality 
adjoined.

The Virtues.

A. The root boiled, or made into powder and drunk, helpeth the bloody 
flux, stayeth the lask, and all other fluxes of blood in man or 
woman.

B. It is reported, that the flowers boiled in wine and drunk, do take 
away the fits of a quartan ague, and make the heart merry.

C. The leaves and flowers far excel all other strewing herbs, for to 
deck up houses, to strew in chambers, halls, and banqueting houses in 
the summertime; for the smell thereof makes the heart merry, 
delighteth the senses: neither doth it cause headache, or 
loathsomeness to meat, as some other sweet smelling herbs do.

D. The distilled water of the flowers dropped into the eyes, taketh 
away the burning and itching thereof and cleareth the sight.



CHAP. 420. Of Burnet Saxifrage.

Fig. 1496. Burnet Saxifrage (1) Fig. 1497. Small Burner Saxifrage (2) 
The Description.

1. This great kind of Pimpernel, or rather Saxifrage, hath great and 
long roots, fashioned like a Parsnip, of an hot and biting taste like 
Ginger: from which riseth up an hollow stalk with joints and knees 
two cubits high, beset with large leaves, which do more nearly 
represent Smallage than Pimpernel, or rather the garden Parsnip. This 
plant consisteth of many small leaves growing upon one stem, snipped 
or dented about the edges like a saw: the flowers do grow at the top 
of the stalks in white round tufts: the seed is like the common 
Parsley, saving that it is hotter and biting upon the tongue.

There is a bigger and lesser of this kind, which differ little, but 
that the stalks and veins of the leaves of the lesser are of a 
purplish colour, and the root is hotter. 

2. Bipinella is likewise a kind of Burnet or Pimpernel, upon which 
Pena hath bestowed this addition Saxifraga minor: under which name 
Saxifraga are comprehended divers herbs of divers kinds, and the one 
very unlike to the other: but that kind of Saxifrage which is called 
Hircina, which is rough or hairy Saxifrage, of others Bipinella, is 
best known. and the best of all the rest, like unto the small Burnet, 
or common Parsley, saving that it is void of hairs, as may appear by 
the old Latin verse,

Pimpinella habet pilos, Saxifraga non habet ullos.
Pimpernel hath hairs some, but Saxifrage hath none.

Notwithstanding, I have found a kind hereof growing in our pastures 
adjoining to London, the leaves whereof if you take and tenderly 
break with your hands, you may draw forth small threads, like the web 
of a spider, such as you may draw from the leaves of Scabious. The 
stalk is hollow, dividing itself from the joints or knees, into 
sundry other small branches; at the top whereof do grow small tufts 
or spoky roundels, of a white colour: after which cometh the seed 
like to Caruia, or Caraways, of a sharp taste: the root is also sharp 
and hot in taste.

The Place.

These plants do grow in dry pastures and meadows in this country very 
plentifully.

The Time.

They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names

That which Fuchsius calleth Pimpinella maior, Dodonaus termeth 
Saxifraga maior, which kind of Saxifrage doth more absolutely answer 
the true Phellandrium of Pliny, than any other plant whatsoever: 
wherein the physicians of Paris have been deceived, calling or 
supposing the Meadow Rue to be the right Phellandrium, whereunto it 
is not like either in shape or faculty; for it is nothing so 
effectual in breaking the stone, or provoking of urine, as either of 
there plants, especially Pimpinella hircina, which is not so called, 
because it hath any rammish small of a goat, but because practioners 
have used to feed goats with, whose flesh and blood is singular good 
against the stone, but we rather take it to be named Hircina, of 
Hircinia sylva[A forest, now mostly felled, which extended eastwards 
from the Rhine across southern Germany], where it doth grow in great 
abundance, the savour of the herb not being unpleasant, somewhat 
resembling the smell and taste of Daucus, Ligustrum and Pastinaca: so 
to conclude, both these are called Saxifragia: the smaller is called 
of some Petræfindula, Bipinella, and Bipenula: of Baptista Sardus, 
and also of Leonardus Fuchsius, Pimpinella maior: wherefore divers 
call it Pimpinella saxifraga: for there is also another Pimpinella 
called Pimpinella sanguisorba: notwithstanding the verse before 
rehearsed showeth a difference between Pimpinella and Saxifraga: in 
High Dutch, it is called Bibernel: in Low Dutch, Bauenaert: in 
English the greater may be called Great Saxifrage, and the other 
Small Saxifrage.

Bipinella is called Saxifragia minor: in English, Small Saxifrage, as 
Pimpinella is called Great Saxifrage. Columna judges it to be the 
Tragium of Dioscorides.

The Nature.

Saxifrage of both kinds, with their seed, leaves, and roots, are hot 
and dry in the third degree, and of thin and subtle parts.

The Virtues.

A. The seed and root of Saxifrage drunken with wine, or the decoction 
thereof made with wine, causeth to piss well, breaketh the stone in 
the kidneys and bladder, and is singular against the strangury, and 
the stoppings of the kidneys and bladder: whereof it took the name 
Saxifragia, or break stone.

B. The juice of the leaves of Saxifrage doth cleanse and take away 
all spots and freckles of the face, and leaveth a good colour.

C. The distilled water thereof mingled with some vinegar in the 
distillation, cleareth the sight, and taketh away all obscurity and 
darkness of the same.



CHAP. 421. Of Burnet.

Fig. 1498. Garden Burnet (1) Fig. 1499. Wild Burnet (2) 
The Kinds.

Burnet of which we will treat, doth differ from Pimpinella, which is 
also called Saxifraga. One of the Burnets is lesser, for the most 
part growing in gardens, nothwithstanding it groweth in barren 
fields, where it is much smaller; the other greater, is altogether 
wild.

The Description.

1. Garden Burnet hath long leaves made up together of a great many 
upon one stem, every one whereof is something round, nicked on the 
edges, somewhat hairy: among these riseth a stalk that is not 
altogether without leaves, something chamfered: upon the tops whereof 
grow little round heads or knops, which bring forth small flowers of 
a brown purple colour, and after them cornered seeds, which are 
thrust up together. The root is long: the whole plant doth smell 
something like a Melon, or Cucumber.

2. Wild Burnet is greater in all parts, it hath wider and bigger 
leaves than those of the former: the stalk is longer, sometimes two 
cubits high: the knops are greater, of a dark purple colour, and the 
seed is likewise cornered and greater: the root longer, but this 
Burnet hath no pleasant smell at all.

3. There is kept in some gardens another of this kind, with very 
large leaves, stalks, and heads, for the heads are some inch and half 
long, yet but slender considering the length, and the flowers (as I 
remember) are of a whitish colour: in other respects it differs not 
from the precedent: it may fitly be called Pimpinella sanguisorba 
hortensis maxima, Great Garden Burnet.

The Place.

The small Pimpernel is commonly planted in gardens, notwithstanding 
it doth grow wild upon many barren heaths and pastures.

The great wild Burnet groweth (as Mr. Lyte saith) in dry meadows 
about Vilvoorde, and myself have found it growing upon the side of a 
causeway which crosseth the one half of a field, where of the one 
part is arable ground, and the other part meadow, lying between 
Paddington and Lisson Green near unto London, upon the highway.

The Time

They flower from June, unto the end of August.

The Names.

The later herbarists do call Burnet Pimpinella sanguisorba, that it 
may differ from the other, and yet it is called by several names, 
Sanguisorba, and Sanguinaria: Gesner had rather it should be called 
Peponella of the smell of Melons or Pumpkins, to which it is like, as 
we have said: of others it is named Pimpinella, or Bipennula: of most 
men, Solbastrella: in High Dutch Kolbleskraut, her Gots Bartlin, 
Blutkraut, Megelkraut: in French, Pimpennelle, Sanguisorbe: in 
English, Burnet. It agreeth cum altera Dioscoridis Sideritide, that 
is to say, with Dioscorides his second Ironwort: the leaf (and 
especially that of the lesser sort) which we have written to consist 
of many nicks in the edges of the leaves; and this may be the very 
same which Pliny in his 24th book, chapter 17, reporteth to be named 
in Persia, Sissitiepteris, because it made them merry; he also 
calleth the same Protomedia, and Casigneta, and likewise 
Dionysionymphas for that it doth marvellously agree with wine; to 
which also this Pimpinella (as we have said) doth give a pleasant 
scent: neither is that repugnant, that Pliny in another place hath 
written, De Sideritibus, of the Ironworts; for it often falleth out 
that he treateth of one and the selfsame plant in divers places, 
under divers names: which thing then happeneth sooner when the 
writers themselves do not well know the plant, as that Pliny did not 
well know Sideritis or Ironwort, it is even thereby manifest, because 
he setteth not down his own opinion hereof, but other men's.

The Temperature.

Burnet, besides the drying and binding faculty that it hath, doth 
likewise meanly cool: and the lesser Burnet hath likewise withal a 
certain superficial, slight, and temperate scent, which when it is 
put into the wine it doth leave behind it: this is not in the dry 
herb, in the juice, nor in the decoction.

The Virtues.

A. Burnet is a singular good herb for wounds (which thing Dioscorides 
doth attribute to his second Ironwort) and commended of a number: it 
stancheth bleeding, and therefore it was named Sanguisorba, as well 
inwardly taken, as outwardly applied.

B. Either the juice is given, or the decoction of the powder of the 
dry leaves of the herb, being bruised, it is outwardly applied, or 
else put among other external medicines.

C. It stayeth the lask and bloody flux: it is also most effectual to 
stop the monthly course.

D. The Lesser Burnet is pleasant to be eaten in salads, in which it 
is thought to make the heart merry and glad; also being put into 
wine, to which it yieldeth a certain grace in the drinking.

E. The decoction of Pimpernel drunken, cureth the bloody flux, the 
spitting of blood, and all other fluxes of blood in man or woman.

F. The herb and seed made into powder, and drunk with wine, or water 
wherein iron hath been quenched doth the like.

G. The leaves of Pimpernel are very good to heal wounds, and are 
received in drinks that are made for inward wounds.

H. The leaves of Burnet steeped in wine and drunken, comfort the 
heart, and make it merry, and are good against the trembling and 
shaking thereof.



CHAP. 422. Of English Saxifrage.

Fig. 1500. English Saxifrage (1) Fig. 1501. Austrian Saxifrage (2) 
The Description.

1.  This kind of Saxifrage our English women physicians have in great 
use; and is familiarly known unto them, vouchsafing that name unto it 
of his virtues against the stone: it hath the leaves of Fennel, but 
thicker and broader, very like unto Seseli pratense monspeliensium 
(which addition Pena hath bestowed upon this our English Saxifrage) 
among which riseth up a stalk, of a cubit high or more, bearing at 
the top spoky roundels beset with whitish yellow flowers; the root is 
thick, black without, and white within, and of a good savour.

2. Clusius hath set forth another plant not much different from this 
our common Saxifrage, and called it Saxifraga Pannoniæ, which I have 
thought fit here to insert: the leaves, saith he, are much shorter 
than those of Hog's Fennel, and somewhat like those of Fumitory: the 
stalks are some foot high, slender, having some few small leaves, and 
at the top carrying an umbel of white flowers: the root is not much 
unlike that of Hog's Fennel, but shorter and more acrid; it is hairy 
at the top thereof, whence the stalks and leaves come forth: it grows 
upon some hills in Hungary and Austria, and flowers in July.

The Place.

Saxifrage groweth in most fields and meadows everywhere throughout 
this our kingdom of England.

The Time.

It flowereth from the beginning of May to the end of August.
The Names.

Saxifraga anglicana is called in our mother tongue Stonebreak or 
English Saxifrage: Pena and Lobel call it by this name Saxifraga 
anglicana: for that it groweth more plentifully in England than in 
any other country.

The Nature.

Stonebreak is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. A decoction made with the seeds and roots of Saxifrage, breaketh 
the stone in the bladder and kidneys, helpeth the strangury, and 
causeth one to piss freely.

B. The root of Stonebreak boiled in wine, and the decoction drunken, 
bringeth down women's sickness, expelleth the secondine and dead 
child.

C. The root dried and made into powder, and taken with sugar, 
comforteth and warmeth the stomach, cureth the gnawings and griping 
pains of the belly.

D. It helpeth the colic, and driveth away ventosities or windiness.

E. Our English women use to put it in their running or rennet for 
cheese, especially in Cheshire (where I was born) where the best 
cheese of this land is made.



CHAP. 423. Of Siler Mountain or Bastard Lovage.

Fig. 1502. Bastard Lovage (1) Fig. 1503. Horse Fennel (2) 
The Description.

1. The natural plants of Seseli, being now better known than in times 
past, especially among our apothecaries, is called by them Siler 
montanum, and Seseleos: this plant they have retained to very good 
purpose and confederation; but the error of the name hath caused 
divers of our late writers to err, and to suppose that Siler 
montanum, called in shops, Seseleos, was no other than Seseli 
massiliensium of Dioscorides. But this plant containeth in his 
substance much more acrimony, sharpness and efficacy in working, than 
any of the plants called Seselios. It hath stalks like Ferula, two 
cubits high. The root smelleth like Ligusticum: the leaves are very 
much cut or divided, like the leaves of Fennel or Seseli massiliense, 
and broader than the leaves of Peucedanum. At the top of the stalks 
grow spoky tufts like Angelica; which bring forth a long and leafy 
seed like Cumin, of a pale colour; in taste seeming as though it were 
condited with sugar, but withal somewhat sharp, and sharper than 
Seseli pratense.

2. There is a second kind of Siler which Pena and Lobel set forth 
under the title of Seseli pratense monspeliensium, which Dodonæus in 
his last edition calleth Siler pratense alterum, that is in show very 
like the former. The stalks thereof grow to the height of two cubits, 
but his leaves are somewhat broader and blacker: there are not so 
many leaves growing upon the stalk, and they are less divided than 
the former, and are of little savour. The seed is smaller than the 
former, and savouring very little or nothing. The root is black 
without, and white within, dividing itself into sundry divisions.

The Place.

It groweth of itself in Liguria, not far from Genoa in the craggy 
mountains, and in the gardens of diligent herbarists.

The Time.

These plants do flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.

It is called commonly Siler Montanum; in French and Dutch by a 
corrupt name Ser-Montain: in divers shops, Seseleos, but untruly: for 
it is not Sesili, nor a kind thereof: in English, Siler mountain, 
after the Latin name, and Bastard Lovage. The first is thought to be 
the Ligusticum of the ancients, and it is so called by Matthiolus and 
others.

The Nature.

This plant with his seed is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seeds of Siler drunk with Wormwood wine, or wine wherein 
Wormwood hath been sodden, moveth women's diseases in great 
abundance: cureth the suffocation and strangling of the matrix, and 
causeth it to return unto the natural place again.

B. The root stamped with honey, and applied or put into old sores, 
doth cure them and cover bare and naked bones with flesh.

C. Being drunk it provoketh urine, easeth the pains of the guts or 
entrails proceeding of crudity or rawness, it helpeth concoction, 
consumeth wind, and swelling of the stomach.

D. The root hath the same virtue or operation, but not so effectual, 
as not being so hot and dry. 



CHAP. 424. Of Seselios, or Heartwort of Candy.

Fig. 1504. Small Candy Seselios (1) Fig. 1505. Great Candy Seselios 
(2) 
The Description.

1. This plant being the Seseli of Candy, and in times past not 
elsewhere found, took his surname of that place where it was first 
found, but nowadays it is to be seen in the corn fields about 
Narbonne in France, from whence I had seeds, which prosper well in my 
garden. This is but an annual plant, and increaseth from year to year 
by his own sowing. The leaves grow at the first even with the ground, 
somewhat hairy, of an overworn green colour, in shape much like unto 
Chervil, but thicker: among which riseth up an hairy rough stalk, of 
the height of a cubit, bearing at the top spoky tufts with white 
flowers: which being faded, there followeth round and flat seed, 
compassed and cunningly wreathed about the edges like a ring.

The seed is flat like the other, joined two together in one, as you 
may see in the seed of Ferula or Angelica, in shape like a round 
target, in taste like Myrrhis. Matthiolus did greatly mistake this 
plant.

2. There is a kind of Seseli creticum, called also Tordylion: and is 
very like unto the former, saving that his leaves are more like unto 
common Parsnips than Chervil, and the whole plant is bigger than the 
former.

Fig. 1506. Mountain Seselios (3) Fig. 1507. Marseilles Seselios (4) 
	3. There is likewise a kind of Seseli that hath a root as big as 
a man's arm, especially if the plant be old, but the new and young 
plants bear roots an inch thick, with some knobs and tuberous 
sprouts, about the lower part; the root is thick, rough, and covered 
over with a thick bark, the substance whereof is first gummy, 
afterward sharp and as it were full of spittle; from the upper part 
of the root proceed many knobs or thick swelling roots, out of which 
there issueth great and large wings or branches of leaves, some 
whereof are notched and dented round about, growing unto one side or 
rib of the leaf, standing also one opposite unto another, of a dark 
and delayed green colour, and somewhat shining above, but underneath 
of a greyish or ash colour: from amongst these leaves there ariseth a 
streaked or guttered stalk, a cubit and a half high, sometimes an 
inch thick, having many joints or knees, and many branches growing 
about them, and upon each joint lesser branches of leaves. At the top 
of the stalks and upper ends of the branches grow little cups or 
umbels of white flowers; which being faded, there cometh in place a 
seed, which is very like Siler montanum. So saith our author: I take 
this here described by him to be the Seseli montanum 1 of Clusius, or 
Ligusticum alterum belgarum of Lobel: and therefore I have given you 
Clusius his figure in this place.

There is also a kind of Siseli, which Pena setteth forth for the 
first kind of Daucus, whereof I take it to be a kind, growing 
everywhere in the pastures about London, that hath large leaves, 
growing for a time even with the earth, and spread thereupon, and 
divided into many parts, in manner almost like to the former for the 
most part in all things, in the round spoky tufts or umbels, bearing 
stiff and fair white flowers in shape like them of Cinquefoil; in 
smell like Sambucus or Elder. When the flower is faded, there cometh 
in place a yellow guttered seed, of a spicy and very hot taste. The 
root is thick, and black without, which rotteth and perisheth in the 
ground (as we may see in many gummy or ferulous plants) after it hath 
seeded, neither will it flower here the second or third year after it 
is sown. Thus our author, but I am ignorant what he  means by this 
description.

4. There is likewise a kind of Seseli called Seseli massiliense, 
which hath leaves very much cloven or cut, and finely jagged, very 
much like unto the leaves of sweet Fennel, greater and thicker than 
the common Fennel. The stalk groweth to the height of three cubits, 
having knotty joints, as it were knees; bearing at the top thereof 
tufts like unto Dill, and seed somewhat long and conered, of a sharp 
and biting taste. The root is long and thick like unto great 
Saxifrage, of a pleasant smell, and sharp in taste.

There is another Seseli of Massilia, which hath large and great 
leaves like unto Ferula, and not much unlike Siler montanum: among 
which rise up stalks four cubits high, bearing at the tops spoky 
tufts like unto the last before rehearsed, of a good savour. The root 
is like unto the former in shape, substance, and savour, but that it 
is greater.

The Place.

These plants are strangers in England, notwithstanding I have them in 
my garden.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in September.

The Names.

Their names have been touched in their several descriptions.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. It provoketh urine, and helpeth the strangury, bringeth down the 
sickness and dead birth: it helpeth the cough and shortness of 
breath, the suffocation of the mother, and helpeth the falling 
sickness.

B. The seed drunk with wine concoteth raw humours, taketh away the 
griping and torments of the belly, and helpeth the ague, as 
Dioscorides saith.

C. The juice of the leaves is given to goats and other cattle to 
drink, that they may the sooner be delivered of their young ones, as 
the same author reporteth.



CHAP. 425. Of Spignel, Spicknel, or Meu.

Fig. 1508. Spignel (1) Fig. 1509. Italian Spignel (2) 
The Description.

1. Spignel hath stalks rising up to the height of a cubit and a half, 
beset with leaves resembling Fennel or Dill, but thicker, more bushy, 
and more finely jagged; and at the top of the stalks do grow spoky 
tufts like unto Dill. The roots are thick, and full of an oleous 
substance, smelling well, and chafing or heating the tongue, of a 
reasonable good savour.

2. There is a bastard kind of Spignel like unto the former, saving 
that the leaves are not so finely cut or jagged: the flowers are 
tufted more thicker than the former: the roots are many, thick, and 
full of sap.

The Place.

Meu, or Meon groweth in Westmorland, at a place called Roundtwhat 
betwixt Appleby and Kendal, in the parish of Orton.

Bastard Meu, or Meum, groweth in the waste mountains of Italy, and 
the Alps, and (as it hath been told me) upon Saint Vincent's rock by 
Bristol, where I spent two days to seek it, but it was not my hap to 
find it, therefore I make some doubt of the truth thereof.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in June and July, and yield their seed in 
August.
The Names.

It is called of the Grecians, Meon, likewise of the Latins Meum: of 
the Italians, Meo: in Apulia, as Matthiolus declareth, it is called 
Imperatrix: in divers places of Spain, Sistra: in others, Pinello: in 
High Dutch, Beerewurtz: in French, Sistre: Ruellius saith that it is 
named in France Anethum tortuosum, and sylvestre, or writhed Dill, 
and wild Dill: also it is called in English, Spignel, or Spicknell, 
of some Meu, and Bearwort.

The second may be called bastard Spignel.

The Temperature.

These herbs, especially the roots of right Meon, is hot in the third 
degree, and dry in the second.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Meon, boiled in water and drunk, mightily open the 
stoppings of the kidneys and bladder, provoke urine and bodily lust, 
ease and help the strangury, and consume all windiness and belchings 
of the stomach.

B. The same taken with honey doth appease the grief of the belly, and 
is exceeding good against all catarrhs, rheums, and aches of the 
joint, as also any phlegm which falls upon the lungs.

C. If the same be laid plasterwise upon the bellies of children, it 
maketh them to piss well.

D. They cleanse the entrails, and deliver them of obstructions or 
stoppings: they provoke urine, drive forth the stone, and bring down 
the flowers: but if they be taken more than is requisite, they cause 
the headache; for seeing they have in them more heat than dryness, 
they carry to the head raw moisture and windy heat, as Galen saith.



CHAP. 426. Of Harstrang or Sulphurwort.


Fig 1510. Sulphurworts (1-3) 

The Description.

1. Sulphurwort or Hog's Fennel hath a stiff and hard stalk full of 
knees or knots, beset with leaves like unto Fennel, but greater, 
coming nearer unto Ferula, or rather like the leaves of wild Pine-
tree, and at the top of the stalks round spoky tufts full of little 
yellow flowers, which do turn into broad brown seed. The root is 
thick and long: I have digged up roots thereof as big as a man's 
thigh, black without, and white within, of a strong and grievous 
smell, and full of yellow sap or liquor, which quickly waxeth hard or 
dry, smelling not much unlike brimstone, called sulphur; which hath 
induced some to call it Sulphurwort; having also at the top toward 
the upper face of the earth, a certain bush of hair, of a brown 
colour, among which the leaves and stalks do spring forth.

2. The second kind of Peucedanum or Hog's Fennel is very like unto 
the former, saving that the leaves be like Ferula: the roots are 
nothing so great as the former, but all the rest of the plant doth 
far exceed the other in greatness.

3. There is another kind of Peucedanum or Hog's Fennel, which Pena 
found upon Saint Vincent's Rock by Bristol, whose picture he hath set 
forth in his Adversaria, which that famous English physician of late 
memory, D. Turner found there also, supposing it to be the right and 
true Peucedanum, whereof no doubt it is a kind: it groweth not above 
a foot high, and is in shape and leaves like the right Peucedanum, 
but they be shorter and lesser, growing somewhat like the writhed 
Fennel of Massilia, but the branches are more largely writhed, and 
the leaves are of the colour of the branches, which are of a pale 
green colour. At the top of the branches grow small white tufts, 
having seed like Dill, but shorter and slenderer, of a good taste, 
somewhat sharp. The root is thicker than the smallness of the herb 
will well bear. Among the people about Bristol, and the rock 
aforesaid, this hath been thought good to eat.

This is the Selinum montanum pumilum of Clusius; and the Peucedani 
facie pucilla planta of Pena and Lobel; wherefore Bauhin was mistaken 
in his Pinax, whereas he refers that of Lobel to his third 
Peucedanum: the root of this is black without, and white within, but 
short, yet at the top about the thickness of one's finger: the leaves 
are small and green, commonly divided into five parts; and these 
again subdivided by threes: the stalk is some six inches or half a 
foot high, divided into sundry branches, crested, broad, and at the 
tops of the branches, even when they first shoot up, appear little 
umbels of white flowers very small, and consisting of five leaves 
apiece. The seed is black, shining and round, two being joined 
together, as in most umbelliferous plants. It flowers in May, and 
ripens the seed in July: I received in July 1632, same plants of this 
from Bristol, by the means of my oft mentioned friend Master George 
Bowles, who gathered it upon Saint Vincent's Rock, whereas the 
authors of the Adversaria report it to grow.
The Place.

The fisrt kind of Peucedanum or Hog's Fennel groweth very plentifully 
on the South side of a wood belonging to Waltham, at the Nase in 
Essex by the highway side; also at Whitstable in Kent, in a meadow 
near to the seaside, sometime belonging to Sir Henry Crisp, and 
adjoining to his house there. It groweth also in great plenty at 
Feversham in Kent, near unto the haven upon the banks thereof, and in 
the meadows adjoining.

The second kind groweth upon the sea coasts of Montpellier in France, 
and in the coasts of Italy.

The Time

These plants do flower in June, July, and August.

The Names.

The Grecians and Latins call it Peucedanos, or Peucedanum, and also 
Pinastellum: most of the shops, and likewise the common people name 
it Fniculum porcinum: of divers, Stataria: of the prophets, Agathos 
daimon, that is to say, a good angel or ghost: in High Dutch, 
Harstrang, Schweffel wurkel, Sewfenkel: in Italian and French, 
Peucedano: in Spanish Herbatum: in English, Hore-strange, and 
Harstrang, Sow-Fennel, or Hog's Fennel, Sulphurwort, or Brimstone-
wort. it is called Peucedanum and Pinastellum, of the Greek and Latin 
words Peuke and Pinus.

The Temperature.

These herbs, especially the yellow sap of the root, is hot in the 
second degree, and dry in the beginning of the third.

The Virtues.

A. The yellow sap of the root of Hog's Fennel, or as they call it in 
same places of England, Horestrange, taken by itself, or with bitter 
almonds and Rue, is good against the shortness of breath, it 
assuageth the griping pains of the belly, dissolveth and driveth away 
ventosity or windiness of the stomach; it wasteth the swelling of the 
milt or spleen, looseth the belly gently, and purgeth by siege both 
phlegm and choler.

B. The same taken in manner aforesaid provoketh urine, easeth the 
pain of the kidneys and bladder, causeth easy deliverance of child, 
and expelleth the secondine, or after-birth, and the dead child.

C. The sap or juice of the root mixed with oil of Roses, or Vinegar, 
and applied, easeth the palsy, cramps, contraction or drawing 
together of sinews, and all old cold diseases, especially the 
sciatica.

D. It is used with good success against the rupture or burstings in 
young children, and is very good to be applied unto the navels of 
children that stand out over much.

E. The decoction of the root drunk is of like virtue unto the juice, 
but not altogether so effectual against the foresaid diseases.

F. The root dried and made into powder doth mundify and cleanse old 
stinking and corrupt sores and ulcers, and healeth them: it also 
draweth forth the corrupt and rotten bones that hinder the same from 
healing, and likewise splinters and other things fixed in the flesh.

G. The said powder or juice of the root mixed with oil of Roses, 
causeth one to sweat, if the body be anointed therewith, and 
therefore good to be put into the unction or ointment for the French 
disease.

H. The congealed liquor tempered with oil of Roses, and applied to 
the head after the manner of an ointment, is good for them that have 
the lethargy, that are frantic, that have dizziness in the head, that 
are troubled with the falling sickness, that have the palsy, that are 
vexed with convulsions and cramps, and generally it is a remedy for 
all infirmities of the sinews, with Vinegar and oil, as Dioscorides 
teacheth.

I. The same being smelt unto reviveth and calleth them again that be 
strangled with the mother, and that lie in a dead sleep.

K. Being taken in a rear egg it helpeth the cough and difficulty of 
breathing, gripings and windiness, which, as Galen addeth, proceedeth 
from the grossness and claminess of humours.

L. It purgeth gently, it diminisheth the spleen, by cutting, 
digesting, and making thin humours that are thick: it causeth easy 
travail, and openeth the matrix.

M. A small piece of the root holden in the mouth is a present remedy 
against suffocation of the mother.



CHAP. 427. Of Herb Ferula, or Fennel-Giant.

Fig. 1511. Fennel-Giant (1) Fig. 1512. Small Fennel-Giant (2) 
The Kinds.

Dioscorides maketh mention of a Ferula, out of which is gathered the 
gum sagapene; and also he declareth, that the gums galbanum and 
ammoniacum are liquors of this herb Ferula: but what difference there 
is in the liquors, according to the climate or country where it 
groweth, he doth not set down; for it may be that out of one kind of 
Ferula sundry juices may be gathered, that is to say, according to 
the diversity of the countries where they grow, as we have said: for 
as in laser, the juice of Laserwort that groweth in Cyrene doth 
differ from that liquor which groweth in Media and Syria; so it is 
likely that the herb Ferula doth bring forth in Media sagapenum, in 
Cyrene ammoniacum, and in Syria galbanum. Theophrastus saith that the 
herb Ferula is divided into two kinds, and he calleth one great, by 
the name of Ferula; and another little, by the name Ferulago.

The Description.

1. Ferula, or Fennel-Giant, hath very great and large leaves of a 
deep green colour, cut and jagged like those of Fennel, spreading 
themselves abroad like wings: amongst which riseth up a great hollow 
stalk, somewhat reddish on that side which is next unto the sun, 
divided into certain spaces, with joints or knees like those of 
Hemlocks or Kexes, of the bigness of a man's arm in the wrist, of the 
height of four or five cubits where it groweth naturally, as in 
Italy, Greece, and other hot countries; notwithstanding it hath 
attained to the height of fourteen or fifteen foot in my garden, and 
likewise groweth fairer and greater than from whence it came, as it 
fareth with other plants that come hither from hot regions: as for 
example our great Artichoke, which first was brought out of Italy 
into England, is become (by reason of the great moisture which our 
country is subject unto) greater and better than those of Italy; 
insomuch that divers Italians have sent for some plants of our 
Artichokes, deeming them to be ofanother kind; nevertheless in Italy 
they are small and dry as they were before. Even so it happeneth to 
this Ferula, as we have said. This foresaid stalk divideth itself 
toward the top into divers other smaller branches, whereon are set 
the like leaves that grow next the ground, but much lesser. At the 
top of the branches at the first budding of the flowers appear 
certain bundles enclosed in thin skins, like the yolk of an egg, 
which divers call Corculum Ferulæ, or the little heart of Ferula; 
which being brought to maturity, open themselves into a tuft or umbel 
like that of Dill, of a yellowish colour: after which come the seed, 
in colour and fashion like those of the Parsnip, but longer and 
greater, always growing two together, so closely joined, that it 
cannot be discerned to be more than one seed until they be divided: 
the root is very thick and great, full of a certain gummy juice, that 
floweth forth, the root being bruised, broken, or cut; whieh being 
dried or hardened, is that gum which is called sagapenum, and in some 
shops serapinum.

2. There is likewise another smaller Ferula like unto the former in 
each respect, saving that it is altogether less: the root likewise 
being wounded yieldeth forth a sap or juice, which when it is hardned 
is called galbanum: of the Assyrians, metopium.

I have likewise another sort sent me from Paris, with this title 
Ferula nigra; which prospereth exceeding well in my garden, but 
difference I cannot find any from the former, save that the leaves 
are of a more black or swart colour.


Fig. 1513. Æsculapius' All-Heal (3) 

3. I know not where more fitly than in this place to give you the 
history of that Ferula or Ferulaceous plant that Dodonæus, Lobel, and 
others have set down under the name of Panax æesculapium. The stalk 
hereof is slender, a cubit high, crested and jointed, and from these 
joints proceed leaves bigger than those of Fennel and also rougher, 
and of a strong smell: at the tops of the branches grow umbels of 
yellow flowers: the seed is flattish, like that of the other Ferula: 
the root long, white, and of a strong smell. This grows naturally in 
Istria.

The Place.

These plants are not growing wild in England; I have them all in my 
garden.

The Time. 

They flower in June and July; they perfect their seed in September; 
not long after, the stalk with his leaves perish: the root remaineth 
fresh and green all winter.

The Names.

The first is called in Latin, Ferula, in Italian, Ferola: in Spanish, 
Cananheia: in English, Herb Ferula, and Fennel-Giant.

The Temperature.

These plants with their gums are hot in the third degree, and dry in 
the second.

The Virtues.

A. The pith or marrow, called Corculum Ferulæ, as Galen teacheth, is 
of an astringent or binding quality, and therefore good for them that 
spit blood, and that are troubled with the flux.

B. Dioscorides saith, that being put into the nostrils it stayeth 
bleeding, and is given in wine to those that are bitten with vipers.

C. It is reported to be eaten in Apulia roasted in the embers, first 
wrapped in leaves or in old clouts, with pepper and salt; which, as 
they say, is a pleasant sweet food, that stirreth up lust, as they 
report.

D. The seed doth heat, and attenuate or make thin: it is a remedy 
against cold fits of an ague, by procuring sweat, being mixed with 
oil, and the body anointed therewith.

E. A dram of the juice of Ferula which beareth sagapenum, purgeth by 
siege tough and slimy humours, and all gross phlegm and choler, and 
is also good against all old and cold diseases which are hard to be 
cured; it purgeth the brain, and is very good against all diseases of 
the head, against the apoplexy and epilepsy.

F. Being taken in the same manner, it is good against cramps, 
palsies, shrinkings and pains of the sinews.

G. It is good against the shortness of breath, the cold and long 
cough, the pain in the side and breast, for it mundifieth and 
cleanseth the breast from all cold phlegm and rheumatic humours.

H. Sagapenum infused or steeped in vinegar all night, and spread upon 
leather or cloth, scattereth, dissolveth, and driveth away all hard 
and cold swellings, tumours, botches, and hard lumps growing about 
the joints or elsewhere, and is excellent good to be put into or 
mingled with all ointments or emplasters which are made to mollify or 
soften.

I. The juice of Ferula galbanifera, called galbanum, drunk in wine 
with a little myrrh, is good against all venom or poison that hath 
been taken inwardly, or shot into the body with venomous darts, 
quarrels, or arrows.

K. It helps women's painful travail, if they do take therof in a cup 
of wine the quantity of a bean.

L. The perfume of galbanum helpeth women that are grieved with the 
rising of the mother, and is good for those that have the falling 
sickness.

M. Galbanum softeneth, mollifieth, and draweth forth thorns, 
splinters, or broken bones, and consumeth cold and phlegmatic 
humours, serving in sundry ointments and emplasters for the use of 
surgery, and hath the same physical virtues that are attributed unto 
sagapenum.



CHAP. 428. Of Dropwort, or Filipendula.

Fig. 1514. Dropwort (1) Fig. 1515. Mountain Dropwort (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Dropworts, some of the champion or fertile 
pastures, some of more moist and dankish grounds, and some of the 
mountain.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Filipendula hath leaves growing and spread 
abroad like feathers, each leaf consisting of sundry small leaves 
dented or snipped round about the edges, growing to the stalk by a 
small and slender stem: these leaves resemble wild Tansy or Burnet, 
but that they be longer and thicker, set like feathers, as is 
aforesaid: among these rise up stalks a cubit and a half high, at the 
top whereof grow many fair white flowers, each small flower 
consisting of six slender leaves, like a little star, bushing 
together in a tuft like the flowers of Meadowsweet, of a soft sweet 
smell: the seed is small, and groweth together like a button: the 
roots are small and black, whereupon depend many little knobs or 
black pellets, much like the roots of the female Peony, saving that 
they be a great deal smaller.

2. The second kind of Filipendula, called of Pena in his 
Observations, Oenanthe, sive Philipendula alter montana is neither at 
this day very well known, neither did the old writers heretofore once 
write or speak of it: but Pena that painful herbarist found it 
growing naturally in Narbonne in France, near unto Veganium, on the 
top of the high hills called Paradisus Dei, and near unto the 
mountain Calcaris: this rare plant hath many knobby long roots, in 
shape like to Asphodeum luteus, or rather like the roots of Corruda, 
or wild Asparagus; from which riseth up a stalk a foot high, and 
more, which is thick, round, and chanelled, beset full of leaves like 
those of common Filipendula, but they be not so thick set or winged, 
but more like unto the leaves of a Thistle, consisting of sundry 
small leaves, in fashion like to Coronopus ruellii, that is, Ruellius 
his Buck's Horn: round about the top of the stalk there groweth a 
very fair tuft of white flowers, resembling fine small hoods, growing 
close and thick together like the flowers of Pedicularis, that is, 
Red Rattle, called of Carolus Clusius, Alectorolophos, whereof he 
maketh this plant a kind, but in my judgement and opinion it is 
rather like Cynosorchis, a kind of Satyrion.

Fig. 1516. Narrow-Leaved Dropwort (3)Fig. 1517. Hemlock Dropwort (4)
	3. There is another kind of Filipendula set forth under the name 
Oenanthe, that hath many tuberous and thick roots like those of 
Dropwort, but white of colour, and every one of those knobs hath a 
certain string or fibre annexed thereto; from whence ariseth a 
crested stalk two foot high, dividing itself toward the top into 
sundry arms or branches: from the hollow place or bosom of every 
joint (out of which do grow those branches) the leaves do also 
proceed, very much cut or jagged like Fennel: at the top of those 
branches come forth spoky roundels of white flowers fashioned like 
stars.

4. The fourth kind of Filipendula is as strange a plant as the 
former, especially with us here in England, except in the watery 
places, and rills in the North, where Paludapium or Water Smallage 
groweth; whereunto in leaves it is not unlike, but more like Ruta 
pratensis: it hath many large branches, a naughty savour, and in 
colour and shape like Cicuta, that is, Hemlock. The stalks are more 
than two cubits high, coming from a root which exceedingly multiplies 
itself into bulbs, like Asphodelus albus. The smell of this plant is 
strong and grievous; the taste hot and biting, it being full of a 
juice, at first milky, but afterwards turning yellow. The spoky tufts 
or roundels growing at the top are like Cicuta, yea, it much 
resembleth Hemlock in property and qualities, and so do they affirm 
that have proved and seen the experience of it: for being eaten in 
salads it did well nigh poison those which ate of it, making them 
giddy in their heads, waxing very pale, staggering and reeling like 
drunken men. Beware and take good heed of this and such like simples; 
for there is no physician that will give it, because there be many 
other excellent good simples which God hath bestowed upon us from the 
preventing and curing of diseases. Pernicious and not excusable is 
the ignorance of some of our time, that have bought and (as one may 
probably conjecture) used the roots of this plant instead of those of 
Peony; and I know they are daily by the ignorant women in Cheapside 
sold to people more ignorant than themselves, by the name of Water 
Lovage; Caveat emptor. The danger that may ensue by using them may be 
gathered by that which our author hath here set down, being taken out 
of the Adversaria, pag. 326.


Fig. 1518. Water Dropwort (5) 

5. The fifth and last kind of Filipendula, which is the fourth 
according to Matthiolus his account, hath leaves like Water Smallage, 
which Pliny calleth Sylaus, the leaves very much resembling those of 
Laver crateuæ: among which riseth up a small stalk deeply furrowed or 
crested, bearing at the top thereof spoky or bushy roundels of white 
flowers thick thrust together. The roots are compact of very many 
filaments or threads; among which come forth a few tuberous or knobby 
roots like unto the second.

The Place and Time.

The first groweth plentifully upon stony rocks or mountains, and 
rough places, and in fertile pastures. I found great plenty thereof 
growing in a field adjoining to Sion House, sometime a nunnery, near 
London, on the side of a meadow called Sion Meadow.

The second hath been sufficiently spoken of in the description. The 
third groweth near unto brooks and rivers' sides. The fourth groweth 
between the ploughed lands in the moist and wet furrows of a field 
belonging to Battersea by London. It also groweth in great abundance 
in many places by the Thames' side; as amongst the osiers against 
York House, a little above the Horseferry, against Lambeth, &c. The 
fifth groweth near the sides of rivers and water-streams, especially 
near the river of Thames, as in St. George's Fields, and about the 
Bishop of London's house at Fulham, and such like places.
The Time.

They flower from May to the end of June.

The Names.

They are commonly called Filipendulæ. The first is called of Nicolaus 
Myrepsus, Philipendula; of some, Saxifragra rubra, and Millefolium 
sylvestre: of Pliny, Molon: in Italian and Spanish, Filipendula: in 
English, Filipendula and Dropwort. Water Filipendula is called 
Filipendula aquatica, Oenanthe aquatica, and Silaus plinii.

The fourth, whose leaves are like to Hemlocks, is as some think 
called of Cordus, Oisenichium: in English Hemlock Filipendula.

The Nature.

These kinds of Filipendula are hot and dry in the third degree, 
opening and cleansing, and yet with a little astriction or binding. 
All the kinds of Oenanthes have the same faculty, except the fourth, 
whose pernicious faculty we have formerly touched.

The Virtues.

A. The root of common Filipendula boiled in wine and drunken, is good 
against all pains of the bladder, causeth one to make water, and 
breaketh the stone. The like Dioscorides hath written of Oenanthe; 
the root, saith he is good for them that piss by drops.

B. The powder of the roots of Filipendula often used in meat, will 
preserve a man from the falling sickeness.



CHAP. 429. Of Hemlocks, or Herb Bennet.


Fig. 1519.Hemlock (1) 

The Description.

1. The first kind of Hemlock hath a long stalk, five or six foot 
high, great and hollow, full of joints like the stalks of Fennel, of 
an herby colour; powdered with small red spots, almost like the stems 
of Dragons. The leaves are great, thick, and small cut or jagged like 
the leaves of Chervil, but much greater, and of a very strong and 
unpleasant savour. The flowers are white, growing by tufts or spoky 
tops, which do change and turn into a white flat seed: the root is 
short, and somewhat hollow within.

Fig. 1520. Broad-Leaved Hemlock (2) 


2. The apothecaries in times past not knowing the right Seseli 
peloponnense, have erroneously taken this Cictuta latifolia for the 
same. The leaves whereof are broad, thick, and like unto Cicutaria, 
yet not the same; they called it Seseli peloponnense cum folio 
Cicutæ, the faculties whereof deny and refute that assertion and 
opinion, yea and the plant itself, which being touched, yieldeth or 
breatheth out a most virulent or loathsome smell: these things 
sufficiently argue, that it is not a kind of Seseli, besides the 
reasons following: Seseli hath a reasonable good savour in the whole 
plant, the root is bare and single, without fibres, like a Carrot; 
but Cicuta hath not only a loathsome smell, but his roots are great, 
thick, and knobby, like the roots of Myrrhis: the whole plant doth in 
a manner resemble the leaves, stalks and flowers of Myrrhis odorata, 
whose small white flowers do turn into long and crooked seeds, 
growing at the top of the branches three cubits high.


Fig. 1521. Giant Hemlock (3) 

3. This in leaves, stalks, and roots is larger than the last 
described, the stalks equalling or exceeding the height of man; the 
smell is strange and grievous, and in all the parts thereof it is 
like to the other plants of this kind. Lobel figures it by the name 
of Cicutaria maxima brancionis, and questions whether it be not 
Thapsia tertia salamanticensium of Clusius; but Clusius denies it so 
to be.

The Place.

Common Hemlock groweth plentifully about town walls and villages in 
shadowy places, and fat soils near ditches.

The second groweth upon mountains and desert places, and is a 
stranger in England; yet I have plants thereof in my garden.

The Time.

They flourish and seed in September.
The Names.

Hemlock is called in Latin, Cicuta: in High Dutch, Schirling: in low 
Dutch, Scheerlinck: in Spanish, Cegut y Canaheia: in French, Cigne: 
in English, Hemlock, Homlock, Kex, and Herb Bennet.

The second is called Cicuta latifolia, and Cicutaria latifolia, and 
Seseli peloponnense quorundam: in English, great Hemlocks, and garden 
Homlock.

The Temperature.

Galen saith, that Hemlock is extreme cold in operation, even in the 
fourth degree of coldness.

The Virtues.

A. It is therefore a very rash part to lay the leaves of Hemlock to 
the stones of young boys or virgin breasts, and by that means to keep 
those parts from growing great; for is doth not only easily cause 
those members to pine away, but also hurteth the heart and liver, 
being outwardly applied: then must it of necessity hurt more being 
inwardly taken; for it is one of the deadly poisons which killeth by 
his cold quality, as Dioscorides writeth, saying, Hemlock is a very 
evil, dangerous, hurtful, and poisonous herb, insomuch that whosoever 
taketh of it into his body dieth remediless, except the party drink 
some wine that is naturally hot, before the venom have taken the 
heart, as Pliny saith: but being drunk with wine the poison is with 
greater speed carried to the heart, by reason whereof it killeth 
presently; therefore not to be applied outwardly, much less taken 
inwardly into the body.

B. The great Hemlock doubtless is not possessed with any one good 
faculty, as appeareth by his loathsome smell, and other apparent 
signs, and therefore not to be used in physic.



CHAP. 430. Of Wild and Water Hemlocks.


Fig. 1522. Thin-Leaved Water Hemlock (1) Fig. 1523. Wild Water 
Hemlock (2) 
The Description.

1. This wild kind of Hemlock hath a small tough white root, from 
which rise up divers stiff stalks, hollow, somewhat reddish toward 
the sun, jointed or kneed at certain distances; from which joints 
spring forth long leaves very green, and finely minced or jagged like 
the common Chervil or Parsley: the flowers stand at the tops of the 
stalks in small spoky umbels, with little longish green leaves about 
them: the seed followeth, like those of Hemlock, or as they grow 
together on the tops of the stalks they resemable Coriander seeds, 
but less: the whole plant is of a naughty smell.

2. Water Hemlock, which Lobel calleth Cicutaria palustris: Clusius 
and Dodonæus, Phellandrium, riseth up with a thick fat and empty 
hollow stalk, full of knees or joints, cre Red, chamfered, or 
furrowed, of a yellowish green colour: the leaves shoot forth of the 
joints and branches, like  unto wild Hemlock, but much thicker, 
fatter, and oleous, very finely cut or jagged almost like those of 
the smallest Visnaga, or Spanish Toothpicks: the flowers stand at the 
top of the stalks in small whitish tufts: the seed followeth, 
blackish, of the bigness of Anise seed, and of a sweet savour: the 
root is thick and long, within the water, very soft and tender, with 
very many strings fastened thereto.

The Place.

1. This grows among stones and rubbish, by the walls of cities and 
towns almost everywhere.

The other groweth in the midst of water ditches and standing pools 
and ponds, in most places or England; it groweth very plentifully in 
the ditches by a causeway, as you go from Redriff to Deptford near 
London, and in many other places.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in July and August.

The Names.

1. This is Petroselini vitium of Travis; and Dauci inutilis genus of 
Gesner: Thalius calls it Apium cicutarium: Lobel, Cicutaria fatua: 
Tabernamontanus, Petroselinum caninum; which name we may fitly make 
English, and call it Dog's-Parsley.

2. This is Ligusticum sylvestris & Fniculum sylvestris of Tragus: 
Cicutaria palustris of Lobel and others: Dodonæus thinks it Pliny's 
Phellandrion; and Cæsalpinus judges it his Silaus.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Their temperature and faculties are answerable to the common Hemlock, 
which have no use in physic, as we have said.



CHAP. 431. Of Earthnut, Earth Chestnut, or Kipper-nut.

Fig. 1524. Small Earth-NutFig. 1525. Great Earth-Nut.
The Description.

1. Earth-Nut or Kipper-Nut, called after Lobel, Nucula terrestris, 
hath small even crested stalks a foot or somewhat more high: whereon 
do grow next the ground leaves like those of Parsley, and those that 
do grow higher like unto those of Dill; the white flowers do stand on 
the top of the stalks in spoky roundels, like the tops of Dill, which 
turn into small seed, growing together by couples, of a very good 
smell, not unlike to those of Fennel, but much smaller: the root is 
round, knobbed, with certain eminences or bunchings out; brown 
without, white within; of a firm and solid substance, and of a taste 
like the Chestnut or Chess-nut, whereof it took his name.

2. There is also another Earth-Nut that hath stalks a foot high, 
whereon do grow jagged leaves like those of English Saxifrage, of a 
bright green colour: the flowers grow at the top of the branches, in 
small spoky tufts consisting of little white flowers: the root is 
like the other, bulbous fashion, with some few strings hanging at the 
bottom, of a good and pleasant smell. This differs from the former, 
in that the leaves are larger and greener: the root also is not so 
far within the ground, and it also sends forth some leaves from the 
bulb itself; whereas our common kind hath only the end of a small 
root that carries the stem and leaves upon it, fastened unto it as 
you see it expressed in the former figure.

The Place.

These herbs do grow in pastures and corn fields almost everywhere: 
there is a field adjoining to Highgate, on the right side of the 
middle of the village, covered over with the same; and likewise in 
the next field unto the conduit heads by Marylebone, near the way 
that leadeth to Paddington by London, and in divers other places. 
Thus saith our author, but I have not yet observed the second grow 
wild with us.

The Time.

They flower in June and July: the seed cometh to perfection 
afterward.

The Names.

Alexander Trallianus hath made mention of Bolbokastanon, Lib. 7, 
reckoning it up among those kinds of meat or sustenances which be 
good for such as have rotten lungs: of some it is called 
Agriocastanon.

Guinterius thought the word was corrupted, and that Balanocastanon 
should be read: but this is as strange a word as Bolbocastanon, which 
was derived of the form of a bulb and the taste of a Chestnut: of 
some, Nucula terrestris, or the little Earth-Nut: it is thought to be 
Bunium dioscoridis of some; but we think not so: of Dr. Turner, 
Apios; yet there is another Apios, being a kind of Tithymale: of 
Matthiolus, Oenanthe, making it a kind of Filipendula: in High Dutch, 
Eerdnusz: in Low Dutch, Eertnoten: the people of Savoy call it 
Faverottes: in English, Earth-Nuts, Kipper-Nuts, and Earth Chestnuts.

The Temperature.

The roots of Earth-Nuts are moderately hot and dry, and also binding: 
but the seed is both hotter and drier.

The Virtues.

A. The seed openeth and provoketh urine, and so doth the root 
likewise.

B. The root is good for those that spit and piss blood, if the root 
be eaten raw, or roasted in the embers.

C. The Dutch people do use to eat them boiled and buttered, as we do 
Parsnips and Carrots, which so eaten comfort the stomach, and yield 
nourishment that is good for the bladder and kidneys.

D. There is a plaster made of the seeds hereof, whereof to write in 
this place were impertinent to our history.



CHAP. 432. Of Cumin.


Fig. 1526. Garden Cumin

The Description.

This Garden Cumin is a low or base herb of a foot high: the stalk 
divideth itself into divers small branches, whereon do grow little 
jagged leaves very finely cut into small parcels, like those of 
Fennel, but more finely cut, shorter and lesser: the spoky tufts grow 
at the top of the branches and stalks, of a red or purplish colour: 
after which come the seed, of a strong or rank smell, and a biting 
taste: the root is tender, which perisheth when it hath ripened his 
seed.

The Place.

Cumin is husbanded and sown in Italy and Spain, and is very common in 
other hot countries, as in Æthiopia, Egypt, Cilicia, and all the 
lesser Asia.

It delights to grow especially in putrefied and hot soils: I have 
proved the seeds in my garden, where they have brought forth ripe 
seed much fairer and greater than any that cometh from beyond the 
seas.

The Time.

It is to be sown in the middle of the spring; a shower of rain 
presently following doth much hinder the growth thereof, as Ruellius 
saith.

Myself did sow it in the midst of May, which sprung up in six days 
after: and the seed was ripe in the end of July.

The Names. 
It is called in Greek Kuminon emeron, that is, tame or garden Cumin, 
that it may differ from the wild ones: it is named in Latin Cuminum: 
in shops, Cyminum: in High Dutch, Roomische Kymmel: in Italian, 
Comino: in Spanish, Cominchos: in French, Comin: in English, Cumin.

The Temperature.

The seed of garden Cumin, as Galen saith, is hot and dry in the third 
degree: Dioscorides saith that it hath in it also a binding quality.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Cumin scattereth and breaketh all the windiness of the 
stomach, belly, guts, and matrix: it is good against the griping 
torments, gnawing or fretting of the belly, not only received 
inwardly by the mouth, but also in clysters, and outwardly applied to 
the belly with wine and barley meal boiled together to the form of a 
poultice.

B. Being handled according to art, either in a cataplasm, poultice, 
or plaster, or boiled in wine and so applied, it taketh away 
blastings, swellings of the cods or genitals: it consumeth windy 
swellings in the joints, and such like.

C. Being taken in a supping broth it is good for the chest and for 
cold lungs, and such as are oppressed with abundance of raw humours.

D. It stancheth bleeding at the nose, being tempered with vinegar and 
smelt unto.

E. Being quilted in a little bag with some small quantity of bay 
salt, and made hot upon a bedpan with fire or such like, and 
sprinkled with good wine vinegar, and applied to the side very hot, 
it taketh away the stitch and pains thereof, and easeth the pleurisy 
very much.



CHAP. 433. Of Wild Cumin.

Fig. 1527. Wild Cumin (1) Fig. 1528. Codded Wild Cumin (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers plants differing very notably one from another in 
shape, and yet all comprehended under the title of wild Cumin.

The Description.

1. The Wild Cumin hath small white roots with some fibres thereto 
appendant; from the which arise sundry little jagged leaves, 
confining of many lesser leaves, finely dented about the edges, in 
fashion like the smallest leaves of wild Parsnip: among which 
springeth up a slender bending stalk a foot high, like unto Pecten 
veneris, bearing at the top thereof white round and hairy buttons or 
knops, like Arction, as Diorcorides hath right well observed: within 
which knops is contained a tender downy substance, among which is the 
seed, like the seed of Dens leonis, but much lesser.

2. The second kind of Cumin is very like unto the foresaid wild 
Cumin, save that it beareth a number of horned or crooked cods, after 
the manner of Scorpioides, but thicker, and less crooked, and the 
seeds within the cods are severally distinct and separated one from 
another by equal partitions, in small crosses, yellow of colour, & 
somewhat long: the stalks are little and tender, beset with leaves 
much like unto the small leaves of Carvi, or Pecten veneris: and at 
the top of the stalks there do grow pretty yellow flowers, like those 
of great Celandine or Rocket, saving that they be somewhat lesser.


Fig. 1529. Horned Wild Cumin (3) 

3. The third kind of Cumin is very like unto the last before 
mentioned, but the leaves are much greater, more slender, & more 
finely cut or jagged, like the leaves of Seseli of Massilia: among 
which riseth up a stalk a cubit high or somewhat more, very smooth 
and whitish: at the top whereof spring forth fine yellow flowers, not 
like the former, but consisting of six leaves apiece; whereoftwo are 
large, and edged with green on the outside: the other four are small 
ones, and grow two on a side between the two larger leaves: these 
flowers being faded, there succeed crooked cods, greater, and more 
full of knots or divisions than the former, wherein is contained a 
small and flat yellow seed like Galega: the root is long, thick, and 
single.

The Place.

These wild Cumins do grow in Lycia, and Galatia, a province of Asia, 
and in Carthage a city of Spain and in Provençe in France; seldom 
seen in these Northern parts: notwithstanding at the impression 
hereof, the last did flower and flourish in my garden. 

The Time.

They flower in August, and perfect their seed in September.

The Names.

Their names have been touched in their titles in as ample manner as 
hath been set down by any author.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Their temperature and virtues are referred to the garden Cumin; 
notwithstanding I cannot read in any author of their use in physic.



CHAP. 434. Of Fluxweed.


Fig. 1530. Fluxweed (1) 

The Description.

1. Fluxweed hath round and hard stalks, a cubit & a half high, 
whereon do grow leaves most finely cut and divided into innumerable 
fine jags, like those of the sea Wormwood called Seriphium, or 
Absinthium tenuifolium, but much finer and smaller, drawing near unto 
the smallest leaves of Corianders, of an overworn green colour: the 
flowers grow alongst the tops of the spriggy branches, of a dark 
yellow colour: after which come long cods full of small red seeds: 
the root is long, straight, and of a woody substance.

2. The second sort differeth not from the precedent, saving that the 
leaves of this plant are broader, wherein especially consisteth the 
difference; notwithstanding in mine opinion Tabernamontanus found 
this second sort growing in some fertile place, whereby the leaves 
did grow broader and greater, which moved him to make of this a 
second sort, whereas in truth they are both but one and the self-same 
plant.

The Place.

This Fluxweed groweth in most places of England, almost everywhere in 
the ruins of old buildings, by highways, and filthy obscure base 
places.

The Time.

It flowereth and seedeth from June to the end of September.

The Names.

Fluxweed is called Thalietrum; and of some, Thalictrum, but 
unproperly; for Thalictrum belongeth to English Rhubarb: the 
Paracelsians do vaunt and brag very much of an herb called Sophia, 
adding thereto the surname Paracelsi, wherewith they imagine to do 
wonders, whether this be the same plant it is disputable, the 
controversy not as yet decided; nevertheless we must be content to 
accept of this for the true Sophia, until some disciple or other of 
his do show or set forth the plant wherewith their master Paracelsus, 
did such great matters: in English we call it Fluxweed, of his 
faculty against the flux.

The Temperature.

Sophia drieth without any manifest sharpness or heat.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Sophia or Fluxweed drunk with wine, or smith's water, 
stoppeth the bloody flux, the lask, and all other issues of blood.

B. The herb bruised or put into unguents, closeth and healeth ulcers, 
or old sores and wounds, as Paracelsus saith, and that because it 
drieth without acrimony or sharpness.



CHAP. 435. Of the Great Celandine, or Swallow-Wort.

Fig. 1531. Great Celandine (1) Fig. 1532. Great Celandine with more 
cut leaves (2) 
The Description.

1. The great Celandine hath a tender brittle stalk, round, hairy, and 
full of branches, each whereof hath divers knees or knotty joints, 
set with leaves not unlike to those of Columbine, but tenderer and 
deeper cut or jagged, of a greyish green under, and green on the 
other side tending to blueness: the flowers do grow at the top of the 
stalks, of a gold yellow colour, in shape like those of the 
Wallflower: after which come long cods, full of bleak or pale seeds: 
the whole plant is of a strong smell, nothing pleasant, and yieldeth 
a thick juice of a milky substance, of the colour of Saffron: the 
root is thick and knobby, with some threads annexed thereto, which 
being broken or bruised, yieldeth a sap or juice of the colour of 
gold.

2. This other doth not in form and magnitude differ from the former, 
but in the leaves, which are finelier cut and jagged, and somewhat in 
their shape resemble an oaken leaf: the flowers also are a little 
jagged or cut about the edges: and in these two particulars consists 
the whole difference. Clusius calls it Chelidonium maius laciniato 
flore; and Bauhin, Chelidonium maius foliis quernis.

The Place.

It groweth in untilled places, by common waysides, among briars and 
brambles, about old walls, and in the shade, rather than in the sun.

The Time.

It is green all the year, it flowereth from April to a good part of 
summer, the cods are perfected in the meantime.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Chelidonium maius, and Hirundinaria major: 
amongst the apothecaries, Chelidonia: divers miscall it by the name 
Celidonium: it is named in Italian, Celidonia: in Spanish, 
Celiduhenha, Yerva de las golundrinhas: in High Dutch, Grosz 
Scholwurtz: in low Dutch Stinkende Gouwe: in French, Esclere or 
Esclayre, and Celidoine: in English, Celandine, or Great Celandine, 
Swallow-Wort, and Tetterwort.

It is called Celandine, not because it then first springeth at the 
coming in of the Swallows, or dieth when they go away: for as we have 
said, it may be found all the year, but because some hold opinion, 
that with this herb the dams restore sight to their young ones when 
their eyes be out: the which things are vain and false; for Cornelius 
Celsus in his sixth book doth witness, that when the sight of the 
eyes of divers young birds be put forth by same outward means, it 
will after a time be restored of itself, and soonest of all the sight 
of the Swallow, whereupon (as the same author saith) that the tale or 
fable grew, how through an herb the dams restore that thing, which 
healeth of itself: the very same doth Aristotle allege in the sixth 
book Of the History of Living Creatures: The eyes of Swallows (saith 
he) that are not fledged, if a man do prick them out, do grow again, 
and afterwards do perfectly recover their sight.

The Temperature.

The great Celandine is manifestly hot and dry, and that in the third 
degree, and withal scours and cleanseth effectually.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of the herb is good to sharpen the sight, for it 
cleanseth and consumeth away slimy things that cleave about the ball 
of the eye, and hinder the sight, and especially being boiled with 
honey in a brazen vessel, as Dioscorides teacheth.

B. The root cureth the yellow jaundice, which cometh of the stopping 
of the gall, especially when there is no ague adjoined with it, for 
it openeth and delivereth the gall and liver from stoppings.

C. The root being chewed, is reported to be good against the 
toothache.

D. The juice must be drawn forth in the beginning of summer, and 
dried in the sun, saith Dioscorides.

E. The root of Celandine boiled with Anise seed in white wine, 
openeth the stoppings of the liver, and cureth the jaundice very 
safely, as hath been often proved.

F. The root cut in small pieces is good to be given unto hawks 
against sundry diseases, whereunto they are subject, as worms, cray, 
and such like.

G. I have by experience found (saith Clusius) that the juice of the 
great Celandine dropped into small green wounds of what sort soever, 
wonderfuly cures them.



CHAP. 436. Of Coxcomb, or Yellow Rattle.


Fig. 1533. Yellow Rattle, or Coxcomb

The Description.

Crista galli, or Crista gallinacea, hath a straight upright stalk, 
set about with narrow leaves, snipped round about the edges: the 
flowers grow at the top of the stems, of a yellow colour; after which 
come up little flat pouches or purses, covered over or contained 
within a little bladder, or flat skin, open before like the mouth of 
a fish, wherein is contained flat yellowish seed, which being ripe 
and dry, will make a noise or rattling when it is shaken or moved, of 
which property it took the name Yellow Rattle.

The Place.

It groweth in dry meadows and pastures, and is to them a great 
annoyance.

The Time.

It flowereth most part of the summer.

The Names.

It is called in Low Dutch Ratelen, and Geele Ratelen: commonly in 
Latin, Crista Galli, and Gallinacea crista: in English, Coxcomb, 
Penny Grass, Yellow or White Rattle: in High Dutch it is called Geel 
Rodel: in French Creste de Coq: divers take it to be the old writers 
Alectorolophos. Some think it to be the Mimmulus: or as others (& 
that more fitly) read it, Nummulus, mentioned by Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 
28.

The Temperature and Virtues.

But what temperature or virtue this herb is of, men have not as yet 
been careful to know, seeing it is accounted unprofitable.



CHAP. 437. Of Red Rattle, or Lousewort.


Fig. 1534. Lousewort, or Red Rattle

The Description.

Red Rattle (of Dodonæus called Fistularia, and according to the 
opinion & censure of Carolus Clusius, Pena & others, the true 
Alectorolophos) hath very small, rent, or jagged leaves, of a brown 
red colour, and and tender stalks, whereof some lie along trailing 
upon the ground; within very moorish meadows they grow a cubit high 
and more, but in moist and wet heaths, and such like barren grounds 
not above an handful high: the flowers grow round about the stalk, 
from the midst thereof even to the top, and are of a brown red 
colour, in shape like the flowers of Dead Nettle; which being past, 
there succeed little flat pouches, wherein is contained flat and 
black seed, in show very like unto the former: the root is small, 
white, and tender.

The Place.

It groweth in moist and moorish meadows, the herb is not only 
unprofitable, but also hurtful, and an infirmity of the meadows.

The Time.

It is found with his flowers and stalks in May and June.

The Names.

It is called in High Dutch, Braun Rodel: in Latin, Pedicularis, of 
the effect, because it filleth sheep and other cattle that feed in 
meadows where this groweth full of lice: divers of the later 
Herbarists call it Fistularia: of some, Crista Galli: and divers take 
it to be Mimmulus herba: in English, Rattle-grass, Red Rattle-grass 
and Lousewort.

The Temperature.

It is cold and dry and astringent.

The Virtues.

A. It is held to be good for fistulas and hollow ulcers, and to stay 
the overmuch flowing of the menses, or any other flux of blood, if it 
be boiled in red wine and drunk.



CHAP. 438. Of Yarrow, or Nose-Bleed.

Fig. 1535. Common Yarrow (1) Fig. 1536. Red-Flowered Yarrow (2) 
The Description.


1. Common Yarrow hath very many stalks coming up a cubit high, round, 
and somewhat hard: about which stand long leaves, cut in the sides 
sundry wise, and as it were made up of many small jagged leaves, 
every one of which seem to come near to the slender leaves of 
Coriander: there stand at the top tufts or spoked roundels: the 
flowers whereof are either white or purple, which being rubbed do 
yield a strong smell, but unpleasant; the root sendeth down many 
strings.

2. The second kind of Milfoil or Yarrow hath stalks, leaves and roots 
like unto the former, saving that his spoky tufts are of an excellent 
fair red or crimson colour, and being a little rubbed in the hand, of 
a reasonable good savour.

The Place.

The first groweth everywhere in dry pastures and meadows: Red Milfoil 
groweth in a field by Sutton in Kent called Holly-Deane, from whence 
I brought those plants that do grow in my garden; but it is not 
common everywhere as the other is.


The Time. 

They flower from May to the end of October.

The Names.

Yarrow is called of the Latin herbarists Millefolium: it is 
Dioscorides his Achilleos: in Latin, Achillea, and Achillea 
sideritis; which thing he may very plainly see that will compare with 
that description which Dioscorides hath set down: this was found out, 
saith Pliny in his 25th book, chap. 5, by Achilles, Chiron's 
disciple, which for that cause is named Achilleios: of others, 
Sideritis: among us, Millefolium: yet be there other Sideritides and 
also another Panaces heracleion whereof we will treat in another 
place: Apuleius setteth down divers names hereof, some of which are 
also found among the bastard names in Dioscorides: in Latin it is 
called Militaris, Supercilium veneris, Acrum, or Acorum sylvaticum: 
of the Frenchmen, Millefeuille: in High Dutch, Garben, Scharffgras: 
in Low Dutch, Geruwe: in Italian, Millefoglio: in Spanish, Milhoyas 
yerva: in English, Yarrow, Nosebleed, Common Yarrow, Red Yarrow, and 
Milfoil.

The Temperature.

Yarrow, as Galen saith, is not unlike in temperature to the 
Sideritides, or Ironworts, that is to say, cleansing, and meanly 
cold, but it most of all bindeth.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Yarrow do close up wounds, and keep them from 
inflammation, or fiery swelling: it stancheth blood in any part of 
the body, and it is likewise put into baths for women to sit in: it 
stoppeth the lask, and being drunk it helpeth the bloody flux.

B. Most men say that the leaves chewed, and especially green, are a 
remedy for the toothache.

C. The leaves being put into the nose, do cause it to bleed, and ease 
the pain of the megrim.

D. It cureth the inward excorations of the yard of a man, coming by 
reason of pollutions or extreme flowing of the seed, although the 
issue do cause inflammation and swelling of those secret parts, and 
though the spermatic matter do come down in great quantity, if the 
juice be injected with a syringe, or the decoction. This hath been 
proved by a certain friend of mine, sometime a Fellow of Kings 
College in Cambridge, who lightly bruised the leaves of common 
Yarrow, with hog's grease, and applied it warm unto the privy parts, 
and thereby did divers times help himself, and others of his fellows, 
when he was a student and a single man living in Cambridge.

E. One dram in powder of the herb given in wine, presently taketh 
away the pains of the colic.



CHAP. 439. Of Yellow Yarrow, or Milfoil.

Fig. 1537. Yellow Yarrow (1) Fig. 1538. Achilles' Yarrow (2) 
The Description.

1. Yellow Yarrow is a small plant seldom above a span high: the 
stalks whereof are covered with long leaves, very finely cut in the 
edges like feathers in the wings of little birds: the tufts or spoky 
roundels bring forth yellow flowers, of the same shape and form of 
the common Yarrow: the root consisteth of thready strings.

2. Achilles' Yarrow, or Noble Milfoil, hath a thick and tough root, 
with strings fastened thereto: from which immediately rise up divers 
stalks, very green and crested, whereupon do grow long leaves 
composed of many small jags, cut even to the middle rib: the flowers 
stand on the top of the stalks with spoky umbels or tufts, of a 
whitish colour, and pleasant smell.

The Place.

These kinds of Yarrow are seldom found: they grow in a fat and 
fruitful soil, and sometimes in meadows, and are strangers in 
England.

The Time.

They flower from May until August.

The Names.

Dioscorides' description doth sufficiently declare, that this herb is 
Stratiotes millefolium: the height of the herb showeth it, the form 
of the leaves agree; there is some ambiguity or doubt in the colour 
of the flowers, which Dioscorides describeth to be white, as the 
vulgar copies have; but Andreas Lacuna addeth out of the old book, of 
a yellow colour: it is named of the later age, Millefolium minus, or 
little Yarrow, and Millefolium luteum, yellow Yarrow, or Nose-bleed: 
the apothecaries and common people know it not.

The Temperature.

Yarrow is meanly cold and somewhat binding.

The Virtues.

A. It is a principal herb for all kind of bleedings, and to heal up 
new and old ulcers and green wounds: there be some, saith Galen, that 
use it for fistulas.

B. This plant Achillea is thought to be the very same wherewith 
Achilles cured the wounds of his soldiers, as before in the former 
chapter.



CHAP. 440. Of Valerian, or Setwall.


Fig. 1539. Kinds of Valerian (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The tame or garden Valerian hath his first leaves long, broad, 
smooth, green, and undivided; and the leaves upon the stalks greater, 
longer, and deeply gashed on either side, like the leaves of the 
greater Parsnip, but yet lesser: the stalk is above a cubit high, 
smooth, and hollow, with certain joints far distant one from another: 
out of which joints grow forth a couple of leaves, and in the tops of 
the stalks upon spoky roundels and flowers heaped together, which are 
small, opening themselves out of a long little narrow neck; of colour 
whitish, and sometimes withal of a light red: the root is an inch 
thick, growing aslope, fastened on the upper part of the earth by a 
multitude of strings, the most part of it standing out of the ground, 
of a pleasant sweet smell when it is broken.

2. The greater wild Valerian hath leaves divided and jagged, as those 
of the former; those about the stalk hereof are also smooth, hollow, 
and jointed, and above a cubit high: the flowers stand on spoky 
roundels like to those of the former, but of a light purple colour: 
the roots are slender, and full of strings and small threads, not 
altogether without smell.

3. The other wild one is much like in form to the garden Valerian, 
but far lesser: the first leaves thereof be undivided, the other are 
parted and cut in sunder: the stalks a span long: the flowers which 
stand on spoky roundels are like to those of the others, of a light 
whitish purple colour: the roots be slender, growing aslope, 
creeping, and full of fine small threads, of little smell.

4. There is a small Valerian growing upon rocks and stony places, 
that is like unto the last described, saving it is altogether less. 
The stalk is some half foot high, and strait, dividing itself into 
branches toward the top, and that always by couples: the bottom 
leaves are whole, the top leaves much divided, the flowers are small, 
of a whitish purple colour, parted into five, and standing upon round 
rough heads, which when the flowers are fallen, become star-
fashioned, divided into six parts: it flowers in June, and is an 
annual plant.

Fig. 1540. Greek Valerian (5) Fig. 1541. Indian Valerian (6) 	5. 
The fifth sort of Valerian hath divers small hollow stalks, a foot 
high and somewhat more, garnished with leaves like unto those that do 
grow on the upper part of the stalks of common Valerian, but smaller, 
cut or jagged almost to the middle rib: at the top of the stalks do 
grow the flowers clustering together, of a blue colour, consisting of 
five leaves apiece, having in the middle thereof small white threads 
tipped with yellow: the seed is small, growing in little husks or 
seed vessels: the root is nothing else but as it were all of threads.

6. I have another sort of Valerian (the seed whereof was sent me from 
that reverend physician Bernard Paludane, under the title of 
Valeriana mexicana:) having small tender stalks trailing upon the 
ground, very weak and brittle: whereupon do grow smooth greenish 
leaves like those of Corn Salad (which we have set forth amongst the 
Lettuce, under the title Lactuca agnina, or Lambs' Lettuce:) among 
the leaves come forth the flowers clustering together, like unto the 
great Valerian in form, but of a deep purple colour: the root is very 
small and thready, which perisheth with the rest of the plant, when 
it hath brought his seed to maturity or ripeness, and must be sown 
anew the next year in May, and not before.

7. There is also another sort or kind of Valerian called by the name 
Phyteuma, of the learned physicians of Montpellier and others (set 
forth under the stock or kindred of the Valerians, resembling the 
aforesaid Corn Salad, which is called of some Prolifera, from the 
Greek title Phyteuma, as if you should say, good to make conception, 
and to procure love:) the lowest leaves are like those of the small 
Valerian, of a yellowish colour: the upper leaves become more jagged: 
the stalks are an handful high: on the tops whereof do stand small 
round spoky tufts of white flowers,; which being past, the seeds 
appear like small round pearls, which being ripe, grow to be somewhat 
flat, having in the middle of each seed the print of an hole, as it 
were graven or bored therein. The root is small and single, with some 
fibres annexed thereto.

Fig. 1542. Annual Valerian (8) Fig. 1543. Broad-Leaved Alpine 
Valerian (9) 	8. This sends forth from a white and woody root many 
leaves spread upon the ground; green, and not unlike those of the 
Star-Thistle: among these rise up some round hollow branched stalks 
two cubits high: at each joint grow forth two leaves lesser, yet like 
the lower: at the tops of the branches grow the flowers as it were in 
little umbels, consisting of five leaves piece; and these of a light 
red, or flesh colour: and then these as it were umbels grow into 
longish branches bearing seed almost like, yet less than the red 
Valerian: it flowers in July, and perisheth when it hath ripened the 
seed. Clusius hath set this forth by the name of Valeriana annua 
altera.

9. The same author hath also given us the history of some other 
plants of this kind; and this he calls Valeriana sylvatica alpina 
latifolia; the stalk hereof is some foot high, round, green, and 
crested: upon which stand leaves sharp pointed, and cut in with two 
or three deep gashes: but the bottom leaves are more round and 
larger, coming near to these of Trachelium, yet lesser, slenderer, 
and bitter of taste: the flowers which are white of colour, and the 
seed, are like those of the other Valerians: the root is small, 
creeping, fibrous, white and aromatic; it grows upon the Alps, and 
flowers in June and July.


Fig. 1544. Small Alpine Valerain (10) 

10. This sends forth leaves like those of the Mountain Daisy: out of 
the midst of which riseth up a stalk four foot high, jointed, and at 
the top divided into little branches, carrying white flowers like the 
other Valerians: the root is as aromatic as that of the last 
mentioned; and grows in the chinks of the Alpine rocks, where it 
flowers in June and July. Clusius hath it by the name of Valeriana 
sylvestris alpina 2. Saxatilis.

The Place.

The first and likewise the Greek Valerian are planted in gardens; the 
wild ones are found in moist places hard to rivers' sides, ditches, 
and watery pits; yet the greater of these is brought into gardens 
where it flourisheth, but the lesser hardly prospereth.

The Time.

These flower in May, June, and July, and most of the summer months.

The Names.

Generally the Valerians are called by one name, in Latin, Valeriana: 
in Greek, Phu: in shops also Phu, which for the most part is meant by 
the garden Valerian, that is called in Latin, Sylvestris, or Rustica 
Nardus: of Pliny, Nardus cretica: which names are rather referred to 
those of the next chapter, although these be reckoned as wild kinds 
thereof: of certain in our age, Marinella, Amantilla, Valentiana, 
Genicularis, Herba Benedicta, and Theriacaria: in most shops, 
Valeriana domestica: of Theophrastus Paracelsus, Pardina: in High 
Dutch, Grosz baldrian: in low Dutch, Speercruyt, S. Joris Cruyt, and 
Valeriane: in English, Valerian, Capon's Tail, and Setwall; but 
unproperly, for that name belongeth to Zedoaria, which is not 
Valerian: what hath been set down in the titles shall serve for the 
distinctions of the other kinds.

The Temperature.

The garden Valerian is hot, as Dioscorides saith, but not much, 
neither the green root, but the dried ones; for the green is easily 
perceived to have very little heat, and the dried to be hotter, which 
is found by the taste and smell.

The Virtues.

A. The dry root, as Dioscorides teacheth, provoketh urine, bringeth 
down the desired sickness, helpeth the pain in the sides, and is put 
into counterpoisons and medicines preservative against the 
pestilence, as are treacles, mithridates, and such like: whereupon it 
hath been had (and is to this day among the poor people of our 
Northern parts) in such veneration amongst them, that no broths, 
pottage, or physical meats are worth anything, if Setwall were not at 
an end: whereupon some woman poet or other hath made these verses;

They that will have their heal;
Must put Setwall in their keel.

B. It is used generally in slight cuts, wounds, and small hurts.

C. The extraction of the roots given, is a most singular medicine 
against the difficulty of making water, and the yellow Jaundice.

D. Wild Valerian is thought of the later herbarists to be good for 
them that are bursten, for such as be troubled with the cramp and 
other convulsions, and also for all those that are bruised with 
falls.

E. The leaves of these and also those of the garden, are good against 
ulcers and soreness of the mouth and gums, if the decoction thereof 
be gargarized or held in the mouth.

F. Some hold opinion that the roots of wild Valerian dried and 
powdered, and a dram weight thereof taken with wine, do purge upward 
and downward.






CHAP. 441. Of Mountain Setwall, or Nardus.


Fig. 1545. Celtic Spikenard (1) 

The Description.

1. The Nardus named celtica, but now by some, ligustica flourisheth 
in high mountains. The Vallesians in their mother tongue call it 
Selliga; whence Gesner thought it to be Saliunca; neither do I doubt, 
but that it is the same which Virgil speaketh of in these verses:

Puniceis humilis quantum Saliunca roseis
Iudicio nostro tantum tibi cedit Amintas.
["As far as the lowly Celtic nard yields to roses,
So far, I judge, does Amintas yield to you."
Virgil, Eclogues, V.]

For it is a very little herb creeping on the ground, and afterward 
lifting up itself with a stalk of a handful high, whereupon from the 
lower part grow small thin leaves, first green, but afterwards 
somewhat yellowish: upon the roughness of the root there are many 
scales, plaited one upon another; but under the root there are many 
brown strings and hairy threads, in smell like the roots of 
Astrabacca, or rather the wild mountain Valerian, whereof it seems to 
be a kind, in taste sharp and bitter. The flowers grow along the 
upper branches, white or yellowish, and very small.

2. The second sort of Spikenard hath many thready roots, from the 
which rise up many scaly rough and thick stalks, having at the top 
certain flat hoary leaves growing upon small and tender footstalks. 
The whole plant is of a pleasant sweet smell.


Fig. 1546. Urinewort (3) 

3. Hirculus is a plant very rare, which as yet I never saw, 
notwithstanding we are greatly beholden to Carolus Clusius the father 
of foreign simples, who finding this plant among many bunches or 
handfuls of mountain Spikenard, hath made it known unto posterity: as 
he hath done many other rare plants, in translating of Garcias the 
Lusitanian physician, he setteth it forth with a light description, 
saying, It is a base and low herb two handfuls high, bringing forth 
leaves without any stalks at all, very hairy about the root, and 
blackish, having no pleasant scent at all. The leaves chewed yield no 
aromatic taste; but are clammy, or viscid; whereas the leaves of 
Celtic Nard are hot, with a little astriction, and of a pleasant 
smell and taste.



Fig. 1547. Mountain Spikenard (4) at firstFig. 1548. Mountain 
Spikenard (4) 	4. Mountain Spikenard hath a great thick knobbed 
root, set here and there with some tender fibres, of a pleasant sweet 
smell; from the which come forth three or four smooth broad leaves, 
and likewise jagged leaves deeply cut even to the middle rib: among 
which rise up naked stalks, garnished in the middle with a tuft of 
jagged leaves. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, in an umbel 
or tuft like those of the wild Valerian in shape and colour, and such 
also is the seed. I have given you the figure of the root and whole 
leaves as they show themselves when they first appear, as it was 
taken by Clusius.

Fig. 1549. Indian Spikenard (5) Fig. 1550. French Spikenard (6) 	5. 
The Spikenard of India is a low plant, growing close unto the ground, 
composed of many rough brown hairy cloves, of a strong, yet not 
unpleasant smell. The root is small and thready. It hath certainly 
stalks, flowers, and seeds, but none of our Indian writers or 
travellers have as yet described them. I have seen little pieces of 
slender hollow stalks some two inches long fastened to the roots that 
are brought to us.

6. This French Spikenard, being a bastard kind, groweth close upon 
the ground like the precedent, compact of scaly rough leaves: in the 
middle whereof cometh forth a great bush of round green stiff and 
rushy leaves: among the which shoot up divers round stalks a cubit 
high, set from the middle to the top with greenish little cods, 
standing in chaffy husks like those of Schnanth. The root is small 
and thready: the whole plant is altogether without smell, which 
showeth it to b a bastard kind of Spikenard.

The Place.

These plants [the first four] are strangers in England, growing in 
great plenty upon the mountains of Iudenberg and Helvetia, on the 
rocks among the moss, and in the mountains of Tirol and Salzburg.

The first and second, if my memory fail me not, do grow in a field in 
the North part of England, called Crag Close, and in the foot of the 
mountain called Ingleborough Fells. The fourth may be found in some 
gardens with us. The fifth grows in the East Indies, in the provinces 
of Mandou and Chito in the kingdom of Bengal and Deccan. The last 
grows in Provençe in France, near a little city called Ganges.

The Time.

The leaves grow to withering in September, at which time they smell 
more pleasantly than when they flourished and were green.

The Names.

Nardus is called in Pannonia or Hungary, of the country people, 
Speick: of some, Bechi fiu; that is, the herb of Vienna, because it 
doth grow there in great abundance, from whence it is brought into 
other countries: of Gesner, Saliunca: in English, Celtic Spikenard: 
of the Vallesians, Selliga, and Nardus celtica.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Celtic Nard mightily provokes urine, as recordeth Rondeletius; who 
travelling through the desert country, chanced to lodge in a 
monastery where was a canon that could not make his water, but was 
presently helped by the decoction of this herb, through the advice of 
the said Rondeletius.

B. The true Spikenard or Indian Nard hath a heating and drying 
faculty, being (according to Galen) hot in the first degree [yet the 
Greek copy hath the third] and dry in the second. It is composed of a 
sufficiently astringent substance, and not much acrid heat, and a 
certain light bitterness. Consisting of these faculties, according to 
reason, both inwardly and outwardly used it is convenient for the 
liver and stomach.

C. It provoketh urine, helps the gnawing pains of the stomach, dries 
up the defluxions that trouble the belly and entrails, as also those 
that molest the head and breast.

D. It stays the fluxes of the belly, and those of the womb, being 
used in a pessary, and in a bath it helps the inflammation thereof.

E. Drunk in cold water, it helps the nauseousness, gnawings, and 
windiness of the stomach, the liver, and the diseases of the kidneys, 
and it is much used to be put into antidotes.

F. It is good to cause hair to grow on the eyelids of such as want 
it, and is good to be strewed up on any part of the body that abounds 
with superfluous moisture, to dry it up.

G. The Celtic Nard is good for all the forementioned uses, but of 
less efficacy, unless in the provoking of urine. It is also much used 
in antidotes.

H. The mountain Nard hath also the same faculties, but is much weaker 
than the former, and not in use at this day that I know of.



CHAP. 442. Of Lark's Heel or Larkspur.


Fig. 1551. Kinds of Larkspur (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The Garden Larkspur hath a round stem full of branches, set with 
tender jagged leaves very like unto the small Southernwood: the 
flowers grow alongst the stalks toward the tops of the branches, of a 
blue colour, consisting of five little leaves which grow together and 
make one hollow flower, having a tail or spur at the end turning in 
like the spur of Toadflax. After come the seed, very black, like 
those of Leeks: the root perisheth at the first approach of winter.

2. The second Larkspur is like the precedent, but somewhat smaller in 
stalks and leaves; the flowers are also like in form, but of a white 
colour, wherein especially is the difference. These flowers are 
sometimes of a purple colour, sometimes white, murrey, carnation, and 
of sundry other colours, varying infinitely, according to the soil or 
country wherein they live.

3. Larkspur with double flowers hath leaves, stalks, roots, and seeds 
like the other single kind, but the flowers of this are double; and 
hereof there are as many several varieties as there be of the single 
kind, to wit, white, red, purple, blush, &c.

4. There is also another variety of this plant, which hath taller 
stalks and larger leaves than the common kind: the flowers also are 
more double and larger, with a lesser heel: this kind also yieldeth 
usually less seed than the former. The colour of the flower is as 
various as that of the former, being either blue, purple, white, red, 
or blush, and sometimes mixed of some of these.

Fig. 1552. Wild Larkspur (4) 

5. The wild Larkspur hath most fine jagged leaves, cut and hacked 
into divers parts, confusedly set upon a small middle tendril: among 
which grow the flowers, in shape like the others, but a great deal 
lesser, sometimes purple, otherwhiles white, and often of a mixed 
colour. The root is small and thready.
The Place.

These plants are set and sown in gardens: the last groweth wild in 
corn fields, and where corn hath grown, but not with us, that I have 
yet observed; though it be frequently found in such places in many 
parts of Germany.

The Time.

They flower for the most part all summer long, from June to the end 
of August and oft-times after.

The Names.

Lark's Heel is called Flos regius: of divers, Consolida regalis; who 
make it one of the Confounds or Comfreys. It is also thought to be 
the Delphinium which Dioscorides describes in his third book; 
wherewith it may agree. It is reported by Gerardus of Veltwijcke, who 
remained lieger with the great Turk from the Emperor Charles the 
Fifth, that the said Gerardus saw at Constantinople a copy which had 
in the chapter of Delphinium, not leaves but flowers like dolphins: 
for the flowers, and especially before they be perfected, have a 
certain show and likeness of those dolphins, which old pictures and 
arms of certain ancient families have expressed with a crooked and 
bending figure or shape; by which sign also the heavenly dolphin is 
set forth. And it skilleth not, though the chapter of Delphinium be 
thought to be falsified and counterfeited; for although it be some 
other man's, and not of Dioscorides, it is notwithstanding some one 
of the old writers, out of whom it is taken, and foisted into 
Dioscorides his books: of some it is called Bucinus, or Bucinum: in 
English, Larkspur, Lark's Heel, Lark's Toes, and Lark's Claw: in High 
Dutch, Ridder spooren, that is, Equitis calcar, Knight's spur: in 
Italian, Sperone: in French, Pied d'alouette.

The Temperature.

These herbs are temperate and warm of nature.

The Virtues.

A. We find little extant of the virtues of Lark's Heel, either in the 
ancient or later writers, worth the noting, or to be credited; for it 
is set down, that the seed of Larkspur drunken is good against the 
stingings of scorpions; whose virtues are so forcible, that the herb 
only thrown before the scorpion or any other venomous beast causeth 
them to be without force or strength to hurt, insomuch that they 
cannot move or stir until the herb be taken away: with many other 
such trifling toys not worth the reading.



CHAP. 443. Of Gith, or Nigella.


Fig. 1553. Kinds of Nigella (1-4) 

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Gith or Nigella, differing some in the 
colour of the flowers, others in the doubleness thereof, and in smell 
of the seed.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Nigella hath weak and brittle stalks of the 
height of a foot, full of branches, beset with leaves very much cut 
or jagged, resembling the leaves of Fumitory, but much greener: the 
flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a whitish blue colour, 
each flower being parted into five small leaves, star fashion: the 
flowers being faded, there come up small knobs or heads, having at 
the end thereof five or six little sharp horns or pointels, and every 
knob or head is divided into sundry small cells or partitions, 
wherein the seed is contained, which is of a blackish colour, very 
like unto onion seed, in taste sharp, and of an excellent sweet 
savour.

2. The wild Nigella hath a streaked stalk a foot or more high, beset 
full of greyish leaves, very finely jagged, almost like the leaves of 
Dill: the flowers are like the former, save that they are bluer: the 
cods or knops are like the heads or husks of Columbines, wherein is 
contained the sweet and pleasant seed, like the former.

3. The third kind of Nigella, which is both fair and pleasant, called 
Damask Nigella, is very like unto the wild Nigella in his small cut 
and jagged leaves, but his stalk is longer: the flowers are like the 
former, but greater, and every flower hath five small green leaves 
under him, as it were to support and bear him up: which flowers being 
gone, there succeed and follow knops and seed like the former, but 
without smell or savour.

4. This in the smallness, and shape of the leaves and the manner of 
growing is like to the last described, having small leaves growing 
under the flower, which is not single, as in the last described, but 
double, consisting of five or more ranks of little bluish leaves, 
which are succeeded by such cornered heads as those of the former, 
having in them a black seed without any manifest smell.

Fig. 1554. Damask Nigella (5) Fig. 1555. Great Spanish Nigella (6) 

5. The fifth kind of Nigella hath many small and slender stalks, set 
full of slender and thin leaves deeply cut or jagged, of a faint 
yellowish green colour: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of 
a whitish colour, and exceeding double: which being faded, there 
succeed bowls or knobs, full of sweet black seed like the former: the 
root is small and tender.

6. The root of this is slender, and yellowish; the stalk some cubit 
high, round, green, crested, and toward the top divided into sundry 
branches, the leaves toward the bottom are somewhat small cut, but 
somewhat larger upon the stalks. The flower is much larger than any 
of the former, composed of five leaves, of a light blue above, and 
somewhat whitish underneath, with large veins running about them: in 
the middle stands up the head, encompassed with black threads, and 
some 7 or 8 little gaping bluish flowers at the bottoms of them; the 
leaves of the flowers decaying, the head becomes bigger, having at 
the tops thereof 6, 7, or 8 longish twined horns growing in a star 
fashion; the inside is parted into cells containing a yellowish 
green, or else blackish seed. It is set forth in the Hortus 
Eystettensis by the name of Melanthium hispanicum maius; by Mr. 
Parkinson it is called Nigella hispanica flore simplici; and Bauhin 
in his Prodromus hath it by the name of Nigella latifolia flore 
maiore simplici cæruleo. It is an annual plant, and flowers in July; 
it is sometimes to be found in the gardens of our florists.

The Place.

The tame are sown in gardens: the wild ones do grow of themselves 
among corn and other grain, in divers countries beyond the seas.

The Time.

The seed must be sown in April: it flowereth in July and August.

The Names.

Gith is called in Greek and Latin Melanthium: in shops, Nigella, and 
Nigella romana: of divers, Gith, and Salusandria, and some among the 
former bastard names, Papaver nigrum: in High Dutch, Swartzkymmich: 
in low Dutch Nardus saet: in Italian, Nigella: in Spanish, Axenuz, 
Alipiure: in French, Nielle odorante: in English Gith, and Nigella 
Romana, in Cambridgeshire, Bishop's Wort: and also Divæ Catherinæ 
flos, Saint Katharine's flower.

The Temperature.

The seed of the garden Nigella is hot and dry in the third degree, 
and of thin parts.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Nigella romana drunk with wine is a remedy against the 
shortnes of breath, dissolveth and putteth forth windiness, provoketh 
urine, the menses, increaseth milk in the breasts of nurses if it be 
drunk moderately, otherwise it is not only hurtful to them, but to 
any that take thereof too often or in too great a quantity.

B. The seed killeth and driveth forth worms, whether it be taken with 
wine or water, or laid to the navel in manner of a plaster.

C. The oil that is drawn forth thereof hath the same property.

D. The seed parched or dried at the fire, brought into powder, and 
wrapped in a piece of fine lawn or sarsenet, cureth all murrs, 
catarrhs, rheums and the pose, drieth the brain, and restoreth the 
sense of smelling unto those which have lost it; being often smelled 
unto from day to day, and made warm at the fire when it is used.

E. It takes away freckles, scurfs, and hard swellings, being laid on 
mixed with vinegar. To be brief, as Galen saith, it is a most 
excellent remedy where there is need of cleansing, drying, and 
heating.

F. It serveth well among other sweets to put into sweet waters, bags, 
and odoriferous powders.



CHAP. 444. Of Cockle.


Fig. 1556. Cockle

The Description.

Cockle is a common and hurtful weed in our corn, and very well known 
by the name of Cockle, which Pena calleth Pseudomelanthium, and 
Nigellastrum, by which names Dodonæus and Fuchsius also term it; 
Mutonus calleth it Lolium; and Tragus calleth it Lychnoides segetum. 
This plant hath straight, slender, and hairy stems, garnished with 
hairy and greyish leaves, which grow together by couples, enclosing 
the stalk round about; the flowers are of a purple colour, declining 
to redness, consisting of five small leaves, in proportion very like 
to wild Campions; when the flowers be faded there follow round knops 
or heads full of blackish seed, like unto the seed of Nigella, but 
without any smell or savour at all.

The Place and Time.

The place of his growing, and time of his flowering, are better known 
then desired.

The Names.

Cockle is called Pseudomelanthium, and Nigellastrum, wild or bastard 
Nigella: of Fuchsius, Lolium: of Mouton, Lychnoides segetum: of 
Tragus, Githago: in High Dutch, Kornegele: in Low Dutch, Korn Roosen: 
in French, Nielle des Bledz: in English, Cockle, Field Nigella, or 
Wild Nigella: in Italian, Githone; whereupon most herbarists being 
moved with the likeness of the word, have thought it to be the true 
Gith or Melanthium; but how far they are deceived it is better known, 
than needful to be confuted: for it doth not only differ in leaves 
from the true Gith, but also in other properties, and yet it is 
called Gith or Melanthium, and that is of the blackeness of the seed; 
yet not properly, but with a certain addition, that it may differ 
from the true Melanthium: for Hippocrates calleth it Melanthium ex 
Tritico, of Wheat: Octavius Hortianus calleth that Gith which groweth 
among Corn: and for the same cause it is named of the learned of this 
our time Nigellastrum, Gigatho, and Pseudomelanthium: Ruellis saith 
it is called in French Niele, and Flos micancalus.

The Temperature.

The seed of Cockle is hot and dry in the later end of the second 
degree.

The virtues.

A. The seed made in a pessary or mother suppository, with honey put 
up, bringeth down the desired sickness, as Hippocrates in his book Of 
Women's Diseases doth witness.

B. Octavianus Hortianus giveth the seed parched and beaten to powder 
to be drunk against the yellow jaundice.

C. Some ignorant people have used the seed hereof for the seed of 
Darnel, to the great danger of those who have received the same: what 
hurt it doth among corn; the spoil unto bread, as well in colour, 
taste, and unwholesomness, is better known than desired.



CHAP. 445. Of Fumitory.


Fig. 1557. Kinds of Fumitory (1-4) 

The Kinds.

There be divers herbs comprehended under the title of Fumitory; some 
wild, and others of the garden; some with bulbous or tuberous roots, 
and others with fibrous or thready roots: and first of those whose 
roots are nothing but strings.

The Description

1. Fumitory is a very tender little herb: the stalks thereof are 
slender, having as it were little knots or joints full of branches, 
that scarce grow up from the ground without proppings, but for the 
most part they grow sidelong: the leaves round about are small, cut 
on the edges as those of Coriander, which as well as the stalks are 
of a whitish green: the flowers be made up in clusters at the tops of 
the small branches, of a red purple colour: then rise up husks, round 
and little, in which lieth the small seed: the root is slender, and 
groweth straight down. This is also found with flowers of a purple 
violet colour, and also sometimes with them white.

2. The second kind of Fumitory hath many small long and tender 
branches, whereupon grow little leaves, commonly set together by 
threes or fours, in colour and taste like unto the former; having at 
the top of the branches many small clasping tendrils, with which it 
taketh hold upon hedges, bushes, and whatsoever groweth next unto it: 
the flowers are small, and clustering together, of a white colour, 
with a little spot in their middles; after which succeed cods 
containing the seed: the root is single, and of a finger's length.

3. The third kind of Fumitory hath a very small root, consisting of 
divers little strings; from which arise small and tender branches 
trailing here and there upon the ground, beset with many small and 
tender leaves most finely cut and jagged, like the little leaves of 
Dill, of a deep green colour tending to blueness: the flowers stand 
on the tops of the branches, in bunches or clusters thick thrust 
together, like those of the Meadow Cleaver, or Three-Leaved Grass, of 
a most bright red colour, and very beautiful to behold: the root is 
very small and thread.

4. The yellow Fumitory hath many crambling thready roots, somewhat 
thick, gross, and fat, like those of Asparagus: from which rise 
divers upright stalks a cubit high, dividing themselves toward the 
top into other smaller branches whereon are confusedly placed leaves 
like those of Thalictrum, or English Rhubarb, but lesser and thinner: 
alongst the tops of the branches grow yellow flowers, resembling 
those of Sage: which being past, there followeth small seed like unto 
dust.

The Place.

The Fumitories grow in corn fields among Barley and other grain; in 
vineyards, gardens, and such like manured places. I found the second 
and third growing in a corn field between a small village called 
Charlton and Greenwich.

The Time.

Fumitory is found with his flower in the beginning of May, and so 
continues to the end of summer. When it is in flower is the best time 
to gather it to keep dry, or to distil.

The Names.

Fumitory is called in Greek Kapnos, Kapnios, and often Kapnitos: in 
Latin, Fumaria: of Pliny, Capnos: in shops, Fumus terræ: in High 
Dutch, Erdtrauch: in Low Dutch, Grijsecom, Duyven Kernel: in Spanish, 
Palomilha: in French and English, Fumiterre.

The Temperature.

Fumitory is not hot, as some have thought it to be, but cold and 
something dry; it openeth and cleanseth by urine.

The Virtues.

A. It is good for all them that have either scabs or any other filth 
growing on the skin, and for them also that have the French disease.

B. It removeth stoppings from the liver and spleen: it purifieth the 
blood, and is oft times good for them that have a quartan ague.

C. The decoction of the herb is used to be given, or else the syrup 
that is made of the juice: the distilled water thereof is also 
profitable against the purposes aforesaid.

D. It is oftentimes boiled in whey, and in this manner it helpeth in 
the end of the spring and in summertime those that are troubled with 
scabs.

E. Paulus Ægineta saith that it plentifully provoketh urine, and 
taketh away the stoppings of the liver, and feebleness thereof; that 
it strengtheneth the stomach, and maketh the belly soluble.

F. Dioscorides affirmeth, that the juice of Fumitory, of that which 
groweth among Barley, as Ægineta addeth, with gum Arabic, doth take 
away unprofitable hairs that prick the eyes, growing upon the 
eyelids, the hairs that prick being first plucked away, for it will 
not suffer others to grow in their places.

G. The decoction of Fumitory drunken driveth forth by urine and siege 
all hot choleric burnt and hurtful humours, and is a most singular 
digester of salt and pituitous humours.



CHAP. 446. Of Bulbous Fumitory, or Hollow-Root.

Fig. 1558. Great Purple Hollow-Root (1) Fig. 1559. Great White 
Hollow-Root (2) 
The Description.

1. The leaves of Great Hollow-Root are jagged and cut in sunder, as 
be those of Coriander, of a light greenish colour, that is to say, 
like the grey colour of the leaves of Columbine, whereunto they be 
also in form like, but lesser: the stalks be smooth, round, and 
slender, an handful long; about which, on the upper part stand little 
flowers orderly placed, long, with a little horn at the end like the 
flowers of Toad-Flax, of a light red tending to a purple colour: the 
seed lieth in flat cods, very soft and greenish when it is ready to 
yield up his black shining ripe seed: the root is bumped or bulbous, 
hollow within, and on the upper part pressed down somewhat flat, 
covered over with a dark yellow skin or bark, with certain strings 
fastened thereto, and of a bitter and austere taste.

2. The second is like unto the first in each respect, saving that it 
bringeth flowers of a white colour, and the other not so.

3. The Small Purple Hollow-Root hath roots, leaves, stalks, flowers, 
and seeds like the precedent, the especial difference is, that this 
plant is somewhat less.

4. The Small White Hollow-Root likewise agreeth with the former in 
each respect, saving that this plant bringeth white flowers, and the 
other not so.

5. This kind of Hollow-Root is also like the last described, saving 
that the flowers thereof are mixed with purple and white, which 
maketh it to differ from the others.

6. There is no difference in this, that can possibly be 
distinguished, from the last described, saving that the flowers 
hereof are of a mixed colour, white and purple, with some yellow in 
the hollowness of the same, wherein consisteth the difference from 
the precedent.

7. This thin leaved Hollow-Root hath likewise an hollow root, covered 
over with a yellow pilling, of the bigness of a tennis ball: from 
which shoot up leaves spread upon the ground, very like unto the 
leaves of Columbines, as well in form as colour, but much thinner, 
more jagged, and altogether lesser: among which rise up snall tender 
stalks, weak and feeble, of an handful high, bearing from the middle 
thereof to the top very fine flowers, fashioned unto one piece of the 
Columbine flower, which resembleth a little bird of a purple colour.

8. This other thin leaved Hollow-Root is like the precedent, saving 
that this plant brings forth white flowers tending to yellowness, or 
as it were of the colour of the field Primrose.

Fig. 1560. Bunniken's Hollow-Root (9) Fig. 1561. Small Bunniken's 
Hollow-Root (10) 	9. Bunnikens Holwortele, as the Dutch men do 
call it, hath many small jagged leaves growing immediately from the 
ground, among which rise up very slender stalks, whereon do grow such 
leaves as those next the ground: on the top of the branches stand 
fair purple flowers like unto the others of his kind, saving that the 
flowers hereof are as it were small birds, the bellies or lower parts 
whereof are of a white colour, wherein it differeth from all the rest 
of the Hollow-Roots.

10. The last and small Hollow-Root is like the last described, saving 
that it is altogether less, and the flowers hereof are of a green 
colour, not unlike in shape to the flowers of Cinquefoil. This plant, 
whose figure our author here gave with this small description, is 
that which from the smell of musk is called Moschatella, by Cordus 
and others: it is the Denticulata of Dalechampius: the Fumaria 
bulbosa tuberosa minima of Tabernamontanus: and the Ranunculus 
minimus septentrionalium herbido muscoso flore of Lobel. The root 
hereof is small and toothed, or made of little bulbs resembling 
teeth. and ending in white hairy fibres: it sendeth up divers little 
branches some two or three inches high: the leaves are somewhat like 
those of the Yellow Fumitory, or Radix cava, but much less: the 
flowers grow clustering on the top of the stalk, commonly five or 
seven rogether, each of them made of four yellowish green leaves with 
four threads in them; it flowers in April, and is to be found in 
divers places amongst bushes at that time, as in Kent about 
Chislehurst, especially in Pitts his wood, and at the further end of 
Cray Heath, on the left hand under a hedge among briers and brambles, 
which is his proper seat.

The Place

These plants do grow about hedges, brambles, and in the borders of 
fields and vineyards, in low and fertile grounds, in Germany and the 
Low Countries, nevertheless the two first, and also this two last 
described do grow in my garden.

The Time.

These do flower in March, and their seed is ripe in April: the leaves 
and stalks are gone in May, and nothing remaining save only the 
roots, so little a while do they continue.

The Names.

Hollow-Root is called in high Dutch Holwurtz: in Low Dutch 
Hoolewortele, that is, Radix cava: in English, Hollow-Root, and 
Holewort: it is used in shops instead of Aristolochia, or Round 
Birthwort; which error is better known than needful to be confuted: 
and likewise their error is apparent, who rashly judge it to be 
Pistolochia or little Birthwort. It should seem the old writers knew 
it not; wherefore some of our later authors have made it Leontopetali 
species, or a kind of Lion's Turnip: others, Eriphium: and other some 
Thesium: most men, Capnos chelidonia: it seemeth to agree with 
Leontopetalon in bulbed roots, and somewhat in leaves, but in no 
other respects, as may be perceived by Dioscorides' and Pliny's 
description of Leontopetalon. And if Eriphium have his name apo to 
eros, that is to say of the spring, then this root may be not 
unproperly Eriphium, and Veris planta, or the plant of the spring, 
for it is evident that it appeareth and is green in the spring only: 
some think it hath been called Eriphium, ab Hædo, or of the Goat: but 
this Eriphion is quite another plant, as both Apuleius writeth, and 
that book also mentioneth which is attributed to Galen, and dedicated 
to Paternianus. In the book which is dedicated to Paternianus, there 
be read these words; Eriphion is an herb which is found upon high 
mountains: it hath leaves like Smallage, a fine flower like the 
Violet, and a root as great as an Onion: it hath likewise other roots 
which send forth roots after roots. Whereby it is evident that this 
root whereof we entreat is not this kind of Eriphium. Concerning 
Thesium the old writers have written but little: Theophrastus saith, 
that the root thereof is bitter and being stamped purgeth the belly. 
Pliny in his 2nd book, chap. 7, showeth that the root which is called 
Thesium is like the bulbed plants, and is rough in taste: Athenæus 
citing Timachida for an author, saith, that Thesion is called a 
flower, of which Ariadne's garland was made. These things seem well 
to agree with Hollow-Root; for it is bumped or bulbous, of taste 
bitter and austere or something rough, which is also thought to 
purge: but what certainty can be affirmed, seeing the old writers are 
so brief? What manner of herb Capnos chelidonia is, which groweth by 
hedges, and hereupon is surnamed Phragmitos, Aetius doth not expound, 
only the name thereof is found in his second Tetrab. the third book, 
chap. 110, in Martianus his Collyrium, and in his Tetrab. 3rd book, 
2nd chap., among such things as strengthen the liver. But if Capnos 
chelidonia be that which Pliny in his 25th book, chap. 13, doth call 
Prima Capnos, or the first Capnos, and commendeth it for the dimness 
of the sight, it is plain enough that Radix cava, or the Hollow-Root, 
is not Capnos chelidonia: for Pliny's first Capnos is branched, and 
foldeth itself upon hedges: but Hollow-Root hath no such branches 
growing on it, and is a low herb, and is not held up with props, nor 
needeth them. But if Aetius his Capnos chelidonia be another herb 
differing from that of Pliny (which thing perchance was the cause why 
it should be surnamed Chelidonia) there is same reason why it should 
be called Capnos chelidonia; for it is somewhat like Fumitory in 
leaves, though greater, and, cometh up at the first spring, which is 
about the time when the swallows do come in; nevertheless it doth not 
follow, that it is true and right Capnos chelidonia, for there be 
also other herbs coming up at the same season, and perish in short 
time after, which notwithstanding are not called Chelidonia.

The Temperature.

Hollow-Root is hot and dry, yet more dry than hot, that is to say, 
dry in the third degree, and hot in the second; it bindeth, 
cleanseth, and somewhat wasteth.

The Virtues.

A. Hollow-Root is good against old and long lasting swellings of the 
almonds in the throat, and of the jaws: it likewise prevaileth 
against the pains of the hæmorrhoides, which are swollen and painful, 
being mixed with the ointment of Poplar buds, called ung. Populeon.

B. It is reported that a dram weight hereof being taken inwardly, 
doth purge by siege, and draweth forth phlegm.



CHAP. 447. Of Columbine.


Fig. 1562. Kinds of Columbine (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The Blue Columbine hath leaves like the great Celandine, but 
somewhat rounder, indented on the edges, parted into divers sections, 
of a bluish green colour, which being broken yield forth little juice 
or none at all: the stalk is a cubit and a half high, slender, 
reddish, and slightly haired: the slender sprigs whereof bring forth 
every one one flower with five little hollow horns, as it were 
hanging forth, with small leaves standing upright, of the shape of 
little birds. These flowers are of colour sometimes blue, at other 
times of a red or purple, often white, or of mixed colors which to 
distinguish severally would be to small purpose, being things so 
familiarly known to all: after the flowers grow up cods, in which is 
contained little black and glittering seed: the roots are thick, with 
some strings thereto belonging, which continue many years.

2. The second doth not differ saving in the colour of the flowers; 
for like as the others are described to be blue, so these are of a 
purple red, or horse-flesh colour, which maketh the difference.

3. The double Columbine hath stalks, leaves, and roots, like the 
former: the flowers hereof are very double, that is to say, many of 
those little flowers (having the form of birds) are thrust one into 
the belly of another, sometimes blue, often white, and other whiles 
of mixed colours, as nature list to play with her little ones, 
differing so infinitely, that to distinguish them apart would require 
more time than were rcquisite to lose: and therefore it shall suffice 
what hath been said for their descriptions.

4. There are also other varieties of this double kind, which have the 
flowers of divers or party colours, as blue and white, and white and 
red variously marked or spotted.


Fig. 1563. Kinds of Columbine (5-8) 


5. This kind hath the flowers with their heels or spurs turned 
outward or in the middle of the flower, whence it is called Aquilina 
inversa: the flowers of this are commonly reddish, or of a light or 
dark purple colour, and double.

6. This differs from the last in the colour of the flowers which are 
white, yet double, and inverted as the former.

7. The roots, leaves, and stalks of this are not unlike those of the 
precedent, but the flower is much different in shape; For it hath no 
heels or spurs, but is made of sundry long leaves lying flat open, 
being sometimes more single, and otherwhiles more double. The colour 
of the flower is either red, white, blue, or variously mixed of these 
as the former.

8. This though it be termed degenerate, is a kind of itself, and it 
differs from the last described in that the utmost leaves are the 
largest, and the colour thereof is commonly green, or green somewhat 
inclining to a purple.

The Place.

They are set and sown in gardens for the beauty and variable colours 
of the flowers.

The Time.

They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.

Columbine is called of the later herbarists Aquileia, Aquilina, and 
Aquilegia: of Costeus, Pothos: of Gesner, Leontostomum: of 
Dalechampius, Iovis flos: of some, Herba leonis, or the herb wherein 
the Lion doth delight: in High Dutch, Agley: in Low Dutch Akeleyn: in 
French, Ancoiles: in English, Columbine. Fabius Columna judges it to 
be the Isopyrum described by Dioscorides.

The Temperature.

Columbines are thought to be temperate between heat and moisture.

The Virtues.

A. Notwithstanding what temperature or virtues Columbines have is not 
yet sufficiently known, for they are used especially to deck the 
gardens of the curious, garlands, and houses: nevertheless Tragus 
writeth, that a dram weight of the seed, with half a scruple or ten 
grains of Saffron given in wine, is a good and effectual medicine for 
the stopping of the liver, and the yellow jaundice, but, saith he, 
that whoso hath taken it must be well covered with clothes, and then 
sweat.

B. Most in these days following others by tradition, do use to boil 
the leaves in milk against the soreness of the throat, falling and 
excoriation of the uvula: but the ancient writers have said nothing 
hereof. Ruellius reporteth, that the flowers of Columbines are not 
used in medicine: yet some there be that do affirm they are good 
against the stopping of the liver, which effect the leaves do also 
perform.

C. Clusius saith, that Dr. Francis Rapard a physician of Bruges in 
Flanders, told him that the seed of this common Columbine very finely 
beaten to powder, and given in wine, was a singular medicine to be 
given to women to hasten and facilitate their labour, and if the 
first taking it were not suffficiently effectual; that then they 
should repeat it again.



CHAP 448. Of Wormwood.

Fig. 1564. Broad-Leaved Wormwood (1) Fig. 1565. Small Pontic Wormwood 
(2) 
The Description.

1. The first kind being our common and best known Wormwood, hath 
leaves of a greyish colour very much cut or jagged, and very bitter: 
the stalks are of woody substance, two cubits high, and full of 
branches; alongst which do grow little yellowish buttons, wherein is 
found small seed like the seed of Tansy, but smaller: the root is 
likewise of a woody substance, and full of fibres.

2. The second kind of Wormwood bringeth forth slender stalks about a 
foot high or somewhat more, garnished with leaves like the former, 
but whiter, much lesser, and cut or jagged into most fine and small 
cuts or divisions: the flowers are like the former, hanging upon 
small stems with their heads downward: the roots are whitish, small 
and many, crawling and crambling one over another, and thereby 
infinitely do increase, of savour less pleasant than the common 
Wormwood. Some have termed this plant Absinthium santonicum, but thy 
had slender reason so to do: for if it was so called because it was 
imagined to grow in the province of Saintonge, it may very well 
appear to the contrary: for in the Alps of Galatia, a country in Asia 
Minor, it groweth in great plenty, and therefore may rather be called 
Galatium sardonicum and not santonicum: but leaving controversies 
impertinent to the History, it is the Pontic Wormwood of Galen's 
description, and so holden of the learned Paludane (who for his 
singular knewledge in plants is worthy triple honour) and likewise 
many others.

The Place.

This Broad-Leaved Wormwood delighteth to grow on rocks and mountains, 
and in untilled places; it groweth much upon dry banks, it is common 
everywhere in all countries: the best, saith Dioscorides, is found in 
Pontus, Cappadocia, and on Mount Taurus: Pliny writeth, that Pontic 
Wormwood is better than that of Italy: and in these words doth 
declare that Pontic Wormwood is extreme bitter:

Turpia deformes gignunt Absinthia campi,
Terraque de fructu, quam sit amara docet.
Untilled barren ground the loathsome Wormwood yields,
And known it's by the fruit how bitter are the fields.

And Bellonius in his first book Of Singularities, chap. 76. doth 
show, that there is also a broad-leaved Wormwood like unto ours, 
growing in the Provinces of Pontus, and is used in Constantinople by 
the physicians there; it is likewise found in certain cold places of 
Switzerland, which by reason of the chillness of the air riseth not 
up, but creepeth upon the ground, whereupon divers call it Creeping 
Wormwood.

The Time.

The little flowers and seeds are perfected in July and August, then 
may Wormwood be gathered and laid up for profitable uses.

The Names.

It is named of Apuleius, Absinthium rusticum, Country Wormwood, or 
Peasant's Wormwood: we have named it Absinthium latifolium, broad 
leaved Wormwood, that it may differ from the rest: the interpreters 
of the Arabians call the better sort, which Dioscordides nameth 
Pontic Wormwood, Romanum Absinthum, Roman Wormwood: and after these, 
the barbarous physicians of the later age: the Italians name Wormwood 
Assenso: the Spaniards, Axenxios, Assensios, most of them Donzell: 
the Portugals, Alosna: in High Dutch, Weronmut, Wermut: in French, 
Aluyne: English, Common Wormwood. Victor Trincavilla, a singular 
physician, in his practise took it for Absinthum ponticum.

2. This is commonly called Absinthium romanum: and in low Dutch, 
Roomische Alsene; by which name it is known to very many, physicians 
and apothecaries, who use this instead of Pontic Wormwood: 
furthermore it hath a leaf and flower far less than the other 
wormwoods: likewise the smell of this is not only pleasant, but it 
yieldeth also a spicy scent, whereas all the rest have a strong and 
loathsome smell: and this Pontic Wormwood doth differ from that which 
Dioscorides commendeth: for Dioscorides his Pontic Wormwood is 
accounted among them of the first kind, or of Broad-leaved Wormwood; 
which thing also Galen affirmeth in his sixth book Of the Faculties 
of Medicines, in the chapter of Southernwood. There be three kinds of 
Wormwood (saith he) whereof they use to call one by the general name, 
and that is especially Pontic: whereby it is manifest that Galen in 
this place hath referred Pontic to no other than to the first 
wormwood; and therefore many not without cause marvel, that Galen 
hath written in his book Of the Method of Curing, how Pontic Wormwood 
is less in flower and leaf: many excuse him, and lay the fault upon 
the corruption of the book, and in his 9th book Of Method, the lesser 
they would have the longer: therefore this wormwood with the lesser 
leaf is not the right Pontic Wormwood, neither again the Arabians 
Roman Wormwood, who have no other Roman than Pontic of the Grecians. 
Also many believe that this is called Santonicum, but this is not to 
be sought for in Mysia, Thracia, or other countries eastward, but in 
France beyond the Alps, if we may believe Dioscorides: his copies 
there be that would have it grow not beyond the Alps of Italy, but in 
Galatia a country in Asia, & in the region of the Sardines, which is 
in the lesser Asia; whereupon it was: called in Greek Sardonion, 
which was changed into the name Santonicum through the errour of the 
translators: Dioscorides his copies keep the word Sardonium, & 
Galen's copies Santonicum, which came to posterity as it seemeth. It 
is called in English, Roman Wormwood, Garden or Cyprus Wormwood, and 
French Wormwood.

The Temperature.

Wormwood is of temperature hot and dry, hot in the second degree, and 
dry in the third: it is bitter and cleansing, and likewise hath power 
to bind or strengthen.

The Virtues.

A. It is very profitable to a weak stomach that is troubled with 
choler, for it cleanseth it through his bitterness, purgeth by siege 
and urine: by reason of the binding quality, it strengtheneth and 
comorteth the stomach, but helpeth nothing at all to remove phlegm 
contained in the stomach, as Galen addeth.

B. If it be taken before a surfeit it keepeth it off, and removeth 
loathsomeness, saith Dioscorides, and it helpeth not only before a 
surfeit, but also it quickly refresheth the stomach and belly after 
large eating and drinking.

C. It is oftentimes a good remedy against long and lingering agues, 
especially tertians: for it doth not only strengthen the stomach and 
make an appetite to meat, but it yieldeth strength to the liver also, 
and riddeth it of obstrutions or stoppings, cleansing by urine 
naughty humours.

D. Furthermore, Wormwood is excellent good for them that vomit blood 
from the spleen, the which happeneth when the spleen being 
overcharged and filled up with gross blood doth unburden itself, and 
then great plenty of blood is oftentimes cast up by vomit. It 
happeneth likewise that store of black and corrupt blood mixed with 
excrements passeth downwards by the stool, and it oftentimes 
happeneth that with violent and large vomiting the sick man fainteth 
or swooneth, or when he is revived doth fall into a difficult and 
almost incurable tympany, especially when the disease doth often 
happen; but from these dangers Wormwood can deliver him, if when he 
is refreshed after vomit and his strength any way recovered, he shall 
a good while use it in what manner soever he himself shall think 
good.

E. Again, Wormwood voideth away the worms of the guts, not only taken 
inwardly, but applied outwardly: it withstandeth all putrefactions; 
it is good against a stinking breath; it keepeth garments also from 
the moths, it driveth away gnats, the body being anointed with the 
oil thereof.

F. Likewise it is singuiar good in poultices and fomentations to bind 
and to dry.

G. Besides all this Dioscorides declareth, that it is good also 
against windiness and griping pains of the stomach and belly, with 
Seseli and French Spikenard: the decoction cureth the yellow jaundice 
or the infusion, if it be drunk thrice a day some ten or twelve 
spoonfuls at a time.

H. It helpeth them that are strangled with eating of mushrooms or 
toadstools if it be drunk with vinegar.

I. And being taken with wine, it is good against the poison of Ixia 
(being a viscous matter proceeding from the thistle Chamælion) and of 
Hemlock, and against the biting of the shrew mouse, and of the Sea 
Dragon: it is applied to the quinsy or inflammations of the throat 
with honey and nitre, and with water to night wheals, and with honey 
to swartish marks that come upon bruises.

K. It is applied after the same manner to dim eyes, and to mattering 
ears.

L. Ioachimius Camerarius of Nuremberg commendeth it greatly against 
the jaundice, giving of the flowers of Wormwood, Rosemary, Sloes, of 
each a small quantity, and a little saffron, boiled in wine, the body 
first being purged and prepared by the learned physician.



CHAP. 449. Of Small-leaved Wormwood.


Fig. 1566. Small-leaved Wormwood

The Description.
1. Small leaved Wormwood bringeth forth very many little branches, 
slender, a span or a foot high, full of leaves, less by a great deal, 
and tenderer than the former, most finely and nicely minced; the 
flowers like those of the former, hang upon the little branches and 
sprigs; the roots are small, creeping overtwhart, from whence do rise 
a great number of young sprouts: this Wormwood also is somewhat 
white, and no less bitter than the broad leaved one, and hath not so 
rank, or so unpleasant a smell, but rather delightful.

The Place.

It grows plentifully in Mysia, Thrace, Hungary and Austria, and in 
other regions near adjoining: it is also found in Bohemia, and in 
many untilled places of Germany; it is a garden plant in the Low 
Countries, and in England.

The Time.

It bringeth forth flowers and seed in autumn: a little while after 
when winter cometh, the herb withereth away, but the root remaineth 
alive, from which leaves and stalks do come again in the spring.

The Names.

This Lobel calls Absinthium ponticum tridentinum herbariorum: 
Clusius, Absinthium tenuifolium austriacum: Tabernamontanus, 
Absinthium nabathæum avicennæ: we may call it in English, Small-
Leaved Wormwood.

The Temperature.

Small-leaved Wormwood is of faculty hot and dry, it is as bitter also 
as the broad-leaved one, and of like faculty.

The Virtues.

The faculties are referred unto the common Wormwood.



CHAP. 450. Of Sea Wormwood.

Fig. 1567. White Sea Wormwood (1) Fig. 1568. Creeping Sea Wormwood 
(2) 
The Description.

1. The white or common Sea Wormwood hath many leaves cut and divided 
into infinite fine jags, like those of Southernwood, of a white hoary 
colour and strong smell, but not unpleasant: among which rise up 
tough hoary stalks set with the like leaves, on the top wherof do 
grow small yellowish flowers; the root is tough, and creepeth far 
abroad, by means whereof it greatly increaseth.

2. The Broad-Leaved Sea Wormwood hath many weak slender branches 
commonly two foot long at their full growth, red of colour, and 
creeping upon the ground: the leaves are small, narrow, long and 
jagged, or parted towards their ends into sundry parcels: they are 
green above, and greyish underneath: the tops of the branches are set 
with many little stalks, some inch long: which upon short footstalks 
coming out of the bosoms of little longish narrow leaves carry small 
round knops, like as in other plants of this kind: the flowers 
flowers grow on the tops of the stalks, of a yellowish colour; the 
root is tough and creeping: the taste is a little bitterish, and the 
smell not unpleasant. This grows with Mr Parkinson and others, and 
(as I remember) it was first sent over from the Isle of Rees by Mr 
John Tradescant. Lobel in his Observations mentions it by the name of 
Absinithium ponticum supinum herbariorum; and Tabernamontanus sets it 
forth by the title of Absinthium repens.

The Place.

These Wormwoods do grow upon the raised grounds in the salt marshes 
near unto the sea, in most places of England; which being brought 
into gardens doth there flourish as in his natural place, and 
retaineth his smell, taste, and natural quality, as hath been often 
proved. So saith our author, but I have not heard that the latter 
grows wild in any place with us in England.

The Time.

These bring forth flowers and seeds when the other Wormwoods do. The 
later scarce seeds with us, it flowers so late in the year.

The Names.

Sea Wormwood is called in Latin, Absinthium marinum, and likewise 
seriphium: in Dutch, See Alsene: of divers, Santonicion, as 
witnesseth Dioscorides: nevertheless there is another Santonicum 
differing from Sea Wormwood: in English of some women of the country, 
Garden Cypress.

The Temperature.

Sea Wormwood is of nature hot and dry, but not so much as the common.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides affirmeth, that being taken of itself, or boiled with 
rice, and eaten with honey, it killeth the small worms of the guts, 
and gently looseth the belly, the which Pliny doth also affirm. 

B. The juice of sea Wormwood drunk with wine resisteth poison, 
especially the poison of Hemlocks.

C. The leaves stamped with figs, saltpetre and the meal of Darnel, 
and applied to the belly, sides, or flanks, help the dropsy, and such 
as are splenetic.

D. The same is singular against all inflammations, and heat of the 
stomach and liver, exceeding all the kinds of Wormwood for the same 
purposes that common Wormwood serveth.

E. It is reported by such as dwell near the sea side, that the cattle 
which do feed where it groweth become fat and lusty very quickly.

F. The herb with his stalks laid in chests, presses, and wardrobes, 
keepeth clothes from moths and other vermin.



CHAP. 451. Of Holy Wormwood.


Fig. 1569. Holy Wormwood

The Description.

This Wormwood called Sementina, and Semen sanctum, which we have 
Englished, Holy, is that kind of Wormwood which beareth that seed 
which we have in use, called wormseed: in shops, Semen santolinum: 
about which there hath been great controversy amongst writers: some 
holding that the seed of Santonicum galatium to be the true wormseed: 
others deeming it to be that of Absinthium romanum: it doth much 
resemble the first of the sea Wormwoods in shape and proportion: it 
riseth up with a woody stalk, of the height of a cubit, divided into 
divers branches and wings; whereupon are set very small leaves: among 
which are placed clusters of seeds in such abundance, that to the 
first view it seemeth to be a plant consisting all of seed.

The Place.

It is a foreign plant: the seeds being sown in the gardens of hot 
regions do prosper well; in these cold countries it will not grow at 
all. Nevertheless there is one or two companions about London, who 
have reported unto me that they had great store of it growing in 
their gardens yearly, which they sold at a great price unto our 
London apothecaries, and gained much money thereby; one of the men 
dwelleth by the Bag and Bottle near London whose name is Cornewall; 
into whose garden I was brought to see the thing that I would not 
believe; for being often told that there it did grow, I still 
persisted it was not true: but when I did behold this great quantity 
of Wormwood, it was nothing else but common Amneos. How many 
apothecaries have been deceived, how many they have robbed of their 
money, and how many children have been nothing the better for taking 
it, I refer it to the judgement of the simplest, considering their 
own report, to have sold many hundred pounds weight of it; the more 
to their shame be it spoken and the idle wit or skill in the 
apothecaries: therefore have I set down this as a caveat unto those 
that buy of these seeds, first to taste and try the same before they 
give it to their children, or commit it to any other use. Certainly 
our author was either misinformed, or the people of these times were 
very simple, for I dare boldly say there is not any apothecary, or 
scarce any other so simple as to be thus deceived now.

The Time.

It flowereth and bringeth forth his seed in July and August.
The Names.

The French men call it Barbotin; the Italians, Semen Zena: whereupon 
also the Latin name Sementina came: the seed is called everywhere 
Semen sanctum, holy seed; and Semen contra lumbricos: in English, 
Wormseed; the herb itself is also called Wormseed, or Wormseed-Wort: 
some name it Semen Zedoariæ, Zedoary seed; because it hath a smell 
somewhat resembling that of Zedoary.

The Temperature.

The seed is very bitter, and for that cause of nature hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. It is good against worms of the belly and entrails, taken any way, 
and better also if a little Rhubarb be mixed withal, for so the worms 
are not only killed, but likewise they are driven down by the siege, 
which thing must always be regarded.

B. The seed mixed with a little Aloe succotrina, and brought to the 
form of a plaster, and applied to the navel of a child doth the like.



CHAP. 452. Of Foreign and Bastard Wormwoods.

Fig. 1570. White Wormwood (1) Fig. 1571. Egyptian Wormwood (2) 
The Description.

1. Absinthium album hath straight and upright stalks, a foot high, 
beset with broad leaves, but very deeply cut or cloven, in show like 
unto those of the Great Daisy, but white of colour: at the top of the 
stalks, out of scaly heads, as in an umbel grow flowers, compact of 
six small white leaves: the root is long, with some fibres annexed 
into it.

2. This kind of Wormwood Gesner and that learned apothecary 
Valerandus Donraz, called Absinthium egyptium: the leaves of this 
plant are very like to the leaves of Trichomanes, which is our common 
Maidenhair, of a white colour, every small leaf standing one opposite 
against another, and of a strong savour.
Fig. 1572. Unsavoury Wormwood (3) Fig. 1573. Small Lavender Cotton 
(4) 

3. This Wormwood, which Dodonæus calleth Absinthium inodorum, and 
insipidum, is very like unto the Sea Wormwood, in his small and 
tender leaves: the stalk beareth flowers also like into the foresaid 
Sea Wormwood, but it is of a sad or deep colour, having neither 
bitter taste, nor any savour at all; whereupon it was called, and 
that very fitly, Absinthium inodorum, or Absinthium insipidum: in 
English, foolish, or unsavoury wormwood. Dodonæus saith not that his 
Absinthium inodorum is like the Sea Wormwood, but that it is very 
like our common broad leaved Wormwood, and so indeed it is, and that 
so like, that it is hard to be discerned therefrom, but only by the 
want of bitterness and smell.

4. This kind of Sea Wormwood is a shrubby and woody plant, in face 
and show like to Lavender Cotton, of a strong smell, having flowers 
like those of the common Wormwood, at the first show like those of 
Lavender Cotton: the root is tough and woody.

The Place.

There plants are strangers in England, yet we have a few of them in 
herbarist's gardens.

The Time.

The time of their flowering and seeding is referred to the other 
Wormwoods.

The Names.

The White Wormwood Conradus Gesnerus nameth Seriphium fmina, and 
saith, that it is commonly called Herba alba, or white herb: another 
had rather name it Santonicum; for as Dioscorides saith, Santonicum 
is found in France beyond the Alps and beareth his name of the same 
country where it groweth, but that part of Switzerland which 
belongeth to France is accounted of the Romans to be beyond the Alps; 
and the province of Santon is far from it: for this is a part of 
Guienne, situate upon the coast of the ocean, beneath the flood 
Gironde northward: therefore Santon Wormwood, is it have his name 
from the Santons, groweth far from the Alps: but if it grow near 
adjoining to the Alps, then hath it not his name from the Santons.

The Temperature 

White Wormwood is hot and somewhat dry.

The Virtues.

A. Unsavory Wormwood, as it is without smell and taste, so is it 
scarce of any hot quality, much less hath it any scouring faculty. 
These are not used in physic, where the others may be had, being as 
it were wild or degenerate kinds of Wormwood; some of them 
participating both of the form and smell of other plants.



CHAP. 453. Of Mugwort.


Fig. 1574. Common Mugwort (1) 

The Descriptiom.

1. The first kind of Mugwort hath broad leaves, very much cut or 
cloven like the leaves of common Wormwood, but larger, of a dark 
green colour above, and hoary underneath: the stalks are long and 
straight, and full of branches, whereon do grow small round buttons, 
which are the flowers, smelling like Marjoram when they wax ripe: the 
root is great, and of a woody substance.

2. The second kind of Mugwort hath a great thick and woody root, from 
whence arise sundry branches of a reddish colour, beset full of small 
and fine jagged leaves, very like unto Sea Southernwood: the seed 
groweth alongst the small twiggy branches, like unto little berries, 
which fall not from their branches in a long time after they be ripe. 
This differeth from the former, in the colour of the stalk and 
flowers, which are red or purplish; whereas the former is more 
whitish.


Fig. 1575. Sea Mugwort (3) 

3. There is also another Mugwort, which hath many branches rising 
from a woody root, standing upright in distances one from another, of 
an ashy colour, beset with leaves not much unlike Sea Purslane; about 
the lower part of the stalks, and toward the top of the branches they 
are narrower and lesser, and cut with great and deep jags thick in 
subtance, and of a whitish colour, as all the rest of the plant is: 
it yieldeth a pleasant smell like Abrotanum marinum, and in taste is 
somewhat saltish; the flowers are many, and yellow: which being 
faded, there followeth seed like unto that of the common Wormwood. 
The leaves of this plant are of two sorts; for some of them are long 
and narrow, like those of Lavender (whence Clusius hath called it 
Artemisia folio lavendulæ;) other some are cut in or divided almost 
to the middle rib; as you may see it expressed apart in the figure by 
itself, which shows both the whole, as also the divided leaves.

The Place.

The common Mugwort groweth wild in sundry places about the borders of 
fields, about highways, brook sides, and such like places.

Sea Mugwort groweth about Rye and Winchelsea castle, and at 
Portsmouth by the Isle of Wight.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

Mugwort is called in Greek and also in Latin Artemisia, which name it 
had of Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus, and wife of noble Mausolus 
King Of Caria, who adopted it for her own herb: before that it was 
called Parthenis, as Pliny writeth. Apuleius affirmeth that it was 
likewise called Parthenion; who hath very many names for it, and many 
of them are placed in Dioscorides among the bastard names: most of 
these agree with the right Artemisia, and divers of them with other 
herbs, whieh now and then are numbered among the Mugworts: it is also 
called Mater Herbarum: in High Dutch, Beifusz, and Sant Johanns 
Gurtell: in Spanish and Italian, Artemisia: in French, Armoisa: Low 
Dutch, Bijvoet, Sint Jans Kruyt: in English, Mugwort, and common 
Mugwort.

The Temperature.

Mugwort is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.

A. Pliny saith that Mugwort doth properly cure women's diseases.

B. Dioscorides writeth, that it bringeth down the terms, the birth, 
and the after-birth.

C. And that in like manner it helpeth the mother, and the pain of the 
matrix, to be boiled as baths for women to sit in; and that being put 
up with myrrh, it is of like force that the bath is of. And that the 
tender tops are boiled and drunk for the same infirmities, and that 
they are applied in manner of a poultice to the share, to bring down 
the monthly course.

D. Pliny saith, that the traveller or wayfaring man that hath the 
herb tied about him feeleth no wearisomeness at all; and that he who 
hath it about him can be hurt by no poisonous medicines, nor by any 
wild beast, neither yet by the sun itself; and also that it is drunk 
against opium, or the juice of black Poppy. Many other fantastical 
devices invented by poets are to be seen in the works of the ancient 
writers, tending to witchcraft and sorcery, and the great dishonour 
of God; wherefore I do of purpose omit them, as things unworthy of my 
recording, or your reviewing.

E. Mugwort pounded with oil of sweet almonds, and laid to the stomach 
as a plaster, cureth all the pains and griefs of the same.

F. It cureth the shakings of the joints, inclining to the palsy, and 
helpeth the contraction or drawing together of the nerves and sinews.



CHAP. 454. Of Southernwoood.

Fig. 1576. Female Southernwood (1) Fig. 1577. Male Southernwood (2) 
The Kinds.

Dioscorides affirmeth that Southernwood is of two kinds, the female 
and the male, which are everywhere known by the names of the greater 
and of the lesser: besides these there is a third kind, which is of a 
sweeter smell, and lesser than the others, and also others of a 
bastard kind.
The Description.

1. The greater Southernwood by careful manuring doth oftentimes grow 
up in manner of a shrub, and cometh to be as high as a man, bringing 
forth stalks an inch thick, or more; out of which spring very many 
sprigs or branches, set about with leaves diversely jagged and finely 
indented, somewhat white, and of a certain strong smell: instead of 
flowers, little small clusters of buttons do hang on the sprigs, from 
the middle to the very top, of colour yellow, and at the length turn 
into seed. The root hath divers strings.

2. The lesser Southernwood groweth low, full of little sprigs of a 
woody substance: the leaves are long, and smaller than those of the 
former, not so white: it beareth clustering buttons upon the tops of 
the stalks: the root is made of many strings.

Fig. 1578. Dwarf Southernwood (3) Fig. 1579. Unsavoury Southernwood 
(4) 	3. The third kind is also shorter: the leaves hereof are jagged 
and deeply cut after the maner of the greater Southernwood, but they 
are not so white, yet more sweet, wherein they are like unto Lavender 
Cotton. This kind is very full of seed: the buttons stand alone on 
the sprigs, even to the very top, and be of a glittering yellow. The 
root is like to the rest.

4. The Unsavoury Southernwood groweth flat upon the ground, with 
broad leaves deeply cut or jagged in the edges like those of the 
common Mugwort: among which rise up weak and feeble stalks trailing 
likewise upon the ground, set confusedly here and there with the like 
leaves that grow next the ground, of a greyish or hoary colour, 
altogether without smell. The flowers grow alongst the stalks, of a 
yellowish colour, small and chaffy: the root is tough and woody, with 
some strings annexed thereto.


Fig. 1580. Wild Southernwood (5) 

5. This Wild Southernwood hath a great long thick root, tough and 
woody, covered over with a scaly bark like the scaly back of an 
adder, and of the same colour: from which rise very many leaves like 
those of Fennel, of an overworn green colour: among which grow small 
twiggy branches on the tops, and alongst the stalks do grow small 
clustering flowers of a yellow colour: the whole plant is of a dark 
colour, as well leaves as stalks, and of a strong unsavoury smell.

The Place.

Theophrastus saith that Southernwood delighteth to grow in places 
open to the sun: Dioscorides affirmeth that it groweth in Cappadocia, 
and Galatia a country in Asia, and in Hierapolis a city in Syria: it 
is planted in gardens almost everywhere: that of Sicilia and Galatia 
is most commended of Pliny.

The Time.

The buttons of Southernwood do flourish and be in their prime in 
August, and now and then in September.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Abrotanon: the Latins and apothecaries keep the 
same name Abrotanum: the Italians and divers Spaniards call it 
Abrotano: and other Spaniards, Yerva lombriguera: in high Durch, 
Stabwurtz: in Low Dutch, Averoone, and Avercruyt: the French, Avrone, 
and Avroesme: the Englishmen, Southernwood: it hath divers bastard 
names in Dioscorides; the greater kind is Dioscorides his fmina, or 
female Southernwood; and Pliny his montanum, or mountain 
Southernwood: the mountain Southernwood we take for the female, and 
the champion for the male. There be notwithstanding some that take 
Lavender Cotton to be the Female Southernwood; grounding thereupon, 
because it bringeth. forth yellow flowers in the top of the sprigs 
like cluster buttons: but if they had more diligently pondered 
Dioscorides his words, they would not have been of this opinion: the 
lesser Southernwood is mas, the male, and is also Pliny's champion 
Southernwood; in Latin, campestre. The third, as we have said, is 
likewise the female, and is commonly called Sweet Southernwood, 
because it is of a sweeter scent than the rest. Dioscorides seemeth 
to call this kind Siculum, Sicilian Southernwood.

The Temperature.

Southernwood is hot and dry in the end of the third degree: it hath 
also force to distribute and to rarify.

The Virtues.

A. The tops, flowers, or seed boiled, and stamped raw with water and 
drunk, helpeth them that cannot take their breaths without holding 
their necks straight up, and is a remedy for the cramp, and for 
sinews shrunk and drawn together; for the sciatica also, and for them 
that can hardly make water; and it is good to bring down the terms.

B. It killeth worms, and driveth them out: if it be drunk with wine 
it is a remedy against deadly poisons.

C. Also it helpeth against the stinging of scorpions and field 
spiders, but it hurts the stomach.

D. Stamped and mixed with oil it taketh away the shivering cold that 
cometh by the ague fits, and it heateth the body if it be anointed 
therewith before the fits do come.

E. If it be pounded with barley meal and laid to pushes it taketh 
them away.

F. It is good for inflammations of the eyes, with the pulp of a 
rotted Quince, or with crumbs of bread, and applied poultice-wise.

G. The ashes of burnt Southernwood, with some kind of oil that is of 
thin parts, as of Palma Christi, Radish oil, oil of sweet Marjoram, 
or Organy, cureth the pilling of the hair off the head, and maketh 
the beard to grow quickly: being strewed about the bed, or a fume 
made of it upon hot embers, it driveth away serpents: if but a branch 
be laid under the bed's head they say it provoketh venery.

H. The seed of Southernwood made into powder, or boiled in wine and 
drunk, is good against the difficulty and stopping of urine; it 
expelleth, wasteth, consumeth, and digesteth all cold humours, tough 
slime and phlegm, which do usually stop the spleen, kidneys, and 
bladder.

I. Southernwood drunk in wine is good against all venom and poison.

K. The leaves of Southernwood boiled in water until they be soft, and 
stamped with barley meal and barrow's grease unto the form of a 
plaster, dissolve and waste all cold tumors and swellings, being 
applied or laid thereto.



CHAP. 455. Of Oak of Jerusalem, and Oak of Cappadocia.

Fig. 1581. Oak of Jerusalem (1) Fig. 1582. Oak of Cappadocia (2) 
The Description.

1. Oak of Jerusalem, or Botrys, hath sundry small stems a foot and a 
half high, dividing themselves into many small branches, beset with 
small leaves deeply cut or jagged, very much resembling the leaf of 
an Oak, which hath caused our English women to call it Oak of 
Jerusalem; the upper side of the leaf is of deep green, and somewhat 
rough and hairy, but underneath it is of a dark reddish or purple 
colour: the seedy flowers grow clustering about the branches, like 
the young clusters or blowings of the Vine: the root is small and 
thready: the whole herb is of a pleasant smell and savour, and of a 
faint yellowish colour, and the whole plant dieth when the seed is 
ripe.

2. The fragrant smell that this kind of Ambrosia or Oak of Cappadocia 
yieldeth, hath moved the poets to suppose that this herb was meat and 
food for the gods: Dioscorides saith it groweth three handfuls high: 
in my garden it groweth to the height of two cubits, yielding many 
weak crooked and streaked branches, dividing themselves into sundry 
other small branches, having from the midst to the top thereof many 
mossy yellowish flowers not much unlike common Wormwood, standing one 
before another in good order; and the whole plant is as it were 
covered over with bran or a mealy dust: the flowers do change into 
small prickly cornered buttons, much like unto Tribulus terrestris; 
wherein is contained black round seed, not unpleasant in taste and 
smell: the leaves are in shape like the leaves of Mugwort, but 
thinner and more tender: all the whole plant is hoary, and yieldeth a 
pleasant savour: the whole plant perished with me at the first 
approach of winter.

The Place.

These plants are brought unto us from beyond the seas, especially 
from Spain and Italy.

The Time.

They flower in August, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

Oak of Jerusalem is called in Greek and Latin Botrys: in Italian, 
Botri: in Spanish, Bien Granada: in High Dutch, Trautenkraut, and 
Krottenkraut: in French and Low Dutch, Pyment: in English, Oak of 
Jerusalem; and of some, Oak of Paradise.

Oak of Cappadocia is called in Greek and Latin, Ambrosia; neither 
hath it any other known name. Pliny saith that Ambrosia is a 
wandering name, and is given unto other herbs: for Botrys (Oak of 
Jerusalem, as we have written) is of divers also called Ambrosia: In 
English it is called Oak of Cappadocia.

The Temperature.

These plants are hot and dry in the second degree, and consist of 
subtle parts.

The Virtues.

A. These plants be good to be boiled in wine, and ministered unto 
such as have their breasts stopped, and are short winded, and cannot 
easily draw their breath; for they cut and waste gross humours and 
tough phlegm. The leaves are of the same force; being made up with 
sugar they commonly call it a conserve.

B. It giveth a pleasant taste to flesh that is sodden with it, and 
eaten with the broth.

C. It is dried and laid among garments, not only to make them smell 
sweet, but also to preserve them from moths and other vermin; which 
thing it doth also perform.



CHAP. 456. Of Lavender Cotton.


Fig. 1583. Lavender Cotton

The Description.

Lavender Cotton bringeth forth clustered buttons of a golden colour, 
and of a sweet smell, and is often used in garlands and decking up of 
gardens and houses. It hath a woody stock, out of which grow forth 
branches like little boughs, slender, very many, a cubit long, set 
about with little leaves, long, narrow, purled, or crumpled; on the 
tops of the branches stand up flowers, one alone on every branch, 
made up with short threads thrust close together, like to the flowers 
of Tansy, and to the middle buttons of the flowers of Camomile, but 
yet something broader, of colour yellow, which be changed into seed 
of an obscure colour. The root is of a woody substance. The shrub 
itself is white both in branches and leaves, and hath a strong sweet 
smell.

There are same varieties of this plant, which Matthiolus, Lobel, and 
others refer to Abrotanum femina, and so call it; and by the same 
name our author gave the figure thereof in the last chapter save one, 
though the description did not belong thereto, as I have formerly 
noted. Another sort thereof our author, following Tabernamontanus and 
Lobel, set forth a little before by the name of Absinthium marinum 
abrotani fminæ facie, that Dodonæus calls Santolina prima; and this 
here figured, Santolina altera. He also mentioneth three other 
differences thereof, which chiefly consist in the leaves; for his 
third hath very short and small leaves like those of Heath; whence 
Bauhin calls it Abrotanum femina foliis ericæ. The fourth hath the 
leaves less toothed, and more like to Cypress, hence it is called in 
the Adversaria, Abrotanum peregrinum cupressi foliis. The fifth hath 
not the stalks growing upright, but creeping: the leaves are toothed, 
more thick and hoary than the rest; in other respects alike. Bauhin 
calls it Abrotanum fmina repens canescens.

The Place.

Lavender Cotton groweth in gardens almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

They are called by one name Santolina, or Lavender Cotton: of most, 
Chamecyparissus. But Pliny concerning Chamecyparissus is so short and 
brief, that by him their opinions can neither be rejected nor 
received.

They are doubtless much deceived that would have Lavender Cotton to 
be Abrotanum fmina, or the female Southernwood: and likewise they 
are in the wrong who take it to be Seriphium, Sea Wormwood; and they 
who first set it abroach to be a kind of Southernwood we leave to 
their errors; because it is not absolutely to be referred to one, but 
a plant participating of Wormwood and Southernwood.

The Temperature.

The seed of Lavender Cotton hath a bitter taste, being hot and dry in 
the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Pliny saith, that the herb Chamæcyparissus being drunk in wine is 
a good medicine against the poisons of all serpents and venomous 
beasts.

B. It killeth worms either given green or dry, and the seed hath the 
same virtue against worms, but avoideth them with greater force. It 
is thought to be equal with the usual worm-seed.



CHAP. 457. Of Sperage, or Asparagus.

Fig. 1584. Garden Asparagus (1) Fig. 1585. Stone Asparagus (3) 
The Description.

1. The first being the manured or garden Sperage, hath at his first 
rising out of the ground thick tender shoots very soft and brittle, 
of the thickness of the greatest swan's quill, in taste like unto the 
green bean, having at the top a certain scaly soft bud, which in time 
groweth to a branch of the height of two cubits, divided into divers 
other smaller branches, whereon are set many little leaves like 
hairs, more fine than the leaves of Dill: among which come forth 
small mossy yellowish flowers, which yield forth the fruit, green at 
the first, afterward red as Coral, of the bigness of a small pea; 
wherein is contained gross blackish seed exceeding hard, which is the 
cause that it lieth so long in the ground after the sowing, before it 
do spring up. The roots are many thick soft and spongy strings 
hanging down from one head, and spread themselves all about, whereby 
it greatly increaseth.

2. We have in our marsh and low grounds near unto the sea, a Sperage 
of this kind, which differeth a little from that of the garden, and 
yet in kind there is no difference at all, but only in manuring, by 
which all things or most things are made more beautiful, and larger. 
This may be called Asparagus palustris, Marsh Sperage.

3. Stone or Mountain Sperage is one of the wild ones, set forth under 
the title of Corruda, which Lobel calleth Asparagus petræus; and 
Galen, Myacanthinus, that doth very well resemble those of the 
garden, in stalks, roots, and branches, saving that those fine hairy 
leaves which are in the garden Sperage be soft, blunt, and tender; 
and in this wild Sperage, sharp hard and pricking thorns, though they 
be small and slender: the friut hereof is round, of the bigness of a 
pea, and of a black colour; the roots are long, thick, fat, and very 
many.

Fig. 1586. Wild Prickly Asparagus (4) Fig. 1587. Wild Thorny 
Asparagus (5) 	4. This fourth kind differeth from the last 
described, being a wild Sperage of Spain and Hungary: the plant is 
altogether set with sharp thorns (three or four coming forth 
together) as are the branches of Whins, Gorse, or Furze: the fruit is 
black when it is ripe, and full of a greenish pulp, wherein lie hard 
and black seeds, sometimes one, otherwhiles two in a berry; the roots 
are like the others, but greater and tougher.

5. Carolus Clusius descriheth also a certain wild Sperage with sharp 
prickles all alone the stalks, orderly placed at every joint one, 
hard, stiff, and whitish, the points of the thorns pointing downward: 
from the which joints also do grow out a few long green leaves 
fastened together, as also a little yellow flower, and one berry, 
three-cornered, and of a black colour, wherein is contained one black 
seed, seldom more: the roots are like the other.


Fig. 1588. Asparagus Thistle (6) 

6. Drypis being likewise a kind hereof, hath long and small roots, 
creeping in the ground like Couch grass; from which spring up 
branches a cubit high, full of knotty joints: the leaves are small 
like unto Juniper, not much differing from Corruda or Nepa: the 
flowers grow at the top of the stalk in spoky tufts or roundels, of a 
white colour, closely thrust together: the seed before it be taken 
out of the husk is like unto Rice; being taken out, like that of 
Melilot, of a saffron colour.

The Place.

The first being our garden Asparagus groweth wild in Essex, in a 
meadow adjoining to a mill, beyond a village called Thorpe; and also 
at Singleton not far from Carby, and in the meadows near Moulton in 
Lincolnshire. Likewise it groweth in great plenty near unto Harwich, 
at a place called Bandamar Lading, and at North Moulton in Holland, a 
part of Lincolnshire.

The wild Sperages grow in Portugal and Biscay among stones, one of 
the which Petrus Bellonius doth make mention to grow in Candy, in his 
first book Of Singularities, cap. 18.

The Time.

The bare naked tender shoots of Sperage spring up in April, at what 
time they are eaten in salads; they flower in June and July; the 
fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

The garden Sperage is called in Greek and Latin likewise Asparagus: 
in shops, Sparagus, and Speragus: in High Dutch, Spargen: in Low 
Dutch, Asparges, and Coralcruyt; that is to say, Herba coralli, or 
Coral-Wort, of the red berries, which bear the colour of Coral: in 
Spapish, Asparragos: in Italian, Asparago: in English, Sperage, and 
likewise Asparagus, after the Latin name: in French, Asperges. It is 
named Asparagus of the excellency, because asparagi, or the springs 
hereof are preferred before those of other plants whatsoever; for 
this Latin word Asparagus doth properly signify the first spring or 
sprout of every plant, especially when it is tender and before it do 
grow into a hard stalk, as are the buds, tendrils, or young springs 
of wild Vine or hops, and such like.

Wild Sperage named in Latin Asparagus sylvestris, and Corruda.

The Temperature.

The roots of the garden Sperage, and also of the wild, do cleanse 
without manifest heat and dryness.

 The Virtues.

A. The first sprouts or naked tender shoots hereof be oftentimes 
sodden in flesh broth and eaten, or boiled in fair water, and 
seasoned with oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper, then are served at 
men's tables for a salad; they are pleasant to the taste, easily 
concocted, and gently loose the belly.

B. They somewhat provoke urine, are good for the kidneys and bladder, 
but they yield unto the body little nourishment, and the same moist, 
yet not faulty: they are thought to increase seed, and stir up lust.



CHAP. 458. Of Horsetail, or Shavegrass.

Fig. 1589. Great Horsetail (1) Fig. 1590. Naked Horsetail (2) 
The Description.

1. Great Horsetail riseth up with a round stalk, hollow within like a 
Reed, a cubit high, compact as it were of many small pieces, one put 
into the end of another, sometimes of a reddish colour, very rough, 
and set at every joint with many stiff rush-like leaves or rough 
bristles, which maketh the whole plant to resemble the tail of a 
horse, whereof it took his name: on the top of the stalk do stand 
instead of flowers clustered and thick catkins, not unlike to the 
first shoots of Sperage, which is called Myacantha: the root is 
jointed, and creepeth in the ground.

2. This small or naked Shave-grass, wherewith fletchers and comb-
makers do rub and polish their work, riseth out of the ground like 
the first shoots of Asparagus, jointed or kneed by certain distances 
like the precedent, but altogether without such bristly leaves, yet 
exceeding rough and cutting: the root groweth aslope in the earth, 
like those of the Couch-grass.


Fig. 1591. Kinds of Horsetail (3-6) 

3. Horsetail which for the mot part groweth among corn, and where 
corn hath been, hath a very slender root, and single; from which rise 
up divers jointed stalks, whereon do grow very long rough narrow 
jointed leaves, like unto the first described, but thicker and 
rougher, as is the rest of the plant.

4. Water Horsetail, that grows by the brinks of rivers and running 
streams, and often in the midst of the water, hath a very long root, 
according to the depth of the water, gross, thick,and jointed, with 
some threads annexed thereto: from which riseth up a great thick 
jointed stalk, whereon do grow long rough rushy leaves, pyramid or 
steeple fashion. The whole plant is also tough, hard, and fit to 
shave and rub wooden things as the other.

5. This kind of Horsetail that grows in woods and shadowy places, 
hath a small root, and single, from which riseth up a rough chamfered 
stalk jointed by certain spaces, having at each joint two e of rough 
bristly leaves set one against another like the other of his kind.

6. The female Horsetail groweth for the most part in waterish places, 
and on the brinks of small rills and purling brooks; it hath a long 
root like that of Couch Grass, from which rise up divers hollow 
stalks, set about at certain distances with small leaves in roundels 
like those of Woodruff, altogether barren of seed and flower, whereof 
it was called by Lobel, Polygona fmine semine vidua. So sayeth our 
author, but it is sometimes found with ten or more seeds at each 
joint; whence Bauhin hath called it Equisetum palustre brevioribus 
foliis polyspermon.

7. In some boggy places of this kingdom is found a rare and pretty 
Hippuris or Horsetail, which grows up with many little branches, some 
two or three inches high, putting forth at each joint many little 
leaves, clustering close about the stalk, and set after the manner of 
other Horsetails: towards the tops of the branches the joints are 
very thick: the colour of the whole plant is grey, a little inclining 
to green, very brittle, and as it were stony or gravelly like 
Coralline, and will crash under your feet, as if it were frozen; and 
if you chew it, you shall find it all stony or gravelly. My friend Mr 
Leonard Buckner was the first that found this plant, and brought it 
to me; he had it three miles beyond Oxford, a little on this side 
Evansham ferry, in a bog upon a common by the Beacon hill near 
Cummer-wood, in the end of August, 1632. Mr Bowles hath since found 
it growing upon a bog not far from Chislehurst in Kent. I question 
whether this be not the Hippuris lacustris quædam foliis mansu 
arenolis of Gesner: but if Gesner's be that which Bauhin in his 
Prodromus, pag. 24. sets forth by the name of Equisetum nudum minus 
variegatum, then I judge it not to be this of my description: for 
Bauhin's differs from this in that it is without leaves, and oft 
times bigger: the staks of his are hollow, these not so: this may be 
called Hippuris coralloides; Horsetail Coralline.

8. Towards the later end of the year, in divers ditches, as in Saint 
James his Park, in the ditches on the back of Southwark towards Saint 
George's fields, &c. you may find covered over with water a kind of 
stinking Horsetail: it grows sometimes a yard long, with many joints 
and branches, and each joint set with leaves, as in the other 
Horsetails, but they are somewhat jagged or divided towards the tops. 
I take this to be the Equisetum ftidum sub aqua repens, described in 
the first place of Bauhin his Prodromus: we may call it in English, 
Stinking Water Horsetail.


Fiog. 1592. Italian Rushy Horsetail (9) 

9. Clusius hath set forth a plant, that he referreth unto the stock 
of Horsetails, which he thus describeth: it hath many twiggy or rushy 
stalks, whereupon it was called Iuncaria: and may be Englished, Rush-
Weed: the leaves grow upon the branches like those of Flax: on the 
tops of the stalks grow small chaffy flowers of a whitish colour. The 
seed is small, and black of colour. The root is little and white: the 
whole plant is sweetish in taste.

10. Dodonæus setteth forth another Horsetail, which he called 
climbing Horsetail, or Horsetail of Olympus. There is (saith he) 
another plant like Horsetail, but greater and higher. It riseth up 
oftentimes with a stalk as big as a man's arm, divided into many 
branches: out of which there grow long slender sprigs very full of 
joints, like to the first Horsetail. The flowers stand about the 
joints, of a mossy substance, small as are those of the Cornel tree; 
in place whereof grow up red fruit full of some juice, not unlike to 
little Mulberries, in which is the seed. The root is hard and woody. 
This grows now and then to a great height, and sometimes lower. 
Bellonius writeth in his Singularities, that it hath been seen to be 
equal in height with the Plane tree: it cometh up lower, near to 
shorter and lesser trees or shrubs, yet doth it not fasten itself to 
the trees with any tendrils or clasping aglets; much less doth it 
wind itself about them, yet doth it delight to stand near and close 
unto them.

The Place.

The titles and descriptions show the place of their growing: the last 
Bellonius reporteth to grow in divers valleys of the mountain 
Olympus, and not far from Ragusa a city in Slavonia.

The Time.

They flower from April to the end of summer.

The Names.

Horsetail is called in Greek Hippuris: in Latin, Equisetum and 
Equinalis: of Pliny in his 15th book, 28th chap. Equisetis, of the 
likeness of a horse hair: of some, Salix equina: in shops, Cauda 
equina: in High Dutch, Schaffthew: in Low Dutch, Peertsteert: 
Italian, Coda di Cavallo: in Spanish, Coda de mula: in French, Queue 
de cheval: and Caqueue: in English, Horsetail, and Shave-grass.

Shave-grass is not without cause named Asprella, of his ruggedness, 
which is not unknown to women, who scour their pewter and wooden 
things of the kitchen therewith: which the German women call 
Kannenkraut: and therefore some of our housewives do call it 
Pewterwort. Of some the tenth is called Ephedra, Anobasis, and 
Caucon.

The Temperature.

Horsetail, as Galen saith, hath a binding faculty, with some 
bitterness, and therefore it doth mightily dry, and that without 
biting.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that Horsetail being stamped and laid to, doth 
perfectly cure wounds, yea though the sinews be cut in sunder, as 
Galen addeth. It is of so great and so singular a virtue in healing 
of wounds, as that it is thought and reported for truth, to cure the 
wounds of the bladder, and other bowels, and helpeth ruptures or 
burstings.

B. The herb drunk either with water or wine, is an excellent remedy 
against bleeding at the nose, and other fluxes of blood. It stayeth 
the overmuch flowing of women's flowers, the bloody flux, and the 
other fluxes of the belly.

C. The juice of the herb taken in the same manner can do the like, 
and more effectually.

D. Horsetail with his roots boiled in wine, is very profitable for 
the ulcers of the kidneys & bladder, the cough and difficulty of 
breathing.



CHAP. 459. Of Sea-Grape.


Fig. 1593. Small Sea Grape (1) 

The Description.

1. Small Sea Grape is not unlike to Horsetail: it bringeth forth 
slender stalks, almost like rushes, set with many little joints, such 
as those are of the Horsetail, and divided into many wings and 
branches; the tops whereof are sharp pointed, somewhat hard and 
pricking: it is without leaves: the flowers grow in clusters out of 
the joints, with little stems, they are small and of a whitish green 
colour: the fruit consisteth of many little pearls, like to the 
unripe berries of Raspis or Hindberry: when it is ripe it is red with 
a saffron colour, in taste sweet and pleasant: the seed or kernel is 
hard, three square, sharp on every side, in taste binding: the root 
is jointed, long, and creeps aslope: the plant itself also doth 
rather lie on the ground than stand up: it groweth all full of small 
stalks and branches, casting themselves all abroad.

Fig. 1594. Great Sea Grape (2) Fig. 1595. Bastard Sea Grape (3) 	2. 
Carolus Clusius hath set forth another sort of Sea Grape, far 
different from the precedent; it riseth up to the height of a man, 
having many branches of a woody substance, in form like to Spanish 
Broom, without any leaves at all: whereupon do grow clusters of 
flowers upon slender footstalks, of a yellowish mossy or herby 
colour, like those of the Cornel tree: after which come the fruit 
like unto the mulberry, of a reddish colour and sour taste, wherein 
lie hid one or two seeds like those of Millet, black without, and 
white within; the root is hard, tough, and woody.

3. Tragon matthioli, or rather Tragos improbus matthioli, which he 
unadvisedly called Tragon, is without controversy nothing else but a 
kind of Kali: this plant riseth up out of the ground with stalks 
seldom a cubit high, divided into sundry other gross, thick, and 
writhing branches, set, or armed with many pricking leaves, of the 
colour and shape of Aizoon, and somewhat thick and fleshy: among 
which come forth such prickly burs, as are to be seen in Tribulus 
terrestris, as that it is hard for a man to touch any part thereof 
without pricking of the hands: the flowers are of an herby colour, 
bringing forth flat seed like unto Kali: the root is slender, and 
spreadeth under the turf of the earth: the whole plant is full of 
clammy juice, not anything astringent, but somewhat saltish, and of 
no singular virtue that is yet known: wherefore I may conclude, that 
this cannot be Tragos dioscoridis, and the rather, for that this 
Tragon of Matthiolus is an herb, and not a shrub, as I have before 
spoken in Uva marina, neither beareth it any berries or grains like 
wheat, neither is it pleasant in taste and smell, or anything 
astringent, all which are to be found in the right Tragos before 
expressed; which (as Dioscorides saith) is without leaves, neither is 
it thorny as Tragus improbus matthioli is: this plant I have found 
growing in the Isle of Sheppey, in the tract leading to the house of 
Sir Edward Hobby, called Sherland.

The Place.

It loveth to grow upon dry banks and sandy places near to the sea: it 
is found in Languedoc, not far from Montpellier, and in other places 
by the sea side, and is a stranger in England.

The Time.

When it groweth of itself the fruit is ripe in autumn, the plant 
itself remaineth long green, for all the cold in winter.

The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists, Uva Marina: in French, Raisin 
de mer, of the pearled fruit, and the likeness that it hath with the 
Raspis berry, which is as it were a Raisin or Grape, consisting of 
many little ones: it is named in Greek Tragos, but it is not called 
Tragos, or Traganos, of a goat (for so signifieth the Greek word) or 
of his rank and rammish smell, but because it bringeth forth fruit 
fit to be eaten, of the verb Trogein, which signifieth to eat: it may 
be called Scorpion, becausc the sprigs thereof are sharp pointed like 
to the Scorpion's tail.

The Temperature.

The berries or raisins, and especially the seed that is in them have 
a binding quality, as we have said, and they are dry in the later end 
of the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that the raisins of Sea Grape do stay the 
flux, and also the whites in women, when they much abound.



CHAP. 460. Of Madder.

Fig. 1596. Red Madder (1) Fig. 1597. Wild Madder (2) 
The Kinds

There is but one kind of Madder only which is manured or set for use, 
but if all those that are like unto it in leaves and manner of 
growing were referred thereto, there should be many sorts: as Goose-
Grass, Soft Cleaver, Our Lady's Bedstraw, Woodruff, and Crosswort, 
all which are like to Madder in leaves, and therefore they be thought 
to be wild kinds thereof.

The Description.

1. The garden or manured Madder hath long stalks or trailing branches 
dispersed far abroad upon the ground, square, rough, and full of 
joints; at every joint set round with green rough leaves, in manner 
of a star, or as those of Woodruff: the flowers grow at the top of 
the branches, of a faint yellow colour: after which come the seed, 
round, green at the first, afterward red, and lastly of a black 
colour: the root long, fat, full of substance, creepeth far abroad 
within the upper crust of the earth, and is of a reddish colour when 
it is green and fresh.

2. Wild Madder is like in form unto that of the garden, but 
altogether smaller, and the leaves are not so rough, but smooth and 
shining: the flowers are white; the root is very small and tender, 
and oftentimes of a reddish colour.

Fig. 1598. Sea Madder (3) Fig. 1599. Small Candy Madder (4) 

3. Sea Madder hath a root two foot long, with many dry threads 
hanging thereat, of a reddish colour like Alkanet, on the outside of 
the same form and bigness, but within it of the colour of the 
scrapings of Juniper, or Cedar wood, sending forth divers slender 
stalks round and full of joints: from which come forth small thin 
leaves, stiff and sharp pointed, somewhat hairy, in number commonly 
four, standing like a Burgundian cross; from the bosom of which come 
forth certain tufts of smaller leaves thrust together upon a heap: 
the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a pale yellowish 
colour.
Rubia spicata cretica clusii.

4. This hath proceeding from the root many knotty four-square rough 
little stalks, a foot high, divided immediately from the root into 
many branches, having but one side branch growing forth of one joint: 
about which joints grow spread abroad four or five, sometimes six 
narrow, short, sharp pointed leaves, somewhat rough; the top of the 
stalks and branches are nothing but long small four square spikes or 
ears, made of three-leaved green husks: out of the top of each husk 
groweth a very small greenish yellow flower, having four exceeding 
small leaves scarce to be seen: after which followeth in each husk 
one small blackish seed, somewhat long, round on the one side, with a 
dent or hollowness on the other. The root is small, hard, woody, 
crooked or scragged, with many little branches or threads, red 
without, and white within, and perisheth when the seeds are ripe. 
July 19, 1621.

Synanchia Lug. p. 1185.

5. The root is crooked, blackish without, yellow underneath the skin, 
white within that and woody; about five or six inches long, with many 
hairy strings: from the root arise many four-square branches trailing 
upon the ground, sometimes reddish towards the root: the leaves are 
small and sharp pointed, like those of Gallium, and grow along the 
stalk, on certain knees or joints, four or five rogether, sometimes 
fewer: from those joints the stalk divideth itself towards the top 
into many parts, whereon grow many flowers, each flower having four 
leaves, sometimes white, sometimes of a flesh colour, and every leaf 
of these flesh coloured leaves is artificially streaked in the 
middle, and near the sides with three lines of a deeper red, of no 
pleasant smell: after which cometh the seed something round, growing 
two together like stones. It flowereth all the summer long, and 
groweth in dry chalky grounds abundantly. August 13, 1619. John 
Goodyer.


Fig. 1600. Dwarf Madder (6) 

6. Lobel thus describes this Dwarf Madder: there is another (saith 
he) which I gathered, growing upon Saint Vincent's Rocks not far from 
Bristol: the leaves are of the bigness of those of Rupturewort, sharp 
pointed, and growing after the manner of those of Madder, upon little 
creeping stalks, some inch and half high, whereon grow yellowish 
small flowers. The root is small, and of the colour of coral.

The Place.

Madder is planted in gardens, and is very common in most places of 
England. Master George Bowles found it growing wild on Saint 
Vincent's Rock; and out of the cliffs of the rocks at Aberdovy in 
Merionethshire.

The second groweth in moist meadows, in moorish grounds, and under 
bushes almost everywhere.

3. This grows by the sea side in most places.

The fourth grows only in some few gardens with us, but the fifth may 
be found wild in many places: I found it in great plenty on the hill 
beyond Chatham in the way to Canturbury.

The Time.

They flourish from May unto the end of August: the roots are gathered 
and dried in autumn, and sold to the use of dyers and medicine.

The Names.

Madder is called in Greek Erythrodanum: in Latin, Rubia, and Rubeia: 
in shops, Rubia tinctorum: Paulus Ægineta showeth that it is named 
Thapson which the dyers use, and the Romans call it Herba rubia: in 
Italian Rubbia, and Robbia: in Spanish, Ruvia, Roya, and Granza: in 
French, Garance: in High Dutch, Rotte: in low Dutch, Mee, and Mee 
Crappen: in English, Madder, and Red Madder.

The Temperature.

Of the temperature of Madder, it hath been disputed among the 
learned, and as yet not censured, whether it do bind or open: some 
say both; divers diversely deem: a great physician (I do not say the 
great learned) called me to account as touching the faculties hereof; 
although he had no commission so to do, notwithstanding I was content 
to be examined upon the point, what the nature of Madder was, because 
I have written that it performeth contrary effects, as shall be 
showed: the roots of Madder, which both the physicians and dyers do 
use, as they have an obscure binding power and force; so be they 
likewise of nature and temperature cold and dry: they are withal of 
divers thin parts, by reason whereof their colour doth easily pierce: 
yet have they at the first a certain little sweetness, with an harsh 
binding quality presently following it; which not only we ourselves 
have observed, but Avicenna the prince of physicians, who in his 58th 
Chapter hath written, that the root of Madder hath a rough and harsh 
taste: now Mr Doctor, whether it bind or open I have answered, 
attending your censure: but if I have erred, it is not with the 
multitude, but with those of the best and best learned.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the roots of Madder is everywhere commended for 
those that are bursten, bruised, wounded, and that are fallen from 
high places.

B. It stancheth bleeding, mitigateth inflammations, and helpeth those 
parts that be hurt and bruised.

C. For these causes they be mixed with potions, which the later 
physicians call wound drinks, in which there is such force and 
virtue, as Matthiolus also reporteth, that there is likewise great 
hope of curing of deadly wounds in the chest and entrails.

D. Our opinion and judgement is confirmed by that most expert man, 
sometimes physician of Louvain, Iohannes Spiringus, who in his 
Rapsodes hath noted, that the decoction of Madder given with 
Triphera, that great composition is singular good to stay the reds, 
the hæmorrhoids and bloody flux, and the same approved by divers 
experiments: which confirmeth Madder to be of an astringent and 
binding quality.

E. Of the same opinion as it seemeth is also Eros Julia her freed man 
(commonly called Trotula) who in a composition against untimely birth 
doth use the same: for if he had thought that Madder were of such a 
quality as Dioscorides writeth it to be of, he would not in any wise 
have added it to those medicines which are good against an untimely 
birth.

F. For Dioscorides reporteth, that the root of Madder doth 
plentifully provoke urine, and that gross and thick and oftentimes 
blood also, and it is so great an opener, that being but only 
applied, it bringeth down the menses, the birth, and after-birth: but 
the extreme redness of the urine deceived him, that immediately 
followeth the taking of Madder, which redness came as he thought, 
from blood mixed therewith, which notwithstanding cometh no otherwise 
then from the colour of the Madder.

G. For the root hereof taken any manner of way doth by & by make the 
urine extreme red: no otherwise than Rhubarb doth make the same 
yellow, not changing in the meantime the substance thereof, not 
making it thicker than it was before, which is to be understood in 
those which are in perfect health, which thing doth rather show that 
it doth not open, but bind; no otherwise than Rhubarb doth: for by 
reason of his binding quality the waterish humours do for a while 
keep their colour. For colours mixed with binding things do longer 
remain in the things coloured, and do not so soon fade: this thing 
they will know that gather colours out of the juices of flowers and 
herbs, for with them they mix alum, to the end that the colour may be 
retained and kept the longer, which otherwise would be quickly lost. 
By these things it manifestly appeareth that Madder doth nothing 
vehemently either cleanse or open, and that Dioscorides hath rashly 
attributed unto it this kind of quality, and after him Galen and the 
rest that followed, standing stiffly to his opinion.

H. Pliny saith, that the stalks with the leaves of Madder, are used 
against serpents.

I. The root of Madder boiled in mead or honeyed water, and drunken, 
openeth the stopping of the liver, the milt and kidneys, and is good 
against the jaundice.

K. The same taken in like maner provoketh urine vehemently, insomuch 
that the often use thereof causeth one to piss blood, as some have 
dreamed.

L. Longius and other excellent physicians have experimented the same 
to amend the loathsome colour of the King's evil, and it helpeth the 
ulcers of the mouth, if unto the decoction be added a little alum and 
honey of Roses.

M. The fifth being the Synanchica of Dalechampius, dries without 
biting, and it is excellent against squinancies, either taken 
inwardly, or applied outwardly, for which cause they have called it 
Synanchica; Hist. Lugd.



CHAP. 461. Of Goose-Grass, or Cleavers.

Fig. 1601. Goose-Grass (1) Fig. 1602. Great Goose-Grass (2) 
The Description.

1. Aparine, Cleavers or Goose-Grass, hath many small square branches, 
tough and sharp, full of joints, beset at every joint with small 
leaves star fashion, and like unto small Madder: the flowers are very 
little and white, perching on the tops of the sprigs: the seeds are 
small, round, a little hollow in the midst in manner of a navel, set 
for the most part by couples: the roots slender and full of strings: 
the whole plant is rough, and his ruggedness taketh hold of men's 
vestures and woollen garments as they pass by: being drawn along the 
tongue it fetcheth blood: Dioscorides reports, that the shepherds 
instead of a colander do use it to take hairs out of milk, if any 
remain therein.

2. The great Goose-Grass of Pliny is one of the Moonworts of Lobel, 
it hath a very rough tender stalk, whereupon are set broad leaves 
somewhat long, like those of Scorpion grass, or Alysson galeni, 
Gale's Moonwort, very rough and hairy, which grow not about the 
joints, but three or four together on one side of the stalk: the 
flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a blue colour: after 
which cometh rough cleaving seeds, that do stick to men's garments 
which touch it: the root is small and single.

The Place.

Goose-Grass groweth near the borders of fields, and oftentimes in the 
fields themselves mixed with the corn: also by common ways, ditches, 
hedges, and among thorns: Theophrastus and Galen write, that it 
groweth among Lentils, and with hard embracing it doth choke it, and 
by that means is burdensome and troublesome unto it.

The Time.

It is found plentifully everywhere in summer time.

The Names.
It is named in Greek Apparine: in Latin, Lappa minor, but not 
properly: Pliny affirmeth it to be Lappaginis speciem: of some, 
Philanthropos, as though he should say, a man's friend, because it 
taketh hold of men's garments; of divers also for the same cause 
Philadelphos: in Italian, Speronella: in Spanish, Presera, or Amor de 
Hortalano: in High Dutch Kleeb kraut: in French, Reble, ou Grateron: 
in low Dutch, Kleefcruyt: in English, Goose-Share, Goose-Grass, 
Cleaver, or Claver.

The Temperature.

It is, as Galen saith, moderately hot and dry, and somewhat of thin 
parts. 

The Virtues.

A. The juice which is pressed out of the seeds, stalks, and leaves, 
as Dioscorides writeth, is a remedy for them that are bitten of the 
poisonsome spiders called in Latin Phalangia, and of vipers if it be 
drunk with wine.

B. And the herb stamped with swine's grease wasteth away the kernels 
by the throat.

C. Pliny teacheth that the leaves being applied do also stay the 
abundance of blood issuing out of wounds.

D. Women do usually make pottage of Cleavers with a little mutton and 
oatmeal, to cause lankness, and keep them from fatness.



CHAP. 462. Of Crosswort.

Fig. 1603. Crosswort (1) Fig. 1604. Madder Crosswort (2) 
The Description.

1. Crosswort is a low and base herb, of a pale green colour, having 
many square feeble rough stalks full of joints or knees, covered over 
with a soft down: the leaves are little, short, & small, always four 
growing together, and standing crosswise one right against another, 
making a right Burgundian cross: toward the top of the stalk, and 
from the bosom of those leaves come forth very many small yellow 
flowers, of a reasonable good savour, each of which is also shaped 
like a Burgundian cross: the roots are nothing else but a few small 
threads or fibres.

2. This in mine opinion may be placed here as fitly as any where 
else; for it hath the leaves standing crossways four at a joint, 
somewhat like those of the largest Chickweed: the stalks are between 
a foot and a half and two cubits high. The white star-fashioned 
flowers stand in roundels about the tops of the stalks. It grows 
plentifully in Piedmont, on the hills not far from Turin. Lobel sets 
it forth by the name of Rubia lævis taurinensium.

The Place.

Cruciata, or Crosswort, groweth in moist and fertile meadows; I found 
the same growing in the churchyard of Hampstead near London, and in a 
pasture adjoining thereto, by the mill: also it groweth in the lane 
or highway beyond Charlton, a small village by Greenwich, and in 
sundry other places.

The Time

It flowereth for the most part all summer long.

The Names.

It is called Cruciata, and Cruciatis, of the placing of the leaves in 
manner of a cCross: in English, Crosswort, or Golden Mugweed.

The Temperature.

Crosswort seemeth to be of a binding and dry quality.

The Virtues.

A. Crosswort hath an excellent property to heal, join, and close 
wounds together, yea it is very fit for thern, whether they be inward 
or outward, if the said herb be boiled in wine and drunk.

B. The decoction thereof is also ministered with good success to 
those that are bursten: and so is the herb, being boiled until it be 
soft, and laid upon the bursten place in manner of a poultice.



CHAP. 463. Of Woodruff.

Fig. 1605. Woodruff (1) Fig. 1606. Blue Woodruff (2) 
The Description.

1. Woodruff hath many square stalks full of joints, and at every knot 
or joint seven or eight long narrow leaves, set round about like a 
star, or the rowel of spur; the flowers grow at the top of the stems, 
of a white colour, and of a very sweet smell, as is the rest of the 
herb, which being made up into garlands or bundles, and hanged up in 
houses in the heat of summer, doth very well attemper the air, cool 
and make fresh the place, to the delight and comfort of such as are 
therein.

2. There is another sort of Woodruff called Asperula cæerulea, or 
blue Woodruff: it is an herb of a foot high, soft, hairy, and 
something branched, with leaves & stalks like those of white 
Woodruff; the flowers thereof are blue, standing upon stems on the 
tops of the stalks: the seed is small, round, and placed together by 
couples: the root is long, and of a red colour.


Fig. 1607. Spurrey (3) 

3. There is another herb called Saginæ spergula, or Spurrey, which is 
sown in Brabant, Holland, and Flanders, of purpose to fatten cattle, 
and to cause them to give much milk, and there called Spurrey, and 
Frank Spurrey: it is a base and low herb, very tender, having many 
jointed stalks, whereupon do grow leaves set in round circles like 
those of Woodruff, but lesser and smoother, in form like the rowel of 
a spur: at the top of the stalks do grow small white flowers, after 
which come round seed like those of Turnips: the root is small and 
thready.

4. There are one or two plants more, which may fitly be here 
mentioned: the first of them is the Spergula marina of Dalechampius, 
which from a pretty large woody and roughish root sends up jointed 
stalks some foot long: at each joint come forth two long thick round 
leaves, and out of their bosoms other lesser leaves: the top of the 
stalks is divided into sundry branches, bearing flowers of a faint 
reddish colour, composed of five little leaves, with yellowish 
threads in the middle; after which follow cups or seed vessels, which 
open into four parts, and contain a little flat reddish seed: it 
grows in the salt marshes about Dartford, and other such places; 
flowers in July and August, and in the mean space ripens the seed. We 
may call this in English, Sea Spurrey.

5. This other hath a large root, considering the smallness of the 
plant: from which arise many weak slender branches some three or four 
inches long, sometimes more, lying commonly flat on the ground, 
having many knots or joints: at each whereof usually grow a couple of 
white scaly leaves, and out of their bosoms other small sharp pointed 
little green leaves: at the tops of the branches grow little red 
flowers, succeeded by such, yet lesser heads than those of the 
former: it flowers in July and August, and grows in sandy grounds, as 
in Tuthill Fields nigh Westminster; the figure set forth in Hist. 
Lugd. p. 2179, by the title of Chamepeuce plinii; Camphorata minor 
dalechampii seems to be of this plant, but without the flower: Bauhin 
in his Prodromus describes it by the name of Alsine Spergulæ facie. 
This may be called Chickweed Spurrey, or Small Red Spurrey.

The Place.

White Woodruff groweth under hedges, and in woods almost everywhere: 
the second groweth in many places of Essex, and divers other parts in 
sandy grounds. The third in Cornfields.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

Most have taken Woodruff to be Pliny his Alyssos, which as he saith, 
doth differ from Erythrodanum, or Garden Madder, in leaves only, and 
lesser stalks: but such a one is not only this, but also that with 
blue flowers: for Galen doth attribute to Alyssos, a blue flower: 
notwithstanding Galen's and Pliny's Alyssos are thought to differ by 
Galen's own words, writing of Alyssos in his second book Of 
Counterpoisons, in Antonius Cous his composition, in this manner: 
Alyssos is an herb very like unto Horehound, but rougher and fuller 
of prickles about the circles: it beareth a flower tending to blue.

Woodruff is named of divers in Latin  Asperula odorata, and of most 
men, Aspergula odorata: of others, Cordialia, and Stellaria: in High 
Dutch, Hertzfreyt: in low Dutch, Leverkraut; that is to say 
Iecoraria, or Hepatica, Liverwort: in French, Muguet: in English, 
Woodruff, Woodrow, and Woodrowell.

The Temperature.

Woodruff is of temperature something like unto Our Lady's Bedstraw; 
but not so strong, being in a mean between heat and dryness.

The Virtues.

A. It is reported to be put into wine, to make a man merry, and to be 
good for the heart and liver: it prevaileth in wounds, as Cruciata, 
and other vulnerary herbs do.



CHAP. 464. Of Lady's Bedstraw.

Fig. 1608. Lady's Bedstraw (1) Fig. 1609. White Lady's Bedstraw (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers of the herbs called Lady's Bedstraw, or Cheese-
Rennet, some greater, others less; some with white flowers, and some 
with yellow.

The Description.

1. Lady's Bedstraw hath small round even stalks, weak and tender, 
creeping hither and thither upon the ground: whereon do grow very 
fine leaves, cut into small jags, finer than those of Dill, set at 
certain spaces, as those of Woodruff: among which come forth flowers 
of a yellow colour, in clusters or bunches thick thrust together, of 
a strong sweet smell but not unpleasant: the root is small and 
thready.

2. Lady's Bedstraw with white flowers is like unto Cleavers or Goose-
Grass, in leaves, stalks, and manner of growing, yet nothing at all 
rough, but smooth and soft: the flowers be white, the seed round: the 
roots slender, creeping within the ground: the whole plant rampeth 
upon bushes, shrubs and all other such things as stand near unto it: 
otherwise it cannot stand, but must reel and fall to the ground.

Fig. 1610. Red Lady's Bedstraw (3) Fig. 1611. Great Bastard Madder 
(4) 	3. This small Gallium, or Lady's Little Red Bedstraw, hath been 
taken for a kind of wild Madder; nevertheless it is a kind of Lady's 
Bedstraw, or Cheese-Rennet, as appeareth both by his virtues in 
turning milk to cheese, as also by his form, being in each respect 
like unto yellow Gallium, and differs in the colour of the flowers, 
which are of a dark red colour with a yellow pointel in the middle, 
consisting of four small leaves: the seed hereof was sent me from a 
citizen of Strasbourg in Germany, and it hath not been seen in these 
parts before this time.

4. There is likewise another sort of Gallium for distinction's sake 
called Mollugo, which hath stalks that need not to be propped up, but 
of itself standeth upright, and is like unto the common white 
Gallium, but that it hath a smoother leaf. The flowers thereof be 
also white, and very small. The root is blackish.

The Place.

The first groweth upon sunny banks near the borders of fields, in 
fruitful soils everywhere.

The second groweth in marsh grounds and other moist places.

The third groweth upon mountains and hilly places, and is not yet 
found in England

The fourth and last groweth in hedges among bushes in most places.

The Time.

They flower most of the summer months.

The Names.

The first is called in Greek Galion: it hath that name of milk, 
called in Greek Gala, into which it is put as cheese-rennet: in Latin 
likewise Gallium: in High Dutch, Magerkraut, Walstroo: in Low Dutch, 
Waltroo: in French, Petit Maguet: in Italian, Galio: in Spanish, 
Coaialeche yerva: in English, our Lady's Bedstraw, Cheese-Rennet, 
Maid's Hair, and Petty Mugweed.

The others are species Lappaginis, or kinds of small Burs, so taken 
of the ancients: The last, of the softness and smoothness of the 
leaves, is commonly called Mollugo: divers take it for a kind of wild 
Madder, naming it Rubia sylvestris, or wild Madder.

The Temperature.

These herbs, especially that with yellow flowers, are dry and 
something binding, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. The flowers of Yellow Maid's Hair, as Dioscorides writeth, is used 
in ointments against burnings, and it stancheth blood: it is put into 
the cerote or cere-cloth of Roses; it is set a sunning in a glass, 
with Oil Olive, until it be white: it is good to anoint the wearied 
traveller: the root thereof drunk in wine stirreth up bodily lust; 
and the flowers smelled unto work the same effect.

B. The herb thereof is used for rennet to make cheese, as Matthiolus 
reporteth, saying, That the people of Tuscany or Etruria do use to 
turn their milk, that the cheese which they make of sheep's and 
goat's milk might be the sweeter and more pleasant in taste, and also 
more wholesome, especially to break the stone, as it is reported.

C. The people in Cheshire, especially about Nantwich, where the best 
cheese is made, do use it in their Rennet, esteeming greatly of that 
cheese above other made without it.

D. We find nothing extant in the ancient writers, of the virtues and 
faculties of the white kind, but are as herbs never had in use either 
for physic or surgery.



CHAP. 465. Of Fern.

Fig. 1612. Male Fern (1) Fig. 1613. Female Fern, or Brake (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Fern, differing as well in form as place of 
growing; whereof there be two sorts according to the old writers, the 
male and the female; and these be properly called Fern: the others 
have their proper names, as shall be declared.

The Description.

1. The Male Fern bringeth forth presently from the root broad leaves 
and rough, somewhat hard, easy to be broken, of a light green colour, 
and strong smell, more than a cubit long, spread abroad like wings, 
compounded as it were of a great number st upon a middle rib, every 
one whereof is like a feather, nicked in the edges, and on the 
backside are sprinkled as it were with a very fine earthy-coloured 
dust or spots, which many rashly have taken for seed: the root 
consisteth of a number of tufts or threads, and is thick and black, 
and is without stalk and seed, and altogether barren.

Filicis (vulgo) maris varietates & differentiæ.
Differences of the male Fern.

I have observed four sorts of Fern, by most writers esteemed to be 
the Male Fern of Dioscordes: by Anguillara, Gesner, Cæsalpinus, and 
Clusius, accounted to be the female, and so indeed do I think them to 
be, though I call them the male, with the multitude. If you look on 
these Ferns according to their several growths and ages, you may make 
many more sorts of them than I have done; which I am afraid hath been 
the occasion of describing more sorts than indeed there are in 
nature. These descriptions I made by them when they were in their 
perfect growths.

1A. Filix mas ramosa pinulis dentatis.

The roots are nothing but an abundance of small black hairy strings, 
growing from the lower parts of the main stalks (for stalks I will 
call them) where those stalks are joined together. At the beginning 
of the spring you may perceive the leaves to grow forth of their 
folding clusters, covered with brownish scales at the superficies of 
the earth, very closely joined together: a young plant hath but a few 
leaves; an old one, ten, twelve, or more: each stalk at his lower end 
near the joining to his fellows, at his first appearing, before he is 
an inch long having some of those black fibrous roots for his 
sustenance. The leaves being at their full growth hath each of them a 
three-fold division, as hath that Fern which is commonly called the 
female: the main stalk, the side branches growing from him, and the 
nerves growing on those side branches bearing the leaves: the main 
stalk of that plant I describe was fully four foot long (but there 
are usually from one foot to four in length) full of those brownish 
scales, especially toward the root, firm, one side flat, the rest 
round, naked fully one and twenty inches, to the first pair of side 
branches. The side branches, the longest being the third pair from 
the root, were nine inches long, and shorter and shorter towards the 
top, in number about twenty pairs; for the most part towards the root 
they grow by couples, almost opposite, the near the top the further 
from opposition: the nerves bearing the leaves, the longest were two 
inches and a quarter long, and so shorter and shorter toward the tops 
of the side branches; about twenty in number on each side of the 
longest side branch. The leaves grow for the most part by couples on 
the nerve, eight or nine pair on a nerve; each leaf being gashed by 
the sides, the gashes ending with sharp points, of a deep green on 
the upper side, on the underside paler, and each leaf having two rows 
of dusty red scales, of a brown or blackish colour: toward the top of 
the main stalk those side branches change into nerves, bearing only 
the leaves. When the leaves are at their full growth, you may see in 
the midst of them at their roots the said scaly folding cluster; and 
as the old leaves with their black thready roots wholly perish, they 
spring up; most years you may find many of the old leaves green all 
the winter, especially in warm places. This groweth plentifully in 
the boggy shadowy moors near Durford Abbey in Sussex, and also on the 
moist shadowy rocks by Mapledurham in Hampshire, near Petersfield; 
and I have found it often on the dead putrefied bodies and stems of 
old rotten oaks, in the said moors; near the old plants I have 
observed very many small young plants growing, which came by the 
falling of the seed from those dusty scales: for I believe all herbs 
have seeds in themselves to produce their kinds, Gen. I, 11. & 12.

The three other have but a twofold division, the many stalks and the 
nettles bearing the leaves. The roots of them all are black fibrous 
threads like the first, their main stalks grow many thick and close 
together at the root, as the first doth: the difference is in the 
fashion of their leaves, and manner of growing, and for distinction's 
sake I have thus called them:

1B. Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis latis densis minutim dentatis.

The leaves are of a yellowish green colour on both sides, set very 
thick and close together on the nerve, that you cannot see between 
them, with marvellous small nicks by their sides, and on their round 
tops: each leaf hath also two rows of dusty seed scales; the figures 
set forth by Lobel, Tabernamontanus and Gerard, under the title of 
Filix mas, do well resemble this Fern. This grows plentifully in most 
places in shadowy woods and copses.

1C. Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis angustis, raris, profunde dentatis.

The leaves are of a deep green, not closely set together on the the 
nerve, but you may far off see betwixt them; deeply indented by the 
sides, ending with a point not altogether sharp: each leaf hath also 
two rows of dusty seed scales. I have not seen any figure well 
resembling this plant. This groweth also in many places in the shade.

1D. Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis latis auriculatis spinosis.

The leaves are of a deeper green than either of the two last 
described, placed on the nerve not very close together, but that you 
may plainly see between them; each leaf (especially those next the 
stalk) having on that side farthest off the stalk a large ear or 
outgrowing ending, with a sharp prick like a hair, as doth also the 
top of the leaf: some of the sides of the leaves are also nicked; 
ending with the like prick or hair. Each leaf hath two rows of dusty 
seed scales. This I take to be Filix mas aculeata maior of Bauhin. 
Neither have I seen any figure resembling this plant. It groweth 
abundantly on the shadowy moist rocks by Mapledurham near Petersfield 
in Hampshire. John Goodyer. July 4. 1633.

2. The female Fern hath neither flowers nor seed, but one only stalk, 
chamfered, something edged, having a pith within of divers colours, 
the which being cut aslope, there appeareth a certain form of a 
spread eagle: about this stand very many leaves which are winged, and 
like to the leaves of the male Fern, but lesser: the root is long and 
black, and creepeth in the ground, being now and then an inch thick, 
or somewhat thinner. This is also of a strong smell, as is the male.

The Place.

Both the Ferns are delighted to grow in barren dry and desert places: 
and as Horace testifieth
Neglectis urenda Filix innascitur agris.
["Fern, fit only for burning, overruns the neglected fields"
Horace, Satires III, l. 37]

It comes not up in manured and dunged places, for if it be dunged (as 
Theophrastus, lib. 8. cap. 8. reporteth) it withereth away.

The male joyeth in open and champion places, on mountains and stony 
grounds, as Dioscorides saith. It grows commonly in shadowy places 
under hedges.

The female is often found about the borders of fields under thorns 
and in shadowy woods.

The Time.

Both these Ferns wither away in winter: in the spring there grow 
forth new leaves, which continue green all summer long.

The Names.

The former is called in Greek Pteris: Nicander in his discourse Of 
Treacle nameth it Blaron: in Latin Filix mas: in Italian, Felce: in 
Spanish, Helecho, Falguero, and Feyto: in High Dutch, Waldt Farne: in 
French, Fougere, or Feuchiere masle: in Low Dutch, Varen Manneken; in 
English, Male Fern.

The second kind is called in Greek Gynepteris, that is, Filix fmina, 
or Female Fern: in Latin, as Dioscorides noteth among the bastard 
names, Lingua cervina: in High Dutch, Waldt Farn Weiblin, and Grosz 
Farnkraut: in Low Dutch, Varen Wijfken: in French, Fougere femelle:in 
English, Brake, Common Fern, and Female Fern.

The Temperature.

Both the Ferns are hot, bitter, and dry, and something binding.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of the Male Fern being taken to the weight of half an 
ounce, driveth forth long flat worms out of the belly, as Dioscorides 
writeth, being drunk in Mead or honeyed water; and more effectually, 
if it be given with two scruples or two third parts of a dram of 
Scammony, or of Black Hellebore: they that will use it, saith he, 
must first eat Garlick. After the same manner, as Galen addeth, it 
killeth the child in the mother's womb. The root hereof is reported 
to be good for them that have ill spleens: and being stamped with 
swine's grease and applied, it is a remedy against the pricking of 
the reed: for proof hereof, Dioscorides saith the Fern dieth if the 
Reed be planted about it; and contrariwise, that the Reed shall if it 
be compassed with Fern: which is vain to think, that it happeneth by 
any antipathy or natural hatred, and not by reason this Fern 
prospereth not in moist places, nor the Reed in dry.

B. The Female Fern is of like operation with the former, as Galen 
saith. Dioscorides reports, that this bringeth barrenness, especially 
to women, and that it causeth women to be delivered before their 
time; he addeth, that the powder hereof finely beaten is laid upon 
old ulcers, and healeth the galled necks of oxen and other cattle: it 
is also reported, that the root of Fern cast into an hogshead of wine 
keepeth it from souring.

C. The root of the Male Fern sodden in wine is good against the 
hardness and stopping of the milt: and being boiled in water, stayeth 
the lask in young children, if they be set over the decoction thereof 
to ease their bodies by a close stool.

CHAP. 466. Of Water-Fern, or Osmund the Waterman.


Fig. 1614. Water Fern, Or Osmund Royal

The Description.

Water Fern hath a great triangled stalk two cubits high, beset upon 
each side with large leaves spread abroad like wings, and dented or 
cut like Polypody: these leaves are like the large leaves of the Ash 
tree; for doubtless when I first saw them afar off it caused me to 
wonder thereat, thinking that I had seen young Ashes growing upon a 
bog; but beholding it a little nearr, I might easily distinguith it 
from the Ash, by the brown rough and round grains that grew on the 
top of the branches, which yet are not the seed thereof, but are very 
like unto the seed. The root is great and thick, folded and covered 
over with many scales and interlacing roots, having in the middle of 
the great and hard woody part thereof some small whiteness, which 
hath been called the heart of Osmund the Waterman.

The Place.

It groweth in the midst of a bog at the further end of Hampstead 
Heath from London, at the bottom of a hill adjoining to a small 
cottage, and in divers other places, as also upon divers bogs on a 
heath or common near unto Bruntwood in Essex, especially near unto a 
place there that some have digged, to the end to find a nest or mine 
of gold; but the birds were over fledge, and flown away before their 
wings could be clipped. So saith our author, and it did grow 
plentifully in both these places, but of late it is all destroyed in 
the former.

The Time.

It flourisheth in summer, as the former Ferns: the leaves decay in 
winter; the root continueth fresh and long lasting; which being 
brought into the garden prospereth as in his native soil, as myself 
have proved.

The Names

It is called in Latin Osmunda: it is more truly named Filix 
palustris, or aquatilis: some term it by the name of Filicastrum: 
most of the alchemists call it Lunaria maior: Valerius Cordus nameth 
it Filix latifolia: it is named in High Dutch, Grosz Farn: in Low 
Dutch, Groot Varen, Wilt Varen: in English, Water-Fern, Osmund the 
Waterman: of some, Saint Christopher's Herb, and Osmund.

 The Temperature.

The root of this also is hot and dry, but less than those of the 
former ones.

The Virtues.

A. The root, and especially the heart or middle part thereof, boiled 
or else stamped, and taken with some kind of liquor, is thought to be 
good for those that are wounded, dry-beaten, and bruised; that have 
fallen from some high place: and for the same cause the empirics do 
put it in decoctions, which the later physicians do call wound-
drinks: some take it to be so effectual, and of so great a virtue, as 
that it can dissolve cluttered blond remaining in any inward part of 
the body, and that it also can expel or drive it out by the wound.

B. The tender sprigs thereof at their first coming forth are 
excellent good unto the purposes aforesaid, and are good to be put 
into balms, oils, and consolidatines, or healing plasters, and into 
unguents appropriate unto wounds, punctures, and such like.



CHAP. 467. Of Polypody or Wall-Fern.

Fig. 1615. Wall Fern or Polypody (1) Fig. 1616 Oak Polypody (2) 
The Description.

1. The leaves of Polypody might be thought to be like those of male 
Fern, but that they are far lesser, and not nicked at all in the 
edges: these do presently spring up from the roots, being cut on both 
the edges with many deep gashes, even hard to the middle rib; on the 
upper side they are smooth, on the nether side they are lightly 
powdered as it were with dusty marks: the root is long, not a finger 
thick, creeping aslope, on which are seen certain little buttons like 
to those pits and dents that appear in the tails of cuttle fishes: 
this hath in it a certain sweetness, with a taste something harsh: 
this kind of Fern likewisec wanteth not only flowers and seed, but 
stalks also.

2. Polypody of the Oak is much like unto that of the wall, yet the 
leaves of it are more finely cut, smooth on the upper side, of a pale 
green colour, together with the stalks and middle ribs; on the nether 
side rough like those of Fern: this Fern also liveth without a stalk; 
it groweth without seed: the root hath many strings fastened to it, 
one folded within another, of a mean bigness, and sweet in taste: it 
sendeth forth here and there new dodkins or springs, whereby it 
increaseth.


Fig. 1617. Indian Polypody (3) 

3. Clusius in his Exotics, lib. 4. cap. 7, gives us the history of an 
Indian Fern or Polypody found amongst the papers of one Dr. Nicholas 
Colie a Dutch physician, who died in his return from the East Indies. 
The root of it was six inches long, and almost one thick, of the same 
shape and colour as the ordinary one is: from this came up three 
leaves, of which the third was lesser than the other two; the two 
larger were eleven inches long, and their breadth from the middle rib 
(which was very large) was on each side almost five inches; the edges 
were divided almost like an oaken case: from the middle rib came 
other veins that ran to the ends of the divisions, and between these 
be smaller veins variously divaricated and netted, which made the 
leaf show prettily.. The colour of it was like that of a dry oaken 
leaf. Where Dr Colie gathered this it was uncertain, for he had left 
nothing in writing.

The Place.

It groweth on the bodies of old rotten trees, and also upon old 
walls, and the tops of houses: it is likewise found among rubbish 
near the borders of fields, especially under trees and thorns, and 
now and then in woods: and in some places it groweth rank and with a 
broader leaf, in others not so rank, and with a narrower leaf.

That which groweth on the bodies of old Oaks is preferred before the 
rest; instead of this most do use that which is found under the Oaks, 
which for all that is not to be termed Quercinum, or Polypody of the 
Oak.

The Time.

Polypody is green all the year long, and may be gathered at any time; 
it bringeth forth new leaves in the first spring.

The Names.

The Grecians call it Polypodion, of the holes of the fishes Polypi, 
appearing in the roots: it is called in Latin, Polypodium, after the 
Greek name, and many times Filicula, as though they should say Parva 
Filix or little Fern: the Italians name it, Polipodio: the Spaniards, 
Filipodio, and Polypodio: in High Dutch, Engelfusz, Baumfarn, 
Dropffoourtz: in low Dutch, Boom Varen: in French, Polypode: and we 
of England, Polypody: that which groweth upon the wall we call 
Polypody of the wall, and that on the Oak, Polypody of the Oak.

The Temperature.

Polypody doth dry, but yet without biting, as Galen writeth.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that it is of power to purge and to draw 
forth choler and phlegm. Clusius addeth, that it likewise purgeth 
melancholy: other suppose it to be without any purging force at all, 
or else to have very little: of the same mind is also Iohannes 
Monardus who thinketh it purgeth very gently; which thing is 
confirmed by experience, the mistress of things. For in very deed 
Polypody of itself doth nor purge at all, but only serveth a little 
to make the belly soluble, being boiled in the broth of an old cock; 
with Beets or Mallows, or other like things that move to the stool by 
their slipperiness. Iohannes Mesue reckoneth up Polypody among those 
things that do especially dry and make thin: peradventure he had 
respect to a certain kind of arthritis, or ache in the joints: in 
which not one only part of the body, but many together most commonly 
are touched: for which it is very much commended by the Brabanters 
and other inhabitants about the River Rhine, and the Maas. In this 
kind of disease the hands, the feet, and the joints of the knees and 
elbows do swell. There is joined withal a feebleness in moving, 
through the extremity of the pain: sometimes the upper parts are less 
grieved, and the lower more. The humours do also easily run from one 
place to another, and then settle. Against this disease the Guelders 
and Clevelanders do use the decotion of Polypody, whereby they hope 
that the superfluous humours may be wasted and dried up, and that not 
by and by, but in continuance of time: for they appoint that this 
decoction should be taken for certain days together.

B. But this kind of gout is sooner taken away either by blood 
letting, or by purgations, or by both, and afterwards by sweat; 
neither is it hard to be cured if these general remedies be used in 
time: for the humours do not remain fixed in those joints, but are 
rather gathered together than settled about them.

C. Therefore the body must out of hand be purged, and then that which 
remaineth is to be wasted and consumed away by such things as procure 
sweat.

D. Furthermore, Dioscorides saith, that the root of Polypody is very 
good for members out of joint, and for chaps between the fingers.

E. The root of Polypody boiled with a little honey, water, and 
pepper, and the quantity of an ounce given, emptieth the belly of 
choleric and pituitous humours; some boil it in water and wine, and 
give thereof to the quantity of three ounces for some purposes with 
good success.



CHAP. 468. Of Oak-Fern.


Fig. 1618. Kinds of Oak-Fern (1-3) 


I will in this chapter give you the Dryopteris of the Adversaria, 
then that of Dodonæus, and thirdly that of Tragus; for I take them to 
be different; and this last to be that figured by our author, out of 
Tabernamontanus.

The Description.

1. This kind of Fern called Dryopteris, or Filix querna, hath leaves 
like unto the Female Fern before spoken of, but much lesser, smaller, 
and more finely cut or jagged, and is not above a foot high, being a 
very slender and delicate tender herb. The leaves are so finely 
jagged that in show they resemble feathers, set round about a small 
rib or sinew; the back side being sprinkled, not with russet or brown 
marks or specks, as the other Ferns are, but as it were painted with 
white spots or marks, not standing out of the leaves in scales, as 
the spots in the male Fern, but they are double in each leaf close 
unto the middle rib or sinew. The root is long, brown, and somewhat 
hairy, very like unto Polypody, but much slenderer, of a sharp and 
caustic taste. Rondeletius affirmed that he found the use of this 
deadly, being put into medicines instead of Polypody by the ignorance 
of some apothecaries in Dauphiné in France. Mr Goodyer hath sent me 
an accurate description together with a plant of this Fern which I 
have thought good here also to set forth.

Dryopteris pena & lobelii.

The roots creep in the ground or mire, near the turf or upper part 
thereof; and fold amongst themselves, as the roots of Polypodium do, 
almost as big as a wheat straw, and about five, six, or seven inches 
long, coal black without, and white within, of a binding taste 
inclining to sweetness, with an innumerable company of small black 
fibres like hairs growing thereunto. The stalks spring from the roots 
in several places, in number variable, according to the length and 
increase of the root; I have seen small plants have but one or two, 
and some bigger plants have fourteen or fifteen: they have but a 
twofold division, the stalk growing from the root, and the nerve 
bearing the leaves: the stalk is about five, six, or seven inches 
long, no bigger than a Bennet or small grass stalk, one side flat, as 
are the male Ferns, the rest round, smooth, and green. The first pair 
of nerves grow about three inches from the root, and so do all the 
rest grow by couples, almost exactly one against another, in number 
about eight, nine, or ten couples, the longest seldom exceeding an 
inch in length. The leaves grow on those nerves also by couples, 
eight or nine couples on a nerve, without any nicks or indentures, of 
a yellowish green colour. This Fern may be said to be like Polypodium 
in his creeping root, like the male Fern in his stalk, and like the 
Female Fern in his nerves and leaves. I could find no seed-scales on 
the backsides of any of the leaves of this Fern. Many years past I 
found this same in a very wet moor or bog, being the land of Richard 
Austen, called Whitrow Moor, where peat is now digged, a mile from 
Petersfield in Hampshire; and this sixth of July, 1633, I digged up 
there many plants, and by them made this dcscription. I never found 
it growing in any other place: the leaves perish at winter, and grow 
up again very late in the spring. John Goodyer. July 6, 1633.

2. Dodonæus thus describes his: Dryopteris (saith he) doth well 
resemble the male Fern, but the leaves are much smaller, and more 
finely cut, smooth on the foresaid, and of a yellowish green together 
with the stalks and middle nerves; on the back it is rough as other 
Ferns, and also liveth without stalk or seed. The root consists of 
fibres intricately folded together, of an indifferent thickness, here 
and there putting up new buds. This is the Adianthum of the 
Adversaria who affirm the use thereof to be safe, and not pernicious 
and deletery, as that of Dryopteris. It thus differs from the former; 
the leaves of this are not set directly one opposite to another, the 
divisions of the leaves are larger and more divided. The root is more 
thready, and creeps not so much as that of the former.

3. This (which is Clusius his Filix pumila saxatilis prima, and which 
I take to be the Dryopteris or Filix arborea of Tragus) hath black 
slender long creeping roots, with few small hard hairy fibres 
fastened to them, of a very astringent taste: from these rise up 
sundry stalks a foot high, divided into certain branches of winged 
leaves, like to those of the female Fern, but much less, tenderer and 
finer cut, and having many blackish spots on their lower sides. This 
differs from the two former, in that the leaves are branched, which 
is a chief difference; and Bauhin did very well observe it, if he had 
as well followed it, when he divided Filix into ramosa & non ramosa.
The Place.

It is oftentimes found in sunny places, in the valleys of mountains 
and little hils, and in the tops of the trunks of trees in thick 
woods.

The Time.

The leaves hereof perish in winter; in the spring new come forth.

The Names.

This is called in Latin, Querna Filix: Oribasius in his eleventh book 
Of Physical Collections calleth it Bryopteris, of the moss with which 
it is found: for, as Dioscorides writeth, it groweth in the moss of 
Oaks. The apothecaries in times past miscalled it by the name of 
Adiantum: but they did worse in putting it in compound medicines 
instead of Adiantum. Valerius Cordus calleth it Pteridion: in Low 
Dutch, Eijken varen: the Spaniards, Helecho de Roble: it is named in 
English, Oak-Fern, Petty-Fern; and it may most fitly be called Moss-
Fern.

The Temperature & Virtues.

A. Oak-Fern hath many tastes, it is sweet, biting, and bitter; it 
hath in the root a harsh or choking taste, and a mortifying quality, 
and therefore it taketh away hairs. Dioscorides saith further, that 
Oak-Fern stamped roots and all is a remedy to root up hairs, if it be 
applied to the body after sweating, the sweat being wiped away.



CHAP. 469. Of Black Oak-Fern.


Fig. 1619. Black Oak-Fern

The Description.

1. There is also a certain other kind of Fern like to the former Oak-
Fern of Dodonæus his description, but the stalks and ribs of the 
leaves are blackish, and the leaves of a deeper green colour: this 
groweth out also immediately from the root, and is likewise 
diversely, but not so finely indented: the root is made up of many 
strings not unlike to the Male Fern, but much lesser.

2. The Female Black Fern is like unto the male, saving his leaves are 
not so sharp at the points, more white and broad than the male, 
wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

They grow likewise upon trees in shadowy woods, and now and then in 
shadowy sandy banks, and under hedges.

The Time.

They remain green all the year long, otherwise than Polypody & 
Maidenhair do; yet do they not cease to bring forth new leaves in 
summer: they are destitute of flowers and seed, as is the former.

The Names.

This is called of divers of the later herbarists, Dryopteris nigra, 
or Black Oak-Fern, of the likeness that it hath with Dryopteris, 
which we have called in English, Oak-Fern, or Moss Fern: of others, 
Adiantum nigrum, or Black Maidenhair, that it may differ from the 
former, which is falsely called Adiantum. There are of the later 
herbarists who would have it to be Lonchitis aspera, or rough 
Spleenwort; but what likeness hath it with the leaves of 
Scolopendrium? none at all: therefore it is not Lonchitis aspera, 
much less Adiantum plinii, which differeth not from Adiantum 
theophrasti for what he hath of Adiantum, the same he taketh out of 
Theophrastus: the right Adiantum we will describe hereafter. 
Notwithstanding Black Oak-Fern was used of divers unlearned 
apothecaries of France and Germany for Adiantum, or Maidenhair of 
Lombardy: but these men did err in doing so; yet not so much as they 
who take Polypody of the Oak for the true Maidenhair.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The Black Oak-Fern hath no styptic quality at all, but is like in 
faculty to Trichomanes, or English Maidenhair.



CHAP. 470. Of Hart's-Tongue.


Fig. 1620. Kinds of Hart's-Tongue and Moon-Fern (1-4) 

The Description.

1. The common kind of Hart's-Tongue, called Phyillitis, that is to 
say, a plant consisting only of leaves, bearing neither stalk, 
flower, nor seed, resembling in show a long tongue, whereof it hath 
been and is called in shops Lingua cervina, that is, Hart's tongue: 
these leaves are a foot long, smooth and plain pon one side, but upon 
that side next the ground streaked overthwart with certain long rough 
marks like small worms, hanging on the back side thereof. The root is 
black, hairy, and twisted, or so growing as though it were wound 
together.

2. The other kind of Fern, called Phyllitis multfida or laciniata, 
that is, jagged Hart's-Tongue, is very like unto the former saving 
that the leaves thereof are cut or jagged like a man's hand, or the 
palm and brow antlers of a deer, bearing neither stalk, flower, nor 
seed.

3. There is another kind of Hart's-Tongue called Hemionitis, which 
hath bred some controversy among writers: for some have took it for a 
kind of Hart's-Tongue, as it is indeed; others describe it as a 
proper plant by itself, called Hemionitis, of Emionos, that is, 
Mulus, a Mule, because Mules do delight to feed thereon: it is barren 
in seeds, stalks, and flowers, and in shape it agreeth very well with 
our Hart's-Tongue: the roots are compact of many blackish hairs: the 
leaves are spotted on the backside like the common Hart's-Tongue, and 
differ in that, that this Hemionitis in the base or lowest parts of 
the leaves is arched after the manner of a new moon, or a forked 
arrow, the youngest and smallest leaves being like unto the Great 
Bindweed, called Volubilis.

4. There is a kind of Fern called likewise Hemionitis sterilis, which 
is a very small and base herb not above a finger high, having four or 
five small leaves of the same substance and colour, spotted on the 
back part, and in taste like Hart's-Tongue; but the leaves bear the 
shape of them of Totabona, or Good Henry, which many of our 
apothecaries do abusively take for Mercury: The roots are very many, 
smooth, black, and thready, bearing neither stalk, flower, nor seed: 
this plant my very good friend Mr Nicholas Belson found in a gravelly 
lane in the way leading to Oxhey Park near unto Watford, fifteen 
miles from London: it grows likewise on the stone walls of Hampton 
Court, in the garden of Mr Huggens, keeper of the said house or 
palace.


Fig. 1621. Handed Moon-Fern (5) 

5. There is a kind of Fern called also Hemionitis, but with this 
addition peregrina, that is very seldom found, and hath leaves very 
like to Hart's-Tongue, but that it is palmed or branched in the part 
next the ground, almost in manner of the second Phyllitis, at the top 
of the leaves; otherwise they resemble one another in nature and 
form.

The Place.

The common Hart's-Tongue groweth by the wayside as you travel from 
London to Exeter in great plenty, in shadowy places, and moist stony 
valleys and wells, and is much planted in gardens.

The second I found in the garden of Master Cranwich a chirurgeon 
dwelling at Much Dunmow in Essex, who gave me a plant for my garden. 
Mr. Goodyer found it wild in the banks of a lane near Swanling, not 
many miles from Southampton.

It groweth upon Ingleborough hills, and divers other mountains of the 
North of England.

The Time.

It is green all the year long, yet less green in winter: in summer it 
now and then bringeth forth new leaves.

The Names.

Iris called in Greek and Latin Phyllitis: in shops, Lingua cervina: 
and falsely Scolopendria, for it differeth much from the right 
Scolopendria, or Stone Fern: it is called in High Dutch, Hirszong: in 
low Dutch, Herstonge: in Spanish, Lengua cervina: in French, Langue 
de Cerf: in English, Hart's-Tongue: of some, Stone Hart's-Tongue: 
Apuleius in his 83rd Chapter nameth it Radiolus.

The Temperature.

It is of a binding and drying faculty.

The Virtues.

A. This common Hart's-Tongue is commended against the lask and bloody 
flux: Dioscorides teacheth, that being drunk in wine it is a remedy 
against the bitings of serpents.

B. It doth open the hardness and stopping of the spleen and liver, 
and all other griefs proceeding of oppilations or stoppings 
whatsoever.



CHAP. 471. Of Spleenwort, or Miltwaste.


Fig. 1622. Kinds of Spleenwort (1-4) 

The Description.

1. Spleenwort being that kind of Fern called Asplenum or Ceterach, 
and the true Scolopendria, hath leaves a span long, jagged or cut 
upon both sides, even hard to the middle rib; every cut or incisure 
being as it were cut half round (whereby it is known from the rough 
Spleenwort) not one cut right against another, but one besides the 
other, set in several order, being slippery and green on the upper 
side, soft and downy underneath; which when they be withered are 
folded up together like a scroll, and hairy without, much like to the 
rough bear-worm wherewith men bait their hooks to catch fish: the 
root is small, black, and rough, much plaited or interlaced, having 
neither stalk, flower, nor seeds.

2. Rough Spleenwort is partly like the other Ferns in show, and 
beareth neither stalk nor seed, having narrow leaves a foot long, and 
somewhat longer, slashed on the edges even to the middle rib, smooth 
on the upper side, and of a swart green colour; underneath rough, as 
is the leaves of Polypody: the root is black; and set with a number 
of slender strings.

3. This greater Spleenwort hath leaves like Ceterach, of a span long, 
somewhat resembling those of Polypody, but that they are more 
divided, snipped about the edges, and sharp pointed: the root is 
fibrous and stringy. This grows on the rocks and mountainous places 
of Italy, and is the Lonchitis aspera maior of Matthiolus and others.

4. This kind of Spleenwort is not only barren of stalks and seeds, 
but also of spots and marks wherewith the others are spotted: the 
leaves are few in number, growing pyramid or steeplewise, great and 
broad below, and sharper toward the top by degrees: the root is 
thick, black, and bushy, as it were a crow's nest.

The Place.

Ceterach groweth upon old stone walls and rocks, in dark and shadowy 
places throughout the West part of England; especially upon the stone 
walls by Bristol, as you go to Saint Vincent's Rock, and likewise 
about Bath, Wells, and Salisbury, where I have seen great plenty 
thereof.

The rough Spleenwort groweth upon barren heaths, dry sandy banks, and 
shadowy places in most parts of England, but especially on a heath by 
London called Hampstead Heath, where it groweth in great abundance.

The Names.

Spleenwort or Miltwaste is called in Greek and Latin Asplenium, and 
also Scolopendria: of Gaza, Mula herba: in shops, Ceterach: in High 
Dutch, Steynfarn: in low Dutch, Steynvaren, and Miltcruyt: in 
English, Spleenwort, Miltwaste, Scalefern and Stonefern: it is called 
Asplenium, because it is special good against the infirmities of the 
spleen or milt, and Scolopendria of the likeness that it hath with 
the bear-worm, before remembered.

Rough Miltwaste is called of divers of the later writers Asplenium 
sylvestre, or wild Spleenwort: of some, Asplenium magnum, or great 
Spleenwort: Valerius Cordus calleth it Strutiopteris: and 
Dioscorides, Lonchitis aspera, or Rough Spleenwort: in Latin 
according to the same author, Longina, and Calabrina: in English, 
Rough Spleenwort, or Miltwaste.

The Temperature.

These plants are of thin parts, as Galen witnesseth, yet are they not 
hot, but in a mean.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides teacheth, that the leaves boiled in wine and drunk by 
the space of forty days, do take way infirmities of the spleen; help 
the strangury, and yellow jaundice, cause the stone in the bladder to 
moulder and pass away, all which are performed by such things as be 
of thin and subtle parts: he addeth likewise that they slay the 
hicket, or yexing, and also hinder conception, either inwardly taken, 
or hanged about the party, and therefore, saith Pliny, Spleenwort is 
not to be given to women, because it bringeth barrenness.

B. There be empirics or blind practitioners of this age, who teach, 
that with this herb not only the hardness and swelling of the 
spleen,but all infirmities of the liver also may be effectually, and 
in very short time removed, insomuch that the sodden liver of a beast 
is restored to his former constitution again, that is, made like unto 
a raw liver, if it be boiled again with this herb.

C. But this is to be reckoned among the old wives' fables, and that 
also which Dioscorides telleth of, touching the gathering of 
Spleenwort in the night, and other most vain things, which are found 
here and there scattered in old books: from which most of the later 
writers do not abstain, who many times fill up their pages with lies 
and frivolous toys, and by so doing do not a little deceive young 
students.



CHAP. 472. Of Divers Small Ferns.

Fig. 1623. Male Fountain Fern (1) Fig. 1624. Male Dwarf Stone Fern 
(3) 
The Description.

1. This small or dwarf Fern, which is seldom found except in the 
banks of stony fountains, wells, and rocks bordering upon rivers, is 
very like unto the common Brakes in leaves, but altogether lesser: 
the root is composed of a bundle of black thready strings.

2. The female, which is found likewise by running streames, wells, 
and fountains, upon rocks, and stony places, is like the precedent, 
but is a great deal smaller, blacker of colour, fewer roots, and 
shorter.

3 The male dwarf Fern that groweth upon the stony mountains of the 
North and West parts of England, especially toward the sea, and also 
in the joints of stone walls among the mortar, hath small leaves 
deeply cut on both sides, like unto Ceterach or Spleenwort, barren 
both of seeds and stalks, as also of those spots or marks that are to 
be seen upon the back part of the other Ferns: the root creepeth 
along, set with some few hairy strings, resembling those of the Oak 
Fern, called Dryopteris.


Fig. 1625. Female Dwarf Stone Fern (4) 

4. The Female Stone Fern hath divers long leaves rising from a 
thready root, contrary to that of the male, composed of many small 
leaves finely minced or cut like the teeth of a saw, of a whitish 
green colour, without any spots or marks at all, seeds or stalks, 
which groweth under shadowy rocks and craggy mountains in most 
places. From a small root composed of many black, and intricately 
folding strings, come up many leaves two or three inches high, stiff, 
thick, dark green, ard shining: in the division, growth, position, 
shape and taste, it resembles the male Fern, and hath also rusty 
spots on the back: the middle rib and stalk is of a shining brownish 
silken colour: it grows in the chinks of the rocks by the seaside in 
Cornwall.

The Place.

The place is sufficiently touched in the description.

The Time.

They flourish both winter and summer, for when the leaves wither by 
reason of age, there arise young to supply the place, so that they 
are not to be seen without green and withered leaves both at once.

The Names.

It sufficeth what hath been said of the names in their several 
titles: notwithstanding the last described we have called Chamæfilix 
marina anglica: which groweth upon the rocky cliff near Harwich, as 
also at Dover, among the Samphire that there groweth.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Their temperature and faculties in working are referred unto the 
kinds of Black Oak Ferns, called Dryopteris, and Onopteris.



CHAP. 473. Of True Maidenhair.

Fig. 1626. True Maidenhair (1) Fig. 1627. Assyrian Maidenhair (2) 
The Kinds.

Theophrastus and Pliny have set down two Maidenhairs, the black and 
the white, whereunto may be added another called Ruta muraria, or 
Wall Rue, equal to the others in faculty, whereof we will intreat.

The Description.

1. Whoso will follow the variable opinions of writers concerning the 
Fern called Adianthum verum, or Capillus veneris verus, must of 
necessity be brought into a labyrinth of doubts, considering the 
divers opinions thereof: but this I know that Venus-hair, or 
Maidenhair, is a low herb growing an hand high, smooth, of a dark 
crimson colour, and glittering withal: the leaves be small, cut in 
sunder and nicked in the edges something like those of Coriander, 
confusedly or without order placed, the middle rib whereof is of a 
black shining colour: the root consisteth of many small thready 
strings.
 	2. This Assyrian Maidenhair is likewise a base or low herb, 
having leaves flat, smooth, and plain, set upon a blackish middle 
rib, like unto that of the other Maidenhair, cut or notched in the 
edges, nature keeping no certain form, but making one leaf of this 
fashion, and another far different from it: the root is tough and 
thready.


Fig. 1628. Wall Rue (3) 

3. This plant which we have inferred among the Adianthes as a kind 
thereof, may without error so pass, which is in great request in 
Flanders and Germany, where the practioners in physic do use the same 
instead of Capillus veneris and with better success than any of the 
Capillary herbs, although Matthiolus and Dioscorides himself hath 
made this Wall Rue to be a kind of Paronychia, or Nailwort: 
notwithstanding the Germans will not leave the use thereof, but 
receive it as the true Adianth, esteeming it equal, if not far 
better, than either Ceterach, Capillus veneris verus, or Trichomanes, 
called also Polytrichon: it bringeth forth very many leaves, round 
and slender, cut into two or three parts, very hard in handling, 
smooth and green on the outside, of an ill-favoured dead colour 
underneath, set with little fine spots, which efficiently showeth it 
to be a kind of Fern: the root is black and full of strings.

The Place.

The right Maidenhair groweth upon walls, in stony, shadowy, and moist 
places, near unto fountains, and where water droppeth: it is a 
stranger in England: notwithstanding I have heard it reported by some 
of good credit, that it groweth in divers places of the Westl country 
of England.

The Assyrian Maidenhair taketh his surname of his native country 
Assyria, it is a stranger in Europe.

Stone Rue groweth upon old walls near unto waters, wells, and 
fountains: I found it upon the wall of the churchyard of Dartford in 
Kent, hard by the river side where people ride through, and also upon 
the walls of the churchyard of Sittingbourne in the same county, in 
the middle of the town hard by a great lake of water, and also upon 
the church walls of Rayleigh in Essex, and divers other places.

The Time.

These plants are green both winter and summer, and yet have neither 
flowers nor seed.

The Names.

Maidenhair is called in Greek Adianton: Theophrastus and Pliny name 
it Adiantum nigrum, or Black Maidenhair: for they set down two 
Maidenhairs, the black and the white, making this the black, and the 
Rue of the wall the white: it is called in Latin Polytrichum, 
Callitrichum, Cincinalis, Terræ capillus, Supercilium terræ: of 
Apuleius, Capillus Veneris, Capillaris, Crinita: & of divers, 
Coriandrum putei: the Italians keep the name Capillus Veneris: in 
English, Black Maidenhair, and Venus' hair, and it may be called Our 
Lady's Hair.

It is called Adianton because the leaf, as Theophrastua saith, is 
never wet, for it casteth off water that falleth thereon, or being 
drowned or covered in water, it remaineth still as if it were dry, as 
Pliny likewise writeth; and is termed Callitrichon and Polytrichon, 
of the effect it hath in dying hair; and maketh it to grow thick.

Wall Rue is commonly called in Latin, Ruta muraria, or Ruta muralis: 
of some, Salvia vitæ, but wherefore I know not, neither themselves, 
if they were living: of the apothecaries of the Low Countries 
Capillus veneris, or Maidenhair, and they have used it a long time 
for the right Maidenhair; it is that kind of Adiantum which 
Theophrastus termed Adiantum candidum, or White Maidenhair, for he 
maketh two, one black, and the other white, as we have said. Pliny 
doth likewise set down two kinds, one he calleth Polytrichon; the 
other Tricomanes, or English Maidenhair, whereof we will entreat in 
the chapter following, which he hath falsely set down for a kind of 
Adiantum, for Tricomanes doth differ from Adiantum.

Some there be that think, Wall-Rue is Paronychia dioscoridis, or 
Dioscorides his Whitlow wort, wherein they have been greatly 
deceived: it is called in High Dutch, Maurranien: in low Dutch, 
Steencruyt: in French, Rue de Maræille: in English, Wall-Rue, and 
white Maidenhair.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The true Maidenhair, as Galen testifieth, doth dry, make thin, 
waste away, and is in a mean between heat and coldness: Mesues 
showeth that it consisteth of unlike or disagreeing parts, and that 
some are watery and earthy, and the same binding, and another 
superficially hot and thin. And that by this it taketh away 
obstructions or stoppings, maketh things thin that are thick, 
looseneth the belly, especially when it is fresh and green: for as 
this part is thin, so is it quickly resolved, and that by reason of 
his binding and earthy parts; it stoppeth the belly, and stayeth the 
lask and other fluxes.

B. Being drunk it breaketh the stone, and expelleth not only the 
stones in the kidneys, but also those which stick in the passages of 
the urine.

C. It raiseth up gross and slimy humours out of the chest and lungs, 
and also those which stick in the conduits of the windpipe, it 
breaketh and raiseth them out by spitting, if a lohoch or licking 
medicine be made thereof.

D. Moreover, it consumeth and wasteth away the King's evil, and other 
hard swellings, as the same author affirmed, and it maketh the hair 
of the head or beard to grow that is fallen and pilled off.

E. Dioscorides reckoneth up many virtues and operations of this 
Maidenhair, which do not only differ, but are also contrary one to 
another. Among others he saith, that the same stancheth blood: and a 
little before, that it draweth away the secondines, and bringeth down 
the desired sickness: which words do confound one another with 
contrarieties; for whatsoever things do stanch blond, the same do 
also stay the terms.

F. He addeth also in the end, that it is grown about sheepfolds for 
the benefit of the sheep, but what that benefit should be, he showeth 
not.

G. Besides, that it cannot be sown, by reason it is without seed, it 
is evident, neither can it fitly be removed. Therefore in this place 
it seemeth that many things are transposed from other places, and 
falsely added to this chapter: and peradventure some things are 
brought hither out of discourse of Cytisus, or Milk Trefoil, whereof 
here to write were to small purpose.

H. Wall-Rue is not much unlike to Black Maidenhair in temperature and 
faculty.

I. Wall-Rue is good for them that have a cough, that are short 
winded, and that be troubled with stitches and pain in their sides.

K. Being boiled, it causeth concoction of raw humours which stick in 
the lungs; it taketh away the pain of the kidneys and bladder, it 
gently provoketh urine, and driveth forth stones.

L. It is commended against ruptures in young children, and some 
affirm it to be excellent good, if the powder thereof be taken 
continually for forty days together.



CHAP. 474. Of English, or Common Maidenhair.


Fig. 1629. Male English Maidenhair (1) 

The Description.

1. English Maidenhair hath long leaves of a dark green colour, 
consisting of very many small round leaves set upon a middle rib, of 
a shining black colour, dashed on the nether side with small rough 
marks or specks, of an overworn colour: the roots are small and 
thready.

2. The female English Maidenhair is like unto the precedent, saving 
that it is lesser, and wanteth those spots or marks that are in the 
other, wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

It grows for the most part near unto springs and brooks, and other 
moist places, upon old stone walls and rocks: I found it growing in a 
shadowy sandy lane in Betsham, in the parish of Southfleet in Kent, 
upon the ground whereas there was no stones or stony ground near unto 
it, which before that time I did never see; it groweth likewise upon 
stone walls at her Majesty's palace of Richmond, & in most stone wals 
of the West and North parts of England. Mr Goodyer saith, that in 
January, 1624, he saw enough to lade an horse growing on the banks in 
a lane, as he rode between Rake and Headley in Hampshire near Wollner 
Forest.

The Time.

It continueth a long time, the coldness of winter doth it no harm, it 
is barren as the other Ferns are, whereof it is a kind.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Filicula, as though we should say, parva 
filix, or the little fern: also Capillaris: in shops, Capillus 
veneris. Apuleius in his 51 chapter maketh it all one with 
Callitrichon: of same it is called Polytrichon: in English, Common 
Maidenhair.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. These,  as Dioscoridess and Galen do write, have all the faculties 
belonging to Adiantum, or Black Maidenhair.

B. The decoction made in wine and drunk, helpeth them that are short 
winded, it helpeth the cough, ripeneth tough phlegm, and avoideth it 
by spitting.

C. The lye wherein it hath been sodden, or laid to infuse, is good to 
wash the head, causing the scurf and scales to fall off, and hair to 
grow in places that are pilled and bare.



CHAP. 475. Of Thistles.

Fig. 1630. Garden Bear's Breech (1) Fig. 1631. Prickly Bear's Breech 
(2) 
The Kinds.

The matter of the Thistles is divers, some Thistles serve for 
nourishment, as the Artichoke without prickles, and the Artichoke 
with prickles; others for medicine, as the root of Carline which is 
good for many things; the blessed thistle also, otherwise called 
Cardum bendictus; Sea Hulver, and divers others: some are poisonsome, 
as Chamæleon niger; one smooth, plain, and without prickles, as the 
Thistle called Bear's Breech, or Acanthus sativus, whereof there is 
another with prickles, which we make the wild, of the which two we 
intend to write in this chapter.

The Description.

1. Bear's Breech of the garden hath broad leaves, smooth, somewhat 
black, gashed on both the edges, and set with many cuts and fine 
nicks: between which riseth up in the midst a big stalk bravely 
decked with flowers set in order from the middle upward, of colour 
white, of form long, which are armed as it were with two catkins, one 
higher, another lower: after them grow forth the husks, in which is 
found broad seed: the roots be black without, and white within, and 
full of clammy juice, and are divided into many off-springs, which as 
they creep far, so do they now and then bud forth and grow afresh: 
these roots are so full of life, that how little soever of them 
remain, it oftentimes also bringeth forth the whole plant.

2. Wild Bear's Breech, called Acanthus sylvestris, Pena setteth forth 
for Chamæleonta monspeliensum, and reporteth that he found it growing 
amongst the gravelly and moist places near to the walls of 
Montpellier, and at the gate of Aegidia, between the fountain and the 
brook near to the wall: this thistle is in stalk, flowers, colour of 
leaves and seed like the first kind, but shorter and lower, having 
large leaves, dented or jagged with many cuts and incisions, not only 
in Some few parts of the leaves, as some other Thistles, but very 
thickly dented or cloven, and having many sharp, large, white and 
hard prickles about the sides of the divisions and cuts, not very 
easy to be handled or touched without danger to the hand and fingers.

The Place.

Dioscorides writeth, that garden Brank Ursine groweth in moist and 
stony places, and also in gardens: it were unadvisedly done to seek 
it in either of the Germanies anywhere, but in gardens only; in my 
garden it doth grow very plentifully.

The wild was found in certain places of Italy near to the sea, by 
that notable learned man Alphonsus Pancius, physician to the Duke of 
Ferrara, and professor of simples and physic, and is a stranger in 
England; I have seen it growing in the garden of Mr John Parkinson.

The Time.

Both the Brank Ursines do flower in the summer season, the seed is 
ripe in autumn: the root remaineth fresh; yet now and then it 
perisheth in winter in both the Germanies, if the weather be too 
cold: but in England the former seldom or never dieth.

The Names.

It is called in Greek and Latin Acanthus: yet doth Acanthus signify 
generally all kind of Thistles, and that is called Acanthus by the 
figure Antonomasia: the English name is Brank Ursine, and Bear's 
Breech.

The tame or garden Brank Ursine is named in Latin Acanthus sativus, 
or hortensis: Pliny also calleth this Acanthus lævis or smooth Brank 
Ursine, and reporteth it to be a city herb, and to serve for arbors: 
some name it Branca ursina (others use to call Cow-Parsnip by the 
name of Branca ursina, but with the addition germanica:) the Italians 
call it Acantho, and Branca Orsina: the Spaniards, Yerva Giguante: 
the engravers of old time were wont to carve the leaves of this Brank 
Ursine in pillars, and other works, and also upon the ears of pots; 
as among others Virgil testifieth in the third Eclogue of his 
Bucolics:

Et nobis idem Alcimedon duo pocula fecit,
Et molli circum est ansus amplexis Acantha.
["And for us Alcimedon has made two drinking cups,
And set wreaths of Acanthus round their handles"]

The other Brank Ursine is named in Latin, Acanthus sylvestris or wild 
Brank Ursine, and they may be called properly Acantha, or Spina, a 
prickle; by which name it is found called of most herbarists, 
Acanthus; yet there is also another Acanthus a thorny shrub: the 
liquor which issueth forth of it, as Herodotus and Theophrastus 
affirm, is a gum: for difference wherof peradventure this kind of 
Acanthus is named Herbacantha: There is likewise found among the 
bastard names of Acanthus the word Mamolaria, and also Crepula, but 
it is not expressed to which of them, whether to the wild or tame, it 
ought to be referred.

The Temperature.

The leaves of the garden Brank Ursine consist in a mean as it were 
between hot and cold, being somewhat moist, with a mollifying and 
gentle digesting faculty, as are those of the Mallow, and therefore 
they are profitably boiled in clysters, as well as Mallow leaves. The 
root, as Galen teacheth, is of a more drying quality.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that the roots are a remedy for limbs that are 
burnt with fire, and that have been out of joint, if they be laid 
thereunto: that being drunk they provoke urine, and stop the belly: 
that they help those that be broken, and be troubled with the cramp; 
and be in a consumption of the lungs.

B. They are good for such as have the phthisic and spit blood withal; 
for those that have fallen from some high place, that are bruised and 
dry beaten, and that have overstrained themselves, and they are as 
good as the roots of the greater Comfrey, whereunto they are very 
like in substance, tough juice, and quality.

C. Of the same root is made an excellent plaster against the ache and 
numbness of the hands and feet.

D. It is put into clysters with good success against sundry maladies.



CHAP. 476. Of the Cotton Thistle.

Fig. 1632.White Cotton Thistle (1) Fig. 1633. Purple Cotton Thistle 
(2) 
The Description.

1. The common Thistle, whereof the greatest quantity of down is 
gathered for divers purposes, as well by the poor to stop pillows, 
cushions, and beds for want of feathers, as also bought of the rich 
upholsterers to mix with the feathers and down they do sell, which 
deceit would be looked unto: this Thistle hath great leaves, long and 
broad, gashed about the edges, and set with sharp and stiff prickles 
all alongst the edges, covered all over with a soft cotton or down: 
out from the midst whereof riseth up a long stalk above two cubits, 
high-cornered, and set with films, and also full of prickles: the 
heads are likewise cornered with prickles, and bring forth flowers 
consisting of many whitish threads: the seed which succeedeth them is 
wrapped up in down; it is long, of a light crimson colour, and lesser 
than the seed of Bastard saffron: the root groweth deep in the 
ground, being white, hard, woody, and not without strings.

2. The Illyrian Cotton Thistle hath a long naked root, beset about 
the top with a fringe of many small threads or jags: from which 
ariseth a very large and tall stalk, higher than any man, rather like 
a tree than an annual herb or plant: this stalk is garnished with 
scrolls of thin leaves, from the bottom to the top, set full of most 
horrible sharp prickles, and so is the stalk and every part of the 
plant, so that it is impossible for man or beast to touch the same 
without great hurt or danger: his leaves are very great, far broader 
and longer than any other thistle whatsoever, covered with an hoary 
cotton or down like the former: the flowers do grow at the top of the 
stalks, which is divided into sundry branches, and are of a purple 
colour, set or armed round about with the like, or rather sharper 
thorns than the aforesaid.

The Place.

These thistles grow by highways' sides, and in ditches almost 
everywhere.

The Time.

They flower from June until August, the second year after they be 
sown: and in the meantime the seed waxeth ripe, which being thorough 
ripe the herb perisheth, as do likewise most of the other thistles, 
which live no longer than till the seed be fullt come to maturity.

The Names.

This thistle is taken for what is called in Greek Akaizion, which 
Disocorides describeth to have leaves set with prickles round about 
the edges, and to be covered with a thin down like a cobweb, that may 
be gathered and spun to make garments of, like those of silk: in High 
Dutch it is called Weiswege distill: in Low Dutch Witte Wech distel: 
in French, Chardon argentin: in English, Cotton Thistle, White Cotton 
Thistle, Wild White Thistle, Argentine or the Silver Thistle.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Discorides saith, that the leaves and roots are a remedy for those 
that have their bodies drawn backwards; thereby Galen supposeth that 
these are of temperature hot.



CHAP. 477. Of Our Lady's Thistle.


Fig. 1634. Our Lady's Thistle

The Description.

The leaves of Our Lady's Thistle are as big as those of White Cotton 
Thistle: for the leaves thereof be great, broad, gashed in the edges, 
armed with a multitude of stiff and sharp prickles, as are those of 
Oat Thistle, but they are without down, altogether slippery, of a 
light green and speckled, with white and milky spots and lines drawn 
divers ways: the stalk is high, and as big as a man's finger: the 
flowers grow forth of heads full of prickles, being threads of a 
purple colour: the seed is wrapped in down like that of Cotton: the 
root is long, thick, and white.

The Place.

It groweth upon waste and common places by highways, and by dung-
hills almost everywhere.

The Time.

It flowereth and seedeth when Cotton Thistle doth.

The Names.

IT is called in Latin, Carduus lacteus, and Carduus mariæ: in High 
Dutch, Onser Vrouwen Distel: in French, Chardon de Notre Dame: in 
English, Our Lady's Thistle: it may properly be called Leucographus, 
of the white spots and lines that are on the leaves: Pliny in his 
27th book, Chap. 11, maketh mention of an herb called Leucographis, 
but what manner of one it is he hath not expressed; therefore it 
would be hard to affirm this to be the same that his Leucographia is; 
and this is thought to be Spina alba, or White Thistle, Milk Thistle, 
and Carduus ramptarius: of the Arabians, Bedoard, or Bedeguar, as 
Matthæus Sylvaticus testifieth.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The tender leaves of Carduus leucographus, the prickles taken off, 
are sometimes used to be eaten with other herbs.

B. Galen writeth, that the roots of Spina alba do dry and moderately 
bind, that therefore it is good for those that be troubled with the 
lask and the bloody flux, that it stayeth bleedings, wasteth away 
cold swellings; easeth the pain of the teeth if they be washed with 
the decoction thereof.

B. The seed thereof is of a thin essence and hot faculty, therefore 
he saith that it is good for those that be troubled with cramps.

C. Dioscorides affirmeth that the seeds being drunk are a remedy for 
infants that have their sinews drawn together, and for those that be 
bitten of serpents: and that it is thought to drive away serpents, if 
it be but hanged about the neck.



CHAP. 478. Of the Globe Thistle.


Fig. 1635. Kinds of Globe Thistle (1-3, 5) 

The Description.

1. Globe Thistle hath a very long stalk, and leaves jagged, great, 
long, and broad, deeply gashed, strong of smell, somewhat green on 
the upper side, and on the nether side whiter and downy: the flowers 
grow forth of a round head like a globe, which standeth on the tops 
of the stalks; they are white and small, with blue threads in the 
midst: the seed is long, with hairs of a mean length: the root is 
thick and branched.

2. There is another Globe Thistle that hath lesser leaves, but more 
full of prickles, with round heads also: but there groweth out of 
them besides the flowers, certain long and stiff prickles.

3. There is likewise another kind resembling the first in form and 
figure, but much lesser, and the flowers thereof tend more to a blue.

4. There is also another Globe Thistle, which is the least, and hath 
the sharpest prickles of all the rest: the head is small; the flowers 
whereof are white, like to those of the first. 

5. There is a certain other kind hereof, yet the head is not so 
round, that is to say, fatter and broader above; out of which spring 
blue flowers; the stalk hereof is slender, and covered with a white 
thin down: the leaves are long, gashed likewise on both sides, and 
armed in every corner with sharp prickles.


Fig. 1636. Woolly Thistle (6) 

6. There is another called the Down-Thistle, which riseth up with 
thick and long stalks. The leaves thereof are jagged, set with 
prickles, white on the nether side: the heads be round and many in 
number, and are covered with a soft down, and sharp prickles standing 
forth on every side, being on the upper part fraughted with purple 
flowers all of strings: the seed is long, and shineth, as doth the 
seed of many of the Thistles.

The Place.

They are sown in gardens, and do not grow in these countries that we 
can find. So saith our author, but I have found the sixth by 
Pocklington and in other places of the Wolds in Yorkshire. Mr. 
Goodyer also found it in Hampshire.

The Time.

They flower and flourish when the other Thistles do.

The Names.

Fuchsius did at the first take it to be Chamæleon niger, bur 
afterwards being better advised, he named it Spina peregrina, and 
Carduus globosus. Valerius Cordus doth fitly call it Sphærocephalus: 
the same name doth also agree with the rest, for they have a round 
head like a ball or globe. Most would have the first to be that which 
Matthiolus setteth down for Spina alba: this Thistle is called in 
English, Globe Thistle, and Ball Thistle.

The downy or woolly headed Thistle is called in Latin, being 
destitute of another name, Eriocephalus, of the woolly head: in 
English, Down Thistle or Woolly Headed Thistle. It is thought by 
divers to be that which Bartholomus Urbeveteranus and Angelus Palea, 
Franciscan friars, report to be called Corona fratrum, or Friar's 
Crown: but this Thistle doth far differ from that, as is evident by 
those things which they have written concerning Corona fratrum; which 
is thus: In the borders of the kingdom of Aragon towards the kingdom 
of Castile we find another kind of Thistle, which groweth plentifully 
there, by common ways, and in wheat fields, &c. vide Dodonæus Pempt. 
5. lib. 5. cap. 5.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Concerning the temperature and virtues of these Thistles we can 
allege nothing at all.



CHAP. 479. Of the Artichoke.

Fig. 1637. Great Red Artichoke (1) Fig. 1638. Great White Artichoke 
(2) 
The Kinds.

There be three sorts of Artichokes, two tame or of the garden; and 
one wild, which the Italian esteemeth greatly of, as the best to be 
eaten raw, which he calleth Cardune.

The Description.

1. The leaves of the great Artichoke, called in Latin Cinara, are 
broad, great, long, set with deep gashes in the edges, with a deep 
channel or gutter alongst the middle, bearing no prickles at all, or 
very few, and they be of a green ash colour: the stalk is above a 
cubit high, and bringeth forth on the top a fruit like a globe, 
resembling at the first a cone or Pineapple, that is to say, made up 
of many scales; which is when the fruit is great or loosed of a 
greenish red colour within, and in the lower part full of substance 
and white; but when it opens itself there grows also upon the cone a 
flower all of threads, of a gallant purple tending to a blue colour. 
The seed is long, greater and thicker than that of Our Lady's 
Thistle, lying under soft and downy hairs which are contained within 
the fruit. The root is thick, and of a mean length.

2. The second great Artichoke differeth from the former in the colour 
of the fruit, otherwise there is little difference, except the fruit 
hereof dilateth itself further abroad, and is not so closely compacst 
together, which maketh the difference.


Fig. 1639. Wild Artichoke (3) 

3. The prickly Artichoke, called in Latin Carduus, or Cinara spinosa, 
differeth not from the former, save that all the corners of the 
leaves hereof, and the stalks of the cone or fruit, are armed with 
stiff and sharp prickles, whereupon it beareth well the name of 
Carduus, or Thistle.

The Place.

The Artichoke is to be planted in a fat and fruitful soil: they do 
love water and moist ground. They commit great error who cut away the 
side or superfluous leaves that grow by the sides, thinking thereby 
to increase the greatness of the fruit, when as in truth they deprive 
the root from much water by that means, which should nourish it to 
the seeding of the fruit; for if you mark the trough or hollow 
channel that is in every leaf; it shall appear very evidently, that 
the Creator in his secret wisedom did ordain those furrowes, even 
from the extreme point of the leaf to the ground where it is fastened 
to the root, for no other purpose but to guide and lead that water 
which falls far off, unto the root; knowing that without such store 
of water the whole plant would wither, and the fruit pine away and 
come to nothing.

The Time.

They are planted for the most part about the Kalends of November, or 
somewhat sooner. The plant must be set and dunged with good store of 
ashes, for that kind of dung is thought best for planting thereof. 
Every year the slips must be torn or slipped off from the body of the 
root, and these are to be set in April, which will bear fruit about 
August following, as Columella, Palladius, and common experience 
teacheth.

The Names.

The Artichoke is called in Latin Cinara, of Cinis, ashes, wherewith 
it loveth to be dunged. Galen calleth it in Greek Kivara, but with k 
and v in the first syllable: of some it is called Cactos: it is named 
in Italian, Carcioffi, Archiocchi; in Spanisfe Alcarrhofa: in 
English, Artichoke: in French, Artichaux: in Low Dutch, Artichoken: 
whereupon divers call it in Latin Articocalus, and Articoca: in High 
Dutch Strobildorn.

The other is named in Latin commonly not only Cinara spinosa, or 
prickly Artichoke, but also of Palladius, Carduus: of the Italians, 
Cardo, and Cardino: of the Spaniards, Cardos: of the Frenchmen, 
Chardons: Leonhartus Fuchsius and most writers take it to be Scolymus 
dioscoridis; but Scolymus dioscoridis hath the leaf of Chamæleon or 
Spina alba, with a stalk full of leaves, and a prickly head: but 
neither is Cinara the Artichoke which is without prickles, nor the 
Artichoke with prickles any such kind of herb; for though the head 
hath prickles, yet the stalk is not full of leaves, but is many times 
without leaves, or else hath not past a leaf or two. Cinara doth 
better agree with that which Theophrastus and Pliny call Kaktos, 
Cactus, and yet it doth not bring forth stalks from the root creeping 
alongst the ground: it hath broad leaves set with prickles; the 
middle ribs of the leaves, the skin pilled off, are good to be eaten, 
and likewise the fruit, the seed and down taken away; and that which 
is under is as tender as the brain of the Date tree: which things 
Theophrastus and Pliny report of Cactus. That which they write of the 
stalks, sent forth immediately from the root upon the ground, which 
are good to be eaten, is peradventure the ribs of the leaves: every 
side taken away (as they be served up at the table) may be like a 
stalk, except even in Sicilia, where they grew only in Theophrastus' 
time. It bringeth forth both certain stalks that be on the ground, 
and another also standing straight up; but afterwards being removed 
and brought into Italy or England, it bringeth forth no more but one 
upright: for the soil and clime do much prevail in altering of 
plants, as not only Theophrastus teacheth, but also even experience 
itself declareth: and of Cactus, Theophrastus writeth thus; Cactus 
groweth only in Sicilia: it bringeth forth presently from the root 
stalks lying along upon the ground, with a broad and prickly leaf: 
the stalks being pilled are fit to be eaten; being somewhat bitter, 
which may be preserved in brine: it bringeth forth also another 
stalk, which is likewise good to be eaten.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The nails, that is, the white and thick parts which are in the 
bottom of the outward scales or flakes of the fruit of the Artichoke, 
and also the middle pulp whereon the downy seed stands, are eaten 
both raw with pepper and salt, and commonly boiled with the broth of 
fat flesh, with pepper added, and are accounted a dainty dish, being 
pleasant to the taste, and good to procure bodily lust: so likewise 
the middle ribs of the leaves being made white and tender by good 
cherishing and looking to, are brought to the table as a great 
service together with other junkets: they are eaten with pepper and 
salt as be the raw Artichokes: yet both of them are of ill juice; for 
the Artichoke containeth plenty of choleric juice, and hath an hard 
substance, insomuch as of this is engendered melancholy juice, and of 
that a thin and choleric blood, as Galen teacheth in his book Of the 
Faculties of Nourishments. But it is best to eat the Artichoke 
boiled: the ribs of the leaves are altogether of an hard substance: 
they yield to the body a raw and melancholy juice, and contain in 
them great store of wind.

B. It stayeth the involuntary course of the natural seed either in 
man or woman.

C. Some write, that if the buds of young Artichokes be first steeped 
in wine, and eaten, they provoke urine, and stir up the lust of the 
body.

D. I find moreover, that the root is good against the rank smell of 
the armholes, if when the pith is taken away the same root be boiled 
in wine and drunk: for it sendeth forth plenty of stinking urine, 
whereby the rank and rammish savour of the whole body is much 
amended.



CHAP. 480. Of Golden Thistles.

Fig. 1640. Spanish Golden Thistle (1) Fig. 1641. French Golden 
Thistle
The Description.

1. The stalks of Golden Thistle rise up forthwith from the root, 
being many, round, and branched. The leaves are long, of a beautiful 
green, with deep gashes on the edges, and set with most sharp 
prickles: the flowers come from the bottom of the leaves, set in a 
scaly chaffy knop, very like to Succory flowers, but of colour as 
yellow as gold: in their places corne up broad flat and thin seeds, 
not great, nor wrapped in down: the root is long, a finger thick; 
sweet, soft, and good to be eaten, wherewith swine are much 
delighted: there issueth forth of this thistle in what part soever it 
is cut or broken, a juice as white as milk.

There is some variety of this thistle; for it is found much larger 
about Montpellier than it is in Spain, with longer branches, but 
fewer flowers: the leaves also are spotted or streaked with white 
like as the Milk Thistle: whence Clusius, whom I here follow, hath 
given two figures thereof, the former by the name of Scolymus 
theophrasti hispanicus; and the other by the title of Scolymus 
theophrasti narbonensis. This with white spots I saw growing this 
year with Mr Tradescant at South Lambeth.

2. The Golden Thistle of Peru, called in the West Indies, Fique del 
inferno, a friend of mine brought it unto me from an island there 
called Saint John's Island, among other seeds. What reason the 
inhabitants there have to call it so, it is unto me unknown, unless 
it be because of his fruit, which doth much resemble a fig in shape 
and bigness, but is full of sharp and venomous prickles, that 
whosoever had one of them in his throat, doubtless it would send him 
packing either to heaven or to hell. This plant hath a single woody 
root as big as a man's thumb, but somewhat long: from which ariseth a 
brittle stalk full of joints or knees, dividing itself into sundry 
other small branches, set full of leaves like unto the Milk Thistle, 
but much smaller, and streaked with many white lines or streaks: and 
at the top of the stalk come forth fair and goodly yellow flowers, 
very like unto the Sea Poppy, but more elegant, and of greater 
beauty, having in the midst thereof a small knop or boll, such as is 
in the middle of our wild Poppy, but full of sharp thorns, and at the 
end thereof a stain or spot of a deep purple: after the yellow 
flowers be fallen, this foresaid knop groweth by degrees greater and 
greater, until it come to full maturity, which openeth itself at the 
upper end, showing his seed which is very black and round like the 
seeds of mustard. The whole plant and each part thereof doth yield 
very great abundance of milky juice, which is of a golden colour, 
falling and issuing from any part thereof, if it be cut or bruised: 
the whole plant perisheth at the approach of winter. The virtues 
hereof are yet unknown unto me, wherefore I purpose not to set down 
anything thereof by way of conjecture, but shall, God willing, be 
ready to declare that which certain knowledge and experience either 
of mine own or others, shall make manifest unto me.

The Place.

The Golden Thistle is sown in gardens of the Low Countries. Petrus 
Bellonius writes, That it groweth plentifully in Candy, and also in 
most places of Italy: Clusius reporteth that he found it in the 
fields of Spain, and of the kingdom of Castile, and about 
Montpellier, with fewer branches, and of a higher growth.

The Indian Thistle groweth in Saint John's Island in the West Indies, 
and prospereth very well in my garden.

The Time.

They flower from June to the end of August: the seed of the Indian 
Golden Thistle must be sown when it is ripe, but it doth not grow up 
until May next after.

The Names.

This thistle is called in Latin Carduus chrysanthemus: in Greek of 
Theophrastus, Scolymos; for those things which he writeth of scolymos 
in his sixth and seventh books do wholly agree with this thistle 
Chrysanthemus: which are these; Scolymus, doth flower in the summer 
solstice, bravely and a long time together; it hath a root that may 
be eaten both sod and raw, and when it is broken it yieldeth a milky 
juice: Gaza nameth it Carduus. Of this Pliny also makes mention, lib. 
21, ch. 16. Scolymus, saith he, differs from those kinds of Thistles, 
viz. Acarna and Atractilis, because the root thereof may be eaten 
boiled. Again, lib. 22, cap. 22, The East countries use it as a meat: 
and he calleth it by another name Leimonion. Which thing also 
Theophrastus seemeth to affirm, in his sixth book; for when he 
reckoneth up herbs whose leaves are set with prickles, he addeth 
Scolymus, or Limonia.

Notwithstanding, Pliny maketh mention likewise of another Scolymus, 
which he affirmeth to bring forth a purple flower, and between the 
middle of the pricks to wax white quickly, and to fall off with the 
wind; in his twentieth book, cap. 2. Which thistle doubtless doth not 
agree with Carduus chrysanthemis, that is, with Theophrastus his 
Scolymus, and with that which we mentioned before: so that there be 
in Pliny two Scolymi; one with a root that may be eaten, and another 
with a purple flower, turning into down, and that speedily waxeth 
white. Scolymus is likewise described by Dioscorides; but this 
differs from Scolymus theophrasti, and it is one of those which Pliny 
reckoneth up, as we will more at large declare hereafter. But let us 
come again to Chrysanthemus: this the inhabitants of Candy, keeping 
the marks of the old name, do call Ascolymbros: the Italians name it 
Anconitani Rinci: the Romans, Spina borda: the Spaniards, Cardon 
lechar: and of divers it is also named Glycyrrhizon, that is to say, 
Dulcis radix, or sweet Root: it is called in English, Golden Thistle: 
some would have it to be that which Regetius in Arte Veterinaria 
calls Eryngium: but they are deceived; for that Eryngium whereof 
Vegetius writeth is Eryngium marinum, or sea Hulver, of which we will 
entreat.

The Golden Thistle of India may be called Carduus chrysanthemus, of 
his golden colour, adding thereto his native country indianus, or 
peruanus, or the Golden Indian Thistle, or the Golden Thistle of 
Peru: the seed came to my hands by the name Fique del Inferno: in 
Latin, Ficus infernalis, the infernal fig, or fig of hell.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The root and tender leaves of this Scolymus, which are sometimes 
eaten, are good for the stomach, but they contain very little 
nourishment, and the same thin and watery, as Galen teacheth.

B. Pliny saith, that the root hereof was commended by Eratosthenes, 
in the poor man's supper, and that it is reported also to provoke 
urine especially; to heal tetters and dry scurf, being taken with 
vinegar; and with Wine to stir up fleshly lust, as Hesiod and Alcæus 
testify; and to take away the stench of the arm-holes, if an ounce of 
the root, the pith picked out, be boiled in three parts of wine, till 
one part be wasted, and a good draught taken fasting after a bath, 
and likewise after meat, which later words Dioscorides likewise hath 
concerning his Scolymus: out of whom Pliny is thought to have 
borrowed these things.



CHAP. 481. Of White Carline Thistle of Dioscorides.

Fig. 1642. Tall Carline Thistle (1) Fig. 1643. Red Carline Thistle 
(2) 
The Description.

1. The leaves of Carline are very full of prickles, cut on both edges 
with a multitude of deep gashes, and set along the corners with stiff 
and very sharp prickles; the middle ribs whereof are sometimes red: 
the stalk is a span high or higher, bringing forth for the most part 
only one head or knop being full of prickles, on the outward 
circumference or compass like the urchin husk of a chesnut: and when 
this openeth at the top, there groweth forth a broad flower, made up 
in the middle like a flat ball, of a great number of threads, which 
is compassed about with little long leaves, oftentimes somewhat 
white, very seldom, red: the seed underneath is slender and narrow, 
the root is long, a finger thick, something black; so chinked as 
though it were split in sunder, sweet of smell, and in taste somewhat 
bitter.

2. There is also another hereof without a stalk, with leaves also 
very full of prickles, like almost to those of the other, lying flat 
on the ground on every side: among which there groweth forth in the 
middle a round head or knop, set with prickles without after the same 
maner, but greater: the flower whereof in the middle is of strings, 
and paled round about with red leaves, and sometimes with white, in 
fair and calm weather the flowers both of this and also of the other 
lay themselves wide open, and when the weather is foul and misty, are 
drawn close together: the root hereof is long, and sweet of smell, 
white, sound, not nicked or splitted as the other.


Fig. 1644. Dwarf Carline Thistle (3) 

3. This small purple Carline Thistle hath a pretty large root divided 
oft-times at the top into divers branches, from which rise many green 
leaves lying spread upon the ground, deeply cut and set with sharp 
prickles; in the midst of these leaves come up sometimes one, but 
otherwhiles more scaly heads, which carry a pretty large flower 
composed of many purple threads, like that of the Knapweed, but 
larger, and of a brighter colour; these heads grow usually close to 
the leaves, yet sometimes they stand upon stalks three or four inches 
high: when the flower is past they turn into down, and are carried 
away with the wind: the seed is small and greyish. This grows upon 
Blackheath, upon the chalky hills about Dartford, and in many such 
places. It flowers in July and August. Tragus calls it Chamæleon 
albus, vel exiguus; Lobel, Carduus acaulis, septentrionalium, and 
Chamæleon albus, cordi: Clusius, Carlina minor purpureo flore, and he 
saith in the opinion of some, it seems not unlike to the Chamæleon 
whereof Theophrastus makes mention, lib. 6. cap. 3. Hist. plant.

The Place.

They both grow upon high mountains in desert places, and oftentimes 
by highway sides: but that which bringeth forth a stalk groweth 
everywhere in Germany, and is a stranger in England.

The Time.

They flower and seed in July and August, and many times later.
The Names.

The former is called in Latin; Carlina, and Cardopatium; and of 
divers, Carolina, of Charlemagne the first Roman Emperor of that 
name, whose army (as it is reported) was in times past through the 
benefit of this root delivered and preserved from the plague: it is 
called in High Dutch Eberwurtz: in low Dutch, French, and other 
languages, as likewise in English, Carline, and Carline Thistle: it 
is Dioscorides his Leucacantha, the strong and bitter roots show the 
same; the faculties also are answerable, as forthwith we will 
declare: Leucacantha hath also the other names, but they are 
counterfeit, as among the Romans Gniacardus; and among the Tuscans, 
Spina alba, or White Thistle, yet doth it differ from that Thistle 
which Dioscorides calleth Spina alba, of which he also writing apart, 
doth likewise attribute to both of them their own proper faculties 
and operation and the same differing.

The later writers do also call the other Carlina altera, and Carlina 
humilis, or minor, low or little Carline: but they are much deceived 
who go about to refer them both to the Chamæleons; for in Italy, 
Germany, or France, Chamæleones, the Chamæleons do never grow, as 
there is one witness for many, Petrus Bellonius, in his first book Of 
Singularities, who sufficiently declareth what difference there is 
between the Carlines and the Chamæleons; which thing shall be made 
manifest by the description of the Chamæleons.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The root of Carline, which is chiefly used, is hot in the later 
end of the second degree, and dry in the third, with a thinness of 
parts and substance; it procureth sweat, it driveth forth all kind of 
worms of the belly, it is an enemy to all manner of poisons, it doth 
not only drive away infections of the plague, but also cureth the 
same, if it be drunk in time.

B. Being chewed it helpeth the toothache; it openeth the stoppings of 
the liver and spleen.

C. It provoketh urine, bringeth down the menses, and cureth the 
dropsy.

D. And it is given to those that have been dry beaten, and fallen 
from some high place.

E. The like operations Dioscorides hath concerning Leucacantha: 
Leucacantha (saith he) hath a root like Cyperus, bitter and strong, 
which being chewed easeth the pain of the teeth: the decoction 
thereof with a draught of wine is a remedy against pains of the 
sides, and is good for those that have the Sciatica or ache in the 
huckle bones, and for them that be troubled with the cramp.

F. The juice also being drunk is of like virtues.



CHAP. 482. Of Wild Carline Thistle.

Fig. 1645. Great Wild Carline Thistle (1) Fig. 1646. Little Wild 
Carline Thistle (2) 
The Description.

1. The Great Wild Carline Thistle riseth up with a stalk of a cubit 
high or higher, divided into certain branches: the leaves are long, 
and very full of prickles in the edges, like those of Carline: the 
flowers grow also upon a prickly head, being set with threads in the 
midst, and paled round about with a little yellowish leaves: the root 
is slender, and hath a twinging taste.

2. Carolus Clusius describeth a certain other also of this kind, with 
one only stalk, slender, short, and not above a handful high, with 
prickly leaves like those of the other, but lesser, both of them 
covered with a certain hoary down: the heads or knops are for the 
most part two, they have a pale down in the midst, and leaves 
standing round about, being somewhat stiff and yellow: the root is 
slender, and of a reddish yellow.

The Place.

The great Carline is found in untoiled and desert places, and 
oftentimes upon hills. It groweth upon Blackheath, and in many other 
places of Kent.

The Lesser Carline Carolus Clusius writeth that he found growing in 
dry stony and desert places, about Salamanca a city of Spain.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.

It is commonly called in Latin, and that not unfitly, Carlina 
sylvestris; for it is like to Carline in flowers, and is not very 
unlike in leaves. And that this is Acorna, it is so much the harder 
to affirm, by how much the briefer Theophrastus hath written hereof; 
for he saith that this is like Bastard Saffron, of a yellow colour 
and fat juice: and Acorna differs from Acarna; for Acarna, as 
Hesychius saith, is the Bay tree; but Acorna is a prickly plant.

The Temperature and Virtues.

It is hot, especially in the root, the twinging taste thereof doth 
declare; but seeing it is of no use, the other faculties be 
unsearched out.



CHAP. 483. Of Chamæleon Thistle.

Fig. 1647. Black Chamæleon Thistle (1) Fig. 1648. Spanish Black 
Chamæleon Thistle (2) 
The Kinds.

Here be two Chamæleons, and both black: the virtues of their roots do 
differ, and the roots themselves do differ in kind; as Theophrastus 
declareth.

The Description.

1, The leaves of Black Chamæleon are lesser and slenderer than those 
of the prickly Artichoke, and sprinkled with red spots: the stalk is 
a cubit high, a finger thick, and somewhat red: it beareth a tufted 
roundel, in which are slender prickly flowers of a blue colour like 
the Hyacinth. The root is thick, black without, of a close substance, 
sometimes eaten away, which being cut is of a yellowish colour 
within, and being chewed it bites the tongue.

2. This Black Chamæleon hath many leaves, long and narrow, very full 
of prickles, of a light green, in a manner white: the stalk is 
chamfered, a foot high, and divided into branches, on the tops 
whereof stand purple flowers growing forth of prickly heads: the root 
is black, and sweet in taste. This is described by Clusius in his 
Spanish Observations, by the name of Chamæleon salmanticensis, of the 
place wherein he found it: for he saith that this groweth plentifully 
in the territory of Salamanca a city in Spain: but it is very 
manifest that this is not Black Chamæleon neither doth Clusius affirm 
it.

The Place.

It is very common, saith Bellonius, in Lemnos, where it beareth a 
flower of so gallant a blue, as that it seemeth to contend with the 
sky in beauty; and that the flower of Blue-Bottle being of this 
colour, seems in comparison of it to be but pale. It groweth also in 
the fields near Abydum, and hard by the rivers of Hellespont, and in 
Heraclea in Thracia.

Chamæleon salmanticensis groweth plentifully in the territory of 
Salamanca a city in Spain.

The Time.

They flower and flourish when the other Thistles do.
The Names.

The Black Chamæleon is called in Latin, Chamæleon niger: of the 
Romans, Carduus niger, and Vernilago: of some, Crocodilion: in 
English, the Chamæleon Thistle, or the Thistle that changeth itself 
into many shapes and colours.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The root hereof, as Galen saith, containeth in it a deadly 
quality: it is also by Nicander numbered arnong the poisonous herbs, 
in his book Of Treacles; by Dioscorides, lib. 6. and by Paulus 
Ægineta: and therefore it is used only outwardly, as for scabs, 
morphews, tetters, and to be brief for all such things as stand in 
need of cleansing: moreover, it is mixed with such things as do 
dissolve and mollify, as Galen saith.



CHAP. 484. Of Sea Holly.

Fig. 1649. Sea Holly (1) Fig. 1650. Levant Sea Holly (2) 
The Kinds.

Dioscorides maketh mention only of one Sea Holly: Pliny, lib. 22. 
cap. 7, seems to acknowledge two, one growing in rough places, 
another by the seaside. The physicians after them, have observed 
more.

The Description.

1. Sea Holly hath broad leaves almost like to Mallow leaves, but 
cornered in the edges, and set round about with hard prickles, fat, 
of a bluish white and of an aromatical or spicy taste: the stalk is 
thick, above a cubit high, now and then somewhat red below: it 
breaketh forth on the tops into prickly or round heads or knops, of 
the bigness of a walnut, held in for the most part with six prickly 
leaves, compassing the top of the stalk round about: which leaves as 
well as the heads are of a glistering blue: the flowers forth of the 
heads are likewise blue, with white threads in the midst: the root is 
of the bigness of a man's finger, very long, and so long, as that it 
cannot be all plucked up, unless very seldom; set here and therewith 
knots, and of taste sweet and pleasant.

2. The leaves of the second Sea Holly are diversely cut into sundry 
parcels, being all full of prickles alongst the edges: the stalk is 
divided into many branches, and bringeth forth prickly heads, but 
lesser than those of the other: from which there also grow forth blue 
flowers, seldom yellow: there stand likewise under every one of 
these, six rough and prickly leaves like those of the other, but 
thinner and smaller: the root hereof is also long, black without, 
white within, a finger thick, in taste and smell like that of the 
other, as be also the leaves, which are likewise of an aromatical or 
spicy taste, which being new sprung up, and as yet tender, be also 
good to be eaten.
The Place.

Eryngium marinum grows by the seaside upon the beach and stony 
ground: I found it growing plentifully at Whitstable in Kent, at Rye 
and Winchelsea in Sussex, and in Essex at Landamer Lading, at 
Harwich, and upon Langtree point, on the other side of the water, 
from whence I have brought plants for my garden.

Eryngium campestre groweth upon the shores of the Mediterranean sea, 
and in my garden likewise.

The Time.

Both of them do flower after the summer solsticc, and in July.
The Names.

This Thistle is called in Greek and likewise in Latin Eryngium: and 
of Pliny also Erynge: in shops, Eringus; in English, Sea Holly, Sea 
Holm, or Sea Hulver.

The first is called in Latin Eryngium marinum: in Low Dutch 
everywhere, Cryus distil, Eindeloos, Meerwortele: in English, Sea 
Holly.

The second is named of Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 8, Centum capita, or 
hundred-headed Thistle: in High Dutch, Wansztrew, Branchendistel, 
Radendistel: in Spanish, Cardo corredor: in Italian, Eringio, and 
Iringo: this is surnamed campestre, or Champion Sea Holly, that it 
may differ from the other.

The Temperature.

The roots of them both are hot, and that in a mean; and a little dry 
also, with a thinness of substance, as Galen testifieth.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of sea Holly boiled in wine and drunken are good for 
them that are troubled with the colic, it breaketh the stone, 
expelleth gravel, and helpeth also the infirmities of the kidneys, 
provoketh urine, greatly opening the passages, being drunk fifteen 
days together.

B. The roots themselves have the same property if they be eaten, and 
are good for those that be liver-sick, and for such as are bitten 
with any venomous beast: they ease cramps, convulsions, and the 
falling sickness, and bring down the terms.

C. The roots condited or preserved with sugar, as hereafter 
followeth, are exceeding good to be given unto old and aged people 
that are consumed and withered with age, and which want natural 
moisture: they are also good for other sorts of people that have no 
delight or appetite to venery; nourishing and restoring the aged, and 
amending the defects of nature in the younger.

The manner to condite Eryngos:

D. Refine sugar fit for the purpose, and take a pound of it, the 
white of an egg, and a pint of clear  water, boil them together and 
scum it, then let it boil until it be come to good strong syrup, and 
when it is boiled, as it cooleth, add thereto a saucer full of rose-
water, a spoonful of cinnamon water, and a grain of musk, whieh have 
been infused together the night before, and now strained; into which 
syrup being more than half cold, put in your roots to soak and infuse 
until the next day; your roots being ordered in manner hereafter 
following:

E. These your roots being washed and picked, must be boiled in fair 
water by the space of some hours, until they be soft, then must they 
be pilled clean, as ye pill parsnips, and the pith must be drawn out 
at the end of the root; and if there be any whose pith cannot be 
drawn out at the end, then you must slit them, and so take out the 
pith: these you must also keep from much handling, that they may be 
clean, let them remain in the syrup till the next day, and then set 
them on the fire in a fair broad pan until they be very hot, but let 
them not boil at all: let them there remain over the fire an hour or 
more, removing them easily in the pan from one place to another with 
a wooden slice. This done, have in a readiness great cap or royal 
papers, whereupon you must strew some sugar, upon which lay your 
roots after that you have taken them out of the pan. These papers you 
must put into a stove, or hothouse to harden; but if you have not 
such place, lay them before a good fire. In this manner if you 
condite your roots there is not any that can prescribe you a better 
way. And thus may you condite any other root whatsoever, which will 
not only be exceeding delicate, but very wholesome, and effectuall 
against the diseases above named.

F. A certain man affirmeth, saith Aetius, that by the continual use 
of Sea Holly, he never afterward voided any stone, when as before he 
was very often tormented with that disease.

G. It is drunk, saith Dioscorides, with Carrot seed against very many 
infirmities, in the weight of a dram.

H. The juice of the leaves pressed forth with wine is a remedy for 
those that are troubled with the running of the reins.

I. They report that the herb Sea Holly, if one Goat take it into her 
mouth, it causeth her first to stand still, and afterwards the whole 
flock, until such time as the shepherd take it forth of her mouth, as 
Plutarch writeth.



CHAP. 485. Of Bastard Sea Hollies.


Fig. 1651. Kinds of Sea Holly (1-4) 

The Description

1. This Eryngium which Dodonæus in his last edition calleth Eryngium 
planum; and Pena more fitly and truly, Eryngium alpinum cæruleum, 
hath stalks a cubit and a half high, having spaces between every 
joint: the lower leaves are greater and broader, and notched about 
the edges; but those above are lesser, compassing or environing each 
joint star-fashion, beset with prickles which are soft and tender, 
not much hurtful to the hands of such as touch them; the knobs or 
heads are also prickly, and in colour blue. The root is bunchy or 
knotty, like that of Helenium, that is Elecampane, black without, and 
white within, and like the Eringes in sweetness and taste.

2. The second Bastard Sea Holly, whose picture is set forth in 
Dodonæus his last edition very gallantly, being also a kind of 
Thistle, hath leaves like unto the former Erynges, but broader next 
the roots than those which grow next the stalks, somewhat long, 
greenish, soft, and not prickly, but lightly creviced or notched 
about the edges, greater than Quince leaves. The stalks grow more 
than a cubit high; on the tops whereof there hang downwards five or 
six knops or heads, in colour and flowers like the other; having 
three or four whitish roots of a foot long.

3. The third kind of Bastard Eryngium hath his first leaves (which 
grow next the ground) great, broad, and soft, growing as it were in a 
roundel about the root. The stalk is small and slender divided into 
some branches, which bear many little leaves, turning or standing 
many ways, which be also slender, prickly, and set about the stalks 
star-fashion. The knops or heads growing at the tops of the branches 
are round and prickly, bearing little blue flowers and leaves, which 
compass them about: the root is slender, and lasteth but one year.

4. The fourth kind of Bastard Sea Holly, which Pena calleth Eryngium 
montanum recentiorum, and is the fourth according to Dodonæus his 
account, is like to the Erynges, not in shape but in taste: this 
beareth a very small and slender stalk, of a mean height, whereupon 
do grow three or four leaves, & seldom five, made of divers leaves 
set upon a middle rib, narrow, long, hard, and of a dark green 
colour; dented on both edges of the leaf like a saw: the stalk is a 
cubit high, jointed or knotted, and dividing itself into many 
branches, on the tops whereof are round tufts or uvmbels, wherein are 
contained the flowers, and after they be faded, the seeds, which are 
small, somewhat long, well smelling, and sharp in. taste: the root is 
white and long, not a finger thick, in taste sweet, but afterwards 
somewhat sharp, and in scent and savour not upleasant: when the root 
is dried, it may be crumbled in pieces, and therefore quickly brayed.


Fig. 1652. Small Smooth Sea Holly (5) 

5. This is a low plant presently from the root divided into sundry 
branches, slender, round & lying on the ground: at each joint grow 
leaves without any certain order, broad toward their ends, and 
narrower attheir setting to, snipped about their edges: those next 
the root were some inch broad, and two or more long, of a yellowish 
green colour: the stalks are parted into sundry branches and at each 
joint have little leaves, and rough and green heads, with bluish 
flowers in them: the roots creep, and are somewhat like those of 
Asparagus. This neither Clusius nor Lobel found wild; but it grew in 
the garden of John Moution of Tournai, a learned apothecary very 
skilful in the knowledge of plants: whereupon they both called it 
Eryngium pusillum planum moutoni.

The Place.

These kinds of sea Holly are strangers in England: we have the first 
and second in our London gardens.

The Time.

They flower and flourish when the Thistles do.

The Names.

These plants be Eryngia spuria, or Bastard Sea Hollies, and are 
lately observed: and therefore they have no old names.

The first may be called in Latin Eryngium borussicum, or non 
spinosum: Sea Holly without prickles.

The second is called by Matthiolus, Eryngium planum or flat Sea 
Holly: others had rather name it Eryngium alpinum, or Sea Holly of 
the Alps.

The third is rightly called Eryngium pumilum, Little Sea Hulver.

Matthiolus maketh the fourth to be Crithmum quartum, or the fourth 
kind of Samphire: and others, as Dodonæus and Lobel, have made it a 
kind of Sea Hulver.

The Temperature and Virues.

Touching the faculties hereof we have nothing to set down, seeeing 
they have as yet no use in medicine, nor used to be eaten. But yet 
that they be hot, the very taste doth declare.



CHAP. 486. Of Star-Thistle.

Fig. 1653. Star-Thistle (1) Fig.1654. St. Barnaby's Thistle (2) 
The Description.

The Star-Thistle, called Carduus stellatus, hath many soft frizzled 
leaves, deeply cut or gashed, altogether without prickles: among 
which riseth up a stalk, dividing itself into many other branches, 
growing two foot high; on the tops whereof are small knops or heads 
like the other Thistles, armed round about with many sharp prickles, 
fashioned like a blazing star, which at the beginning are of a purple 
colour, but afterwards of a pale bleak or whitish colour: the seed is 
small, flat, and round; the root is long, and brown without.

2. Saint Barnaby's Thistle is another kind of Star-Thistle, 
notwithstanding it hath prickles nowhere save in the head only, and 
the prickles of it stand forth in manner of a star: the stalks are 
two cubits high, parted into divers branches softer than are those of 
Star-Thistle, which stalks have films or thin skins cleaving unto 
them all in length, by which they seem to be four-square: the leaves 
are somewhat long, set with deep gashes on the edges: the flowers are 
yellow, and consist of threads: the seed is little; the root long and 
slender.

The Place.

The two first do grow upon barren places near unto cities and towns, 
almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower and flourish especially in July and August.

The Names.

The first is called in Latin, Stellaria; as also Carduus stellatus, 
and likewise Carduus calcitrapa; but they are deceived, who take it 
to be Eryngium, or Sea Holly, or any kind thereof. Matthiolus saith, 
that it is called in Italian Calcatrippa: in High Dutch, Wallen 
distel: in low Dutch, Sterre distel: in French, Chausse trappe: in 
English, Star-Thistle.

St. Barnaby's Thistle is called in Latin Spina solstitatus, because 
it flowereth in the summer solstice, as Gesner saith, or rather 
because after the solstice the prickles thereof be sharpest: of 
Guillandinus, Eryngium, but not properly, and Stellaria horatii 
augerii, who with good success gave it against the stone, dropsies, 
green sickness, and quotidian fevers. It is called in English as 
above said, Saint Barnaby's Thistle.

The Temperature.

The Star Thistle is of a hot nature.

The Virtues.

A. The seed is commended against the strangury; it is reported to 
drive forth the stone, if it be drunk with wine.

B. Baptista Sardus affirmeth, that the distilled water of this 
thistle is a remedy for those that are infected with the French Pox, 
and that the use of this is good for the liver, that it taketh away 
the stoppings thereof.

C. That it cleanseth the blood from corrupt and putrefied humours.

D. That it is given with good success against intermitting fevers 
whether they be quotidian or tertian.

E. As touching the faculties of Saint Barnaby's Thistle, which are as 
yet not found out, we have nothing to write.



CHAP. 487 Of Teasels.

Fig. 1655. Garden Teasel (1) Fig. 1656. Wild Teasel (2) 
The Kinds

Our age hath set down two kinds of Teasels: the tame, and the wild. 
These differ not save only in the husbanding; for all things that are 
planted and manured do more flourish, and come for the most part 
fitter for man's use.

The Description.

1. Garden Teasel is also of the number of the Thistles; it bringeth 
forth a stalk that is straight, very long, jointed, and full of 
prickles: the leaves grow forth of the joints by couples, not only 
opposite or set one right against another, but also compassing the 
stalk about, and fastened together; and so fastened, that they hold 
dew and rain water in manner of a little baisin: these be long, of a 
light green colour, and like to those of Lettuce, but full of 
prickles in the edges, and have on the outside all alongst the ridge 
stiffer prickles: on the tops of the stalks stand heads with sharp 
prickles like those of the Hedgehog, and crooking backward at the 
point like hooks: out of which heads grow little flowers. The seed is 
like Fennel seed, and in taste bitter: the heads wax white when they 
grow old, and there are found in the midst of them when they are cut, 
certain little maggots: the root is white, and of a mean length.

2. The second kind of Teasel which is also a kind of Thistle, is very 
like unto the former, but his leaves are smaller & narrower: his 
flowers of a purple colour, and the hooks of the Teasel nothing so 
hard or sharp as the other, nor good for any use in dressing of 
cloth.


Fig. 1657. Shepherd's Rod (3)

3. There is another kind of Teasel, being a wild kind thereof, and 
accounted among these Thistles, growing higher than the rest of his 
kinds; but his knobbed heads are no bigger than a Nutmeg, in all 
other things else they are like to the other wild kinds. This hath 
the lower leaves deeply cut in with one gash on each side at the 
bottom of the leaf, which little ears are omitted in the figure: the 
leaves also are less than the former, and narrower at the setting on, 
and hold no water as the two former do: the whole plant is also much 
less.

The Place.

The first called the tame Teasel is sown in this country in gardens, 
to serve the use of fullers and clothworkers.

The second kind groweth in moist places by brooks, rivers, and such 
like places.

The third I found growing in moist places in the highway leading from 
Braintree to Henningham Castle in Essex, and not in any other place 
except here & there a plant upon the highway from Much Dunmow to 
London. Thus our author: I found it growing in great plenty at 
Edgecombe by Croydon, close by the gate of the house of my much 
honoured friend Sir John Tunstall.

The Time.

These flower for the most part in June and July.

The Names.

Teasel is called in Greek, and likewise in Latin, Dipsacus, Labrum 
veneris, and Carduus veneris: it is termed Labrum veneris, and Laver 
lavacrum, of the form of the leaves made up in fashion of a baisin, 
which is never without water: they commonly call it Virga pastoris 
minor, and Carduus fullonum: in high Dutch, Karden Distel: in low 
Dutch Caerden: in Spanish Cardencha: and Cardo Penteador: in Italian, 
Dissaco, and Cardo: in French, Chardon de foullon, Verge à bergier: 
in English, Teasel, Card Teasel, and Venus' Baisin.

The third is thought to be Galedragon plinii: of which he hath 
written in his 27th book, the tenth Chapter.

The Temperature.

The roots of these plants are dry in the second degree and have a 
certain cleansing faculty.

The Virtues.

A. There is small use of Teasel in medicines: the heads (as we have 
said) are used to dress woolen cloth with.

B. Dioscorides writeth, that the root being boiled in wine, & stamped 
till it is come to the substance of a salve, healeth chaps and 
fistulæ of the fundament, if it be applied thereunto; and that this 
medicine must be preserved in a box of copper, and that also it is 
reported to be good for all kinds of warts.

C. It is needless here to allege those things that are added touching 
the little worms or maggots found in the heads of the Teasel, and 
which are to be hanged about the neck, or to mention the like thing 
that Pliny reporteth of Galedragon: for they are nothing else but 
most vain and trifling toys, as myself have proved a little before 
the impression hereof, having a most grievous ague and of long 
continuance: notwithstanding physic charms, these worms hanged about 
my neck, spiders put into a walnut shell, and divers such foolish 
toys that I was constrained to take by fantastic peoples' 
procurement; notwithstanding I say, my help came from God himself, 
for these medicines and all other such things did me no good at all.



CHAP. 488. Of Bastard Saffron.

Fig. 1658. Bastard Saffron (1) Fig. 1659. Blue Flowered Bastard 
Saffron (2) 
The Description.

1. Cnicus, called also Bastard Saffron, which may very well be 
reckoned among the Thistles, riseth up with a stalk of a cubit and a 
half high, straight, smooth, round, hard, and woody, & branched at 
the top: it is defended with long leaves something broad, sharp, 
pointed, and with prickles in the edges: from the tops of the stalks 
stand out little heads or knops of the bigness of an olive or bigger, 
set with many sharp pointed and prickly scales: out of whlch come 
forth flowers like threads, closely compact, of a deep yellow shining 
colour, drawing near to the colour of Saffron: under them are long 
seeds, smooth, white, somewhat cornered, bigger than a barley corn, 
the husk whereof is something hard, the inner pulp or substance is 
fat, white, sweet in taste: the root slender and unprofitable.

2. There is also another kind of Bastard Saffron, that may very well 
be numbered amongst the kinds of Thistles, and is very like unto the 
former, saving that his flocky or thready flowers, are of a blue 
colour: the root is thicker, and the whole plant is altogether more 
sharp in prickles: the stalks also are more crested and hairy.

The Place.

It is sown in divers places of Italy, Spain, and France, both in 
gardens and in fields: Pliny, lib. 25, cap. 15, saith, that in the 
reign of Vespasian this was not known in Italy; being in Egypt only 
of good account, and that they used to make oil of it, and not meat.

The Time.

The flowers are perfected in July and August: the root after the seed 
is ripe, the same year it is sown withereth away.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Cnicus: in Latin also Cnicus or Cnecus: in 
shops, Cartamus, or Carthamum: of divers, Crocus hortensis, and 
Crocus saracenicus: in Italian, Zaffarano Saracinesco, and Zaffarano 
Salvatico: in Spanish, Alasor, and Semente de papagaios: in High 
Dutch, Wilden Zaffran: in French, Safran Sauvage: in English, Bastard 
Saffron: of some, Mock Saffron, and Saffron D'orte, as though you 
should say Saffron de horte, or of the garden. Theophrastus and Pliny 
call it Cnecus urbana, and sativa, or tame and garden Bastard 
Saffron, that it may differ from Atractilis, which they make to be a 
kind of Cnicus sylvestris, or wild Bastard Saffron, but rather a 
species of the Holy Thistle.

The Temperature.

We use saith Galen, the seed only for purgations: it is hot, and that 
in the first degree, as Mesues writeth.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of the seed of Bastard Saffron bruised and strained into 
honeyed water or the broth of a chicken, and drunk, provoketh to the 
stool and purgeth by siege slimy phlegm, and sharp humours: Moreover 
it is good against the colic, and difficulty of taking breath, the 
cough, and stopping of the breast, and is singular against the 
dropsy.

B. The seed used as aforesaid, and strained into milk, causeth it to 
curdle and yield much curds, and maketh it of great force to loose 
and open the belly.

C. The flowers drunk with honeyed water open the liver, and are good 
against the jaundice: and the flowers are good to colour meat instead 
of Saffron.

D. The seed is very hurtful to the stomach, causing desire to vomit, 
and is of hard slow digestion, remaining long in the stomach and 
entrails.

E. Put to the same seed things comfortable to the stomach, as Anise 
seed, Galingale, or Mastic, Ginger, sal gemmæ, and it shall not hurt 
the stomach at all, and the operation thereof shall be the more quick 
and speedy.

F. Of the inward pulp or substance hereof is made a most famous and 
excellent composition to purge water with, commonly called 
Diachartamon, a most singular and effectual purgation for those that 
have the dropsy.

G. The perfect description hereof is extant in Guido the Surgeon, in 
his first Doctrine, and the sixth Tractate.

H. We have not read, or had in use that Bastard Saffron with the blue 
flower, and therefore can say nothing of his virtues.



CHAP. 489. Of Wild Bastard Saffron.

Fig. 1660. Wild Bastard Saffron (1) Fig. 1661. Blessed Thistle (2) 
The Description.

1. Atractylis, otherwise called wild Bastard Saffron, bringeth forth 
a straight and firm stalk, very fragile or brittle, divided at the 
top into certain branches: it hath long jagged leaves set with 
prickles: the heads on the tops of the branches are very full of 
sharp prickles: out of which grow flowers all of threads, like those 
of Bastard Saffron, but they are of a light yellow colour, and 
sometimes purple: the seed is somewhat great, brown, and bitter, 
otherwise like that of Bastard Saffron: the root is of a mean 
bigness.

2. The stalks of Carduus benedictus, or Blessed Thistle, are round, 
rough, and pliable, and being parted into divers branches, do lie 
flat on the ground: the leaves are jagged round about, and full of 
harmless prickles in the edges: the heads on the tops of the stalks 
are set with prickles, and environed with sharp prickling leaves, out 
of which standeth a yellow flower: the seed is long, and set with 
hairs at the top like a beard: the root is white, and parted into 
strings: the whole herb, leaves and stalks, and also the heads, are 
covered with a soft and thin down.
The Place.

Atractylis groweth in Candy, and in divers provinces and islands of 
Greece, and also in Languedoc: and is an herb growing in our English 
gardens.

Carduus benedictus is found everywhere in Lemnos, an island of the 
Midland Sea, in champion grounds, as Petrus Bellonius testifieth: it 
is diligently cherished in gardens in these Northern parts.

The Time.

Atractylis is very late before it flowereth and seedeth.

Carduus benedictus flowereth in July and August, at which time it is 
especially to be gathered for physic matters.

The Names.

Atractylis is called in Greek Atractylis agria: of the Latins 
likewise, Atractylis, and Cnicus sylvestris; and because women in the 
old time were wont to use the stiff stalk thereof pro fuso aut colo, 
for a spindle or a distaff, it is named Fusus agrestis, and Colus 
rustica; which thing Petrus Bellonius reporteth the women in Greece 
do also even at this day; who call Atractylis by a corrupt name 
Ardactyla: divers of the later herbarists name it Carthamus 
sylvestris: that is to say in Low Dutch Wilden Carthamus: and in 
English, Wild Bastard Saffron, or Spindle Thistle.

Blessed Thistle is called in Latin everywhere Carduus benedictus:, 
and in shops by a compound word, Cardo-benedictus: it is most plain, 
that it is species Atractylidis or a kind of wild Bastard Saffron: it 
is called Atractylis hirsutior, hairy wild Bastard Saffron: Valerius 
Cordus nameth it Cnicus supinus: it is called in High Dutch, 
Beseegnete distel, Kardo Benedict: the later name whereof is known to 
the Low Country men: in Spanish it is called Cardo Sancto: in French, 
Chardon benoist, or beneist: in the Isle Lemnos, Garderacantha: in 
English, Blessed Thistle, but more commonly by the Latin name Carduus 
benedictus.

The Temperature.

Wild Bastard Saffron doth dry and moderately digest, as Galen 
witnesseth.

As Carduus benedictus is bitter, so is it also hot and dry in the 
second degree, and withal cleansing and opening.

The Virtues.

A. The tops, seed, and leaves of Atractylis, saith Dioscorides, being 
beaten and drunk with pepper and wine, are a remedy for those that 
are stung of the scorpion.

B. Blessed Thistle taken in meat or drink, is good for the swimming 
and giddiness of the head, it strengtheneth memory, and is a singular 
remedy against deafness.

C. The same boiled in wine and drunk hot, healeth the griping pains 
of the belly, killeth and expelleth worms, causeth sweat, provoketh 
urine, and driveth out gravel; cleanseth the stomach, and is very 
good against the fever quartan.

D. The juice of the said Carduus is singular good against all poison, 
as Hierome Bocke witnesseth, in what sort soever the medicine be 
taken; and helpeth the inflammation of the liver, as reporteth 
Ioachinus Camerarius of Nuremberg.

E. The powder of the leaves ministered in the quantity of half a 
dram, is very good against the pestilence, if it be received within 
24 hours after the taking of the sickness, and the party sweat upon 
the same: the like virtue hath the wine, wherein the herb hath been 
sodden.

F. The green herb pounded and laid to, is good against all hot 
swellings, as Erysipelas, plague-sores, and botches, especially those 
that proceed of the pestilence, and is also good to be laid upon the 
bitings of mad dogs, serpents, spiders, or any venomous beast 
whatsoever; and so is it likewise if it be inwardly taken.

G. The distilled water thereof is of less virtue.

H. It is reported that it likewise cureth stubborn and rebellious 
ulcers, if the decoction be taken for certain days together; and 
likewise Arnoldus de Villanova reporteth, that if it be stamped with 
barrow's grease to the form of an unguent, adding thereto a little 
wheat flour, it doth the same, being applied twice a day.

I. The herb also is good being stamped and applied, and so is the 
juice thereof.

K. The extraction of the leaves drawn according to art, is excellent 
good against the French disease, and quartan agues, as reporteth the 
foresaid Camerarius.

L. The same author reporteth, that the distilled water taken with the 
water of Lovage, and Dodder, helpeth the saucefleme face, if it be 
drunk for certain days together.



CHAP. 490. Of Thistle upon Thistle, and divers other Wild Thistles.


Fig. 1662. Kinds of Thistle (1-4) 

The Description.

1. Among all the Thorns and Thistles, this is most full of prickles; 
the stalks thereof are very long, and seem to be cornered by reason 
of certain thin skins growing to them, being sent down forth of the 
leaves: the leaves are set round about with many deep gashes, being 
very full of prickles as well as the stalks: the heads are very thick 
set in every place with stiff prickles, and consist of a multitude of 
scales; out of which grow purple flowers, as they do out of other 
Thistles, seldom white: the root is almost straight, but it groweth 
not deep.

2. To this also may be referred that which Lobel writeth to be named 
of the Italians Leo, and Carduus ferox, for it is so called of the 
wonderful sharp and stiff prickles, wherewith the whole plant 
aboundeth. The stalk thereof is short, scarce a handful high: the 
flower groweth forth of a prickly head, and is of a pale yellow 
colour, like that of Wild Bastard Saffron, and it is also environed 
and set round about on every side with long hard thorns and prickles.

3. The third groweth seldom above a cubit or two foot high: it 
bringeth forth many round stalks, parted into divers branches; the 
leaves are like those of white Cotton Thistle, but lesser, and 
blacker, and not coverd with down or cotton: upon the tops of the 
stalks grow little heads like hedgehogs; out of which spring gallant 
purple flowers, that at length are turned into down, leaving seeds 
behind them like those of the other Thistles; the root consisteth of 
many small strings.

4. The fourth riseth up with an higher stalk, now and then a yard 
long, round, and not so full of branches nor leaves, which are sharp 
and full of prickles, but lesser and narrower: the heads be also 
lesser, longer, and not so full of stiff prickles: the flowers are of 
a white colour, and vanish into down: the root is black, and of a 
foot long.

Fig. 1663. Musk Thistle (5) Fig. 1664. Spear Thistle (6) 	5. This 
wild Thistle which groweth in the fields about Cambridge, hath an 
upright stalk, whereon do grow broad prickly leaves: the flowers grow 
on the tops of the branches, consisting of a flocky down, of a white 
colour tending to purple, of a most pleasant sweet smell, striving 
with the savour of musk: the root is small, and perisheth at the 
approach of winter. (I had no figure directly fitting this; wherefore 
I put that of Dodonæus his Onopordon, which may well serve for it, if 
the leaves were narrower, and more divided.) 

6. The Spear Thistle hath an upright stalk, garnished with a skinny 
membrane full of most sharp prickles: whereon do grow very long 
leaves, divided into divers parts, with sharp prickles; the point of 
the leaves are as the point of a spear, whereof it took his name: the 
flowers grow on the tops of the branches, set in a scaly prickly 
head, like unto the heads of Knapweed in form, consisting of many 
threads of a purple colour: the root consisteth of many tough 
strings.

Fig. 1665. Theophrastus' Fifth Thistle (7) Fig. 1668. Donrez' Fifth 
Thistle (8) 	7. Theophrastus his fifth Thistle called Acarna, 
which was brought from Illyria to Venice, by the learned Valerandus 
Donrez, described by Theophrastus, hath horrible sharp yellow 
prickles, set upon his green indented leaves, which are covered on 
the back side with an hoary down (as all the rest of the plant) 
having a stalk of a cubit and a half high, and at the top certain 
scaly knops containing yellow thrummy flowers, armed or fenced with 
horrible sharp prickles: the root is long and thready.

8.The other kind of fifth Thistle, being also another Acarna of 
Valerandus' description, hath long and large leaves, set full of 
sharp prickles, as though it were set full of pins: all the whole 
plant is covered with a certain hoariness, like the former: there 
ariseth up a stalk nine inches long, yea in some fertile grounds a 
cubit high, bearing the flower of Carduus benedictus, standing thick 
together, but lesser.


Fig. 1667. Bush-headed Thistle (9) 

9. This Thistle in the opinion of Bauhin, whereto I much incline, is 
the same with the former. The root is small, the leaves long, welting 
the stalks at their setting on, and armed on the edges with sharp 
prickles: the stalks lie trailing on the ground like those of the 
Star Thistle, so set with prickles, that one knoweth not where to 
take hold thereof: it hath many closely compact umbels, consisting of 
pale yellowish little flowers like those of Groundsel; the seed is 
like that of Carthamus, small and chaffy. Pena and Lobel call this 
Picnomos cretæ salonensis, of a place in Provence where they first 
found it, called the Crau, being not far from the city Salon. 
Tabernamontanus set it forth for Chamæleon niger, and our author 
formerly gave the figure hereof by the same title.

The Place.

The two first grow on divers banks not far from Mount Apennine, and 
sometimes in Italy, but yet seldom.

The Way Thistles grow everywhere by highways' sides and common paths 
in great plenty.

The places of the rest have been sufficiently spoken of in their 
descriptions.

The Time.

These kinds of Thistles do flower from the beginning of June until 
the end of September.

The Names.

These Thistles comprehended in this present chapter are by one 
general name called in Latin Cardui sylvestres, or wild Thistles; and 
that which is the second in order is named Scolymus: but not that 
Scolymus which Theophrastus declareth to yield a milky juice (of 
which we have written before) but one of those which Pliny in his 
twentieth book, cap. 23. describeth: of some they are taken for kinds 
of Chamæleon: their several titles do set forth their several Latin 
names, and also the English.

There was formerly much confuslon in this chapter, both in the 
figures and history, which I will here endeavour to amend, and give 
as much light as I can, to the obscurity of our Author and some 
others; to which end I have made choice of the names as the fittest 
place.

1. This description was taken out of Dodonæus, and the title also of 
Onopordon which was formerly put over the figure, and they belong to 
the Thistle our author before described by the name of Acanthum purp. 
Illyricum, cap. 476. I have therefore changed the title, yet let the 
description stand, for it reasonable well agrees with the figure 
which is of the Carduus spinossimus vulgaris of Lobel, and 
Polyacantha theophrasti of Tabernamontanus. Of this Thistle I observe 
three kinds: the first is a Thistle some two cubits and a half high, 
with many slender stalks and branches exceeding prickly, having 
commonly five prickly welts running alongst the stalks: the leaves on 
the upper sides as also the stalks are of a reasonable fresh green 
colour, but the underside of the leaf is somewhat whitish: the heads 
consist of sundry hairy green threads which look like prickles, but 
they are weak, and not prickly: the flower is of the bigness, and of 
the like colour and shape as the common Knapweed, yet somewhat 
brighter: it grows on ditch sides, and flowers in July. This I take 
to be the Aculeosa gasæ of the Adversaria pag. 374, but not that 
which Lobel figures for it in his Icones. This is that which 
Tabernamontanus figures for Polyacantha, and our author gave his 
figure in this place. The second of these I take to be that which 
Lobel hath figured for Polyacantha, and Dodonæus for Carduus 
sylvatica 3, (which figure we here give you) and in the Hist. Lugd. 
Pag. 1473, it is both figured and described by the name of Polyanthus 
theophrasti. In the figure there is little difference: in the things 
themselves this; the stalks of this are as high as those of the last, 
but slenderer, with fewer and straighter branches, and commonly edged 
with four large welts, which have fewer, yet longer prickles than 
those of the former: the leaves and stalks of this are of a greyish 
or whitish colour: the heads are longish, but much smaller than those 
of the former, and they seldom open or spread abroad their flowers, 
but only show the tops of divers reddish threads of a faint colour. 
This grows as frequently as the former, and commonly in the same 
places. The third, which I think may fitly be referred unto these, 
grows on wet heaths and such like places, having a stalk sometimes 
four or five cubits high, growing straight up, with few branches, and 
those short ones: the flowers are of an indifferent bigness, and 
commonly purple, yet sometimes white. I think this may be the 
onopyxos alter lugdunensis: or the Carduus palustris described in 
Bouhin his Prodromus, pag. 156.

2. The second, which is a stranger with us, is the Phnix, Leo & 
Carduus ferox of Lobel and Dodonæus. Bauhin hath referred it to 
Acarna, calling it Acarna minor caule non folioso.

3. The third description was also out of Dodonæus, being of his 
Carduus sylvestris primus, or the Onopyxos dodonæi of the Hist. Lugd. 

4. This description also was out of Dodonæus, being of his Carduus 
sylvestris alter, agreeing in all things but the colour of the 
flowers, which should be purple. Lobel in his Observations describeth 
the same Thistle by the name of Carduus vulgatissimus viarum: but 
both he and Dodonæus give the figure of Carlina sylvestris for it: 
but neither the flowers nor the heads of that agree with that 
description. I judge this to be the Thistle that Fabius Columna hath 
set forth for the Ceanothos of Theophrastus; and Tabernamontanus for 
Carduus arvensis.

5. The Musk Thistle I have seen growing about Deptford, and (as far 
as my memory serves me) it is very like to the third here described: 
it grows better than a cubit high, with reasonable large leaves and 
also heads which are a little soft or downy, large, with purple 
flowers: the heads before the flowers open smell strong of musk. I 
have found no mention of this but only in Gesner, de Collectione in 
Parte, where he hath these words; Carduus arvensis major purpureo 
flore (qui flore nondum nato moschum olebat) floret Iulio.["The great 
thistle of the tillage fields (whose npopened flowers smell of musk) 
flowers in July"].

There is sufficient of the rest in their titles and descriptions.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. These wild Thistles (according to Galen) are hot and dry in the 
second degree, and that through the property of their essence they 
drive forth stinking urine, if the roots be boiled in wine and drunk; 
and that they take away the rank smell of the body and arm-holes.

B. Dioscorides saith, that the root of the common Thistle applied 
plasterwise correcteth the filthy smell of the arm holes and whole 
body.

C. And that it works the same effect if it be boiled in wine and 
drunk, and that it expelleth plenty of stinking urine.

D. The same author affirmeth also, that the herb being as yet green 
and tender is used to be eaten among other herbs after the manner of 
Asparagus.

E. This being stamped before the flower appeareth, saith Pliny, and 
the juice pressed forth, causeth hair to grow where it is pilled off, 
if the place be bathed with the juice.

F. The root of any of the wild Thistles being boiled in water and 
drunk, is reported to make them dry that drink it.

G. It strengtheneth the stomach; and it is reported (if we believe 
it) that the same is also good for the matrix, that boys may be 
engendered: for so Chereas of Athens hath written, and Glaucias, who 
is thought to write most diligently of Thistles.

H. This Thistle being chewed is good against stinking breath. Thus 
far Pliny, in his twentieth book, cap. 23.



CHAP. 491. Of the Melon or Hedgehog Thistle.


Fig. 1668. Hedgehog Thistle

The Description.

Who can but marvel at the rare and singular workmanship which the 
Lord God almighty hath showed in this Thistle, called by the name 
Echino melocactos, or Melocarduus echinatus? This knobby or bunchy 
mass or lump is strangely compact and context together, containing in 
it sundry shapes and forms, participating of a Pepon or Melon, and a 
Thistle, both being incorporate in one body; which is made after the 
form of a cock of hay, broad and flat below, but sharp toward the 
top, as big as a man's body from the belly upward: on the outside 
hereof are fourteen hard ribs, descending from the crown to the 
lowest part, like the bunchy or out swelling rib of a Melon standing 
out, and chanelled between: at the top or crown of the plant issueth 
forth a fine silken cotton, wherewith it is full fraught; within 
which cotton or flocks lie hid certain small sheaths or cods, sharp 
at the point, and of a deep sanguine colour, answering the cods of 
Capsicum or Indian Pepper, not in show only, but in colour, but the 
cods are somewhat smaller. The furrowed or chanelled ribs on the 
outside are garnished or rather armed with many prickly stars, 
standing in a compass like sharp crooked horns or hooks, each star 
consisting of ten or twelve pricks, wherewith the outward bark or 
pilling is guarded, so that without hurt to the fingers it cannot be 
touched: this rind is hard, thick, and like unto Aloes, of the colour 
of the Cucumber: the flesh or inner pulp is white, fat, waterish, of 
taste sour, unsavoury, and cooling, much like unto the meat of a raw 
Melon or Pumpkin. This plant groweth without leaf or stalk, as our 
Northern Thistle doth, called Carduus acaulis, and is bigger than the 
largest Pumpkin: the roots are small, spreading far abroad in the 
ground, and consisting of black and tough twigs, which cannot endure 
the injury of our cold climate.

The Place.

This admirable Thistle groweth upon the cliffs and gravelly grounds 
near unto the seaside, in the islands of the West Indies, called St. 
Margaret's and St. John's Isle, near unto Puerto Rico, or Porto Rico, 
and other places in those countries, by the relation of divers 
travellers that have journeyed into those parts, who have brought me 
the plant itself with his seed; the which would not grow in my garden 
by reason of the coldness of the climate.

The Time.

It groweth, flowereth, and flourisheth all the year long, as do many 
other plants of those countries.

The Names.

It is called Carduus echinatus, Melocarduus echinatus, and Echino 
melocactus: in English, the Hedgehog Thistle, or prickly Melon 
Thistle. Such as are curious may see more hereof in Clusius his 
Exotics, lib. 4, cap. 24.

The Temperature and Virtues.

There is not anything extant set forth of the ancient or of the later 
writers, neither by any that have travelled from the Indies 
themselves: therefore we leave it to a further consideration.



CHAP. 492. Of the Gummy Thistle, called Euphorbium.

Fig. 669. The Poisonous Gum Thistle (1) Fig. 1670. The Antidote 
against the Poisonous Thistle (2) 
The Description.

1. Euphorbium (whereout that liquor or gum called in shops Euphorbium 
is extracted) hath very great thick gross and spreading roots, 
dispersed far abroad in the ground: from which arise long and round 
leaves, almost like the fruit of a great Cucumber, a foot and a half 
long, ribbed, walled, and furrowed like unto the Melon: these 
branched ribs are set or armed for the most part with certain 
prickles standing by couples, the point or sharp end of one guarding 
one way, and the point of another looking directly a clean contrary 
way: these pricks are often found in the gum itself, which is brought 
unto us from Libya and other parts: the leaves hereof being planted 
in the ground will take root well, and bring forth great increase, 
which thing I have proved true in my garden: it hath perished again 
at the first approach of winter. The sap or liquor that is extracted 
out of this plant is of the colour and substance of the cream of 
milk; it burneth the mouth extremely, and the dust or powder doth 
very much annoy the head and the parts thereabout, causing great and 
vehement sneezing, and stuffing of all the pores.

2. This rare plant called Anteuphorbium hath a very thick gross and 
far spreading root, very like unto Euphorbium; from which riseth up 
many round green and fleshy stalks, whereupon do grow thick leaves 
like Purslane, but longer, thicker, and fatter: the whole plant is 
fuill of cold and clammy moisture, which represseth the scorching 
force of Euphorbiumn; and it wholly seems at the first view to be a 
branch of green Coral.

Fig. 1671. Torch Thistle (3) Fig. 1672. Thorny Reed of Peru (4) 

3. There is not among the strange and admirable plants of the world 
any one that gives more cause of marvel, or more moveth the mind to 
honor and laud the Creator, than this plant, which is called of the 
Indians in their mother tongue Uragua, which is as much to say, a 
torch, taper, or wax candle; whereupon it hath been called in Latin 
by those that understood the Indian tongue, Cereus, or a Torch. This 
admirable plant riseth up to the height of a spear of twenty foot 
long, although the figure express not the same; the reason is, the 
plant when the figure was drawn came to our view broken: it hath 
divers bunches and valleys, even as is to be seen in the sides of the 
Cucumber, that is, furrowed, guttered, or chamfered alongst the same, 
and as it were laid by a direct line, with a welt from one end unto 
the other: upon which welt or line do stand small star-like thistles, 
sharp as needles, and of the colour of those of the Melon Thistle, 
that is to say, of a brown colour: the trunk or body is of the 
bigness of a man's arm, or a cable rope; from the middle whereof 
thrust forth divers knobby elbows of the same substance, and armed 
with the like prickles that the body of the trunk is set withal: the 
whole plant is thick, fat, and full of a fleshy substance, having 
much juice like that of Aloes,  when it is hardened, and of a bitter 
taste: the flowers grow at the top or extreme point of the plant: 
after which follow fruit in shape like a fig, full of a red juice, 
which being touched staineth the hands of the colour of red lead: the 
taste is not unpleasant.

4. There hath been brought from the Indies a prickly reed of the 
bigness of a good big staff, of the length of six or eight foot, 
chamfered and furrowed, having upon two sides growing unto it an 
uneven membrane or skinny substance, as it were a jag or welt set 
upon the wing of a garment, and upon the very point of every cut or 
jag armed with most sharp prickles: the whole trunk is filled full of 
a spongeous substance, such as is in the hollowness of the brier or 
bramble; amongst the which is to be seen as it were the peelings of 
Onions, wherein are often found living things, that at the first seem 
to be dead. The plant is strange, and brought dry from the Indies, 
therefore we cannot write so absolutely hereof as we desire; 
referring what more might be said to a further confideration or 
second edition.

The Place.

These plants grow upon Mount Atlas, in Libya, in most of the Islands 
of the Mediterranean sea, in all the coast of Barbary, especially in 
St. Crux near unto the sea side, in a barren place there called by 
the English men Half Hanneken; which place is appointed for Merchants 
to confer of their business, even as the Exchange in London is: from 
which place my friend Mr William Martin, a right expert surgeon, did 
procure me the plants of them for my garden, by his servant that be 
sent thither as surgeon of a ship. Since which time I have received 
plants of divers others that have travelled into other of those parts 
and coasts: notwithstanding they have not endured the cold of our 
extreme winter.

The Time.

They put forth their leaves in the spring time, and wither away at 
the approach of winter.

The Names.

It is called both in Greek and Latin Euphorbium: Pliny in one place 
putteth the herb in the feminine gender, naming it Euphorbia: the 
juice is called also Euphorbion, and so it is likewise in shops: we 
are fallen in English to use the Latin word, and to call both the 
herb and juice by the name of Euphorbium, for other name we have 
none: it may be called in English, the Gum Thistle.

The Temperature.

Euphorbium (that is to say, the congealed juice which we use) is of a 
very hot, and, as Galen testifieth, caustic or burning faculty, and 
of thin parts: it is also hot and dry in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.

A. An emplaster made with the gum Euphorbium, and twelve times so 
much oil, and a little wax, is very singular against all aches of the 
joints, lameness, palsies, cramps, and shrinking of sinews, as Galen, 
lib. 4. de Medicamentis Secundum Genera, declareth at large, which to 
recite at this present would but trouble you overmuch.

B. Euphorbium mingled with oil of Bay and bear's grease cureth the 
scurf and scalds of the head, and baldness, causing the hair to grow 
again, and other bare places, being anointed therewith.

C. The same mingled with oil, and applied to the temples of such are 
very sleepy, and troubled with the lethargy, doth awaken and quicken 
their spirits again.

D. If it be applied to the nuque or nape of the neck, it bringeth 
their speech again that have lost it by reason of the Apoplexy.

E. Euphorbium mingled with vinegar and applied taketh away all foul 
and ill-favoured spots, in what part of the body soever they be.

F. Being mixed with oil of Wallflowers, as Mesues saith, and with any 
other oil or ointments, it quickly heateth such parts as are over-
cold.

G. It is likewise a remedy against old pains in the huckle bones, 
called the Sciatica.

H. Aetius, Paulus, Actuarius, and Mesue do report, That if it be 
inwardly taken it purgeth by siege water and phlegm; but withal it 
setteth on fire, scorcheth and fretteth, not only the throat and 
mouth, but also the stomach, liver, and the rest of the entrails, and 
inflames the whole body.

I. For that cause it must not be beaten small, and it is to be 
tempered with such things as allay the heat and sharpness thereof, 
and that make glib and slippery; of which things there must be such a 
quantity, as that it may be sufficient to cover all over the 
superficial or outward part thereof.

K. But it is a hard thing so to cover and fold it up, or to mix it, 
as that it will not burn or scorch. For though it be tempered with 
never so much oil, if it be outwardly applied it raiseth blisters, 
especially in them that have soft and tender flesh, and therefore it 
is better not to take it inwardly.

L. It is troublesome to beat it, unless the nostrils of him that 
beats it be carefully stopped and defended; for if it happen that the 
hot sharpness thereof do enter into the nose, it presently causeth 
itching, and moveth sneezing, and after that, by reason of the 
extremity of the heat, it draweth out abundance of phlegm and filth, 
and last of all blood, not without great quantity of tears.

M. But against the hot sharpness of Euphorbion, it is reported that 
the inhabitants are remedied by a certain herb, which of the effect 
and contrary faculties is named Anteuphorbium. This plant likewise is 
full of juice, which is nothing at all hot and sharp but cool and 
slimy, allaying the heat and sharpnessof Euphorbium. We have not yet 
learned that the old writers have set down anything touching this 
herb; notwithstanding it seemeth to be a kind of Orpine, which is the 
antidote or counterpoison against the poison and venom of Euphorbium.



CHAP. 493. Of Soft Thistles, and Thistle Gentle.

Fig. 1673. Great Soft-Bulbed Thistle (1) Fig. 1674. Great Soft 
Thistle (2) 
The Description.

1. The first and largest of these hath roots consisting of great 
longish bulbs like those of the Asphodel: from whence arise many 
large stalks three or four cubits high, erected and downy: the leaves 
are very long and large, juicy, greenish, and cut about the edges, 
and set with soft prickles. At the tops of the stalks and branches 
grow heads round and large, out whereof come flowers consisting of 
abundance of threads, of a purple colour, which fly away in down. 
This grows wild in the mountainous meadows and in sume wet places of 
Austria. I have seen it growing in the garden of Mr John Parkinson, 
and with Mr Tuggy. It flowers in July. Clusius hath called it Cirsium 
maximum montanum incano folio, bulbosi radice. But he gave no figure 
thereof, nor any else, unless the Acanthium peregrinum in 
Tabernamontanus were intended for this plant, as I verily think it 
was. I have given you a figure which I drew some years ago by the 
plant itself.

2. The root of this is long, yet sending forth of the sides creeping 
fibres, but not bulbous: the leaves are like those of the last 
mentioned, but less, and armed with sharp prickles of a greenish 
colour, with the middle rib white: the heads sometimes stand upright, 
and otherwhiles hang down; they are very prickly, and send forth 
flowers consisting of many elegant purple threads. The stalks are 
thick, crested and welted with the setting on of the leaves. This 
grows wild upon the seacoasts of Zeeland, Flanders, and Holland: it 
flowers in June and July: it is the Cirsium tertium of Dodonæus; and 
Cirsium maius of Lobel.

Fig. 1675. Soft Smooth-Leaved Thistle (3) Fig. 1676. Small Bur 
Thistle (4) 	3. This whose root is fibrous and living, sends forth 
lesser, narrower, and softer leaves than those of the former, not 
jagged or cut about their edges, nor hoary, yet set about with 
prickles: the stalks are crested: the heads are smaller, and grow 
three or four together, carrying such purple flowers as the former. 
This is that which Matthiolus, Gesner, and others have set forth for 
Cirsium: Dodonæus, for Cirsium 2, and Clusius hath it for his Cirsium 
quartum, or montanum secundum.

4. The leaves of this are somewhat like those of the last described, 
but larger, and welting the stalks further at their setting on: they 
are also set with prickles about the edges: the stalks are some two 
cubits high, divided into sundry long slender branches: on whose tops 
grow little rough prickly heads, which after the flowers come to 
perfection do hang downwards, and at the length turn into down, 
amongst which lies hid a smooth shining seed. This groweth wild in 
divers woody paces of Hungary and Austria. It is the Cirsium of 
Dodonæus: the Cirsium 2 or Montanum 1 of Clusius; and Cirsium alterum 
of Lobel. It flowers in June: the root is about the thickness of 
one's little finger, fibrous also, and living.


Fig. 1677. Kinds of Soft Thistle (5,6) 

5. This sends up long narrow leaves, hairy, and set about the edges 
with slender prickles: out of the middle of these leaves grows up a 
stalk sometimes a foot, otherwhiles a cubit high, slender, stiff, and 
downy: upon which grow leaves somewhat broad at their setting on, and 
there also a little nicked or cut in: this stalk sometimes hath no 
branches, otherwhiles two or three long slender ones, at the tops 
whereof grow out of scaly heads such flowers as the common Knapweed, 
which at length turn into down; among which lies hid a small shining 
seed like the other plants of this kind. The root is made of divers 
thick fibres, which run in the ground, and here and there put up new 
heads. This plant wants no setting forth; for Clusius gives us the 
figure and history thereof, first by the name of Cirsium pannonicum 
pratense; then he gives another history thereof, with a worser 
figure, (which he received of Dr Thomas Penny of London) by the name 
of Cirsium anglicum 2. Lobel also described it, and set it forth with 
a figure expressing the flower already faded, by the name of Cirsium 
anglicum. Bauhin in his Pinax, deceived by these several expressions, 
hath made three several plants of this one; a fault frequent in many 
writers of plants. Clusius found it growing in the mountainous 
meadows alongst the side of the Danube in Austria: Penny, in the 
meadows at the foot of Ingleborough hill in Yorkshire: Lobel, in the 
meadows at a place called Acton in Gloucestershire. I found this only 
once, and that was in a meadow on this side Highgate, having been 
abroad with the Company of Apothecaries, and returning that way home, 
in the company of Mr James Walsall, William Broad, and some others. I 
have given you both the figures of Clusius; his own in the first 
place, and that of Dr. Penny in the second, but the former is the 
better: I have also given you that of Lobel.

6. These also Clusius (whom I herein follow) addeth to the kinds of 
Thistles. This jagged leaved one, which he calleth Carduus mollior 
primus, hath many leaves at the root, both spread upon the ground, 
and also upright; and they are covered with a white and soft 
downiness, yet green on the upper side: they are also much divided or 
cut in even to the middle rib, like to the softer or tenderer leaves 
of the Star Thistle: they have no prickles at all upon them: out of 
the midst of these leaves grow up one or two stalks, round, crested, 
purplish, hoary, and some cubit or better high. The leaves that grow 
upon the lower part of the stalk are divided, those above not so: the 
tops of the stalks sometimes, yet very seldom, are parted into 
branches, which carry scaly heads containing elegant flowers made of 
many purple strings. The flower decaying, there succeeds a cornered 
seed: the root sometimes equals the thickness of one's finger, 
brownish, long, and somewhat fibrous. It flowers in May, and grows 
upon the hilly places of Hungary.


Fig. 1678. Dock-Leaved Thistle-Gentle (7) 

7. The stalk of this is some foot or better high, thick, crested, and 
somewhat hairy: the leaves about the root are somewhat large, and in 
shape like those of Bonus Henricus, (abusively called in English, 
Mercury) somewhat sinuated about the edges, and set with harmless 
prickles, green above, and very hoary underneath, like the leaves of 
the white Poplar: those that grow upon the stalk are lesser and 
narrower: out of whose bosoms towards the tops of the stalk grow out 
little branches which carry three, four, or more little scaly heads 
like those of the Blue-Bottle, or Knapweed, whereout grow thready 
bluish purple flowers: the seed is wrapped in down, and not unlike 
that of Blue-Bottle: the root is black, hard, and living, sending 
forth shoots on the sides. It growsupon the highest Austrian Alps, 
and flowers in July. Clusius calls this Carduus mollior lapathi 
folio.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These plants seem by their taste to be of a moderately heating and 
drying faculty, but none of them are used in medicine, nor have their 
virtues set down by any author.



CHAP. 494. Of Three-Leaved Grass, or Meadow Trefoil.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of three-leaved Grass, some greater, others 
lesser; some bear flowers of one colour, some of another: some of the 
water and others of the land: some of a sweet smell, others stinking: 
and first of the common Meadow Trefoils, called in Irish Shamrocks.


Fig. 1679. Meadow Trefoil (1) 

The Description.

1. Meadow Trefoil bringeth forth stalks a cubit long, round, and 
something hairy, the greater part of which creepeth upon the ground; 
whereon do grow leaves consisting of three joined together, one 
standing a little from another; of which those that are next the 
ground and roots are rounder, and they that grow on the upper part 
longer, having for the most part in the midst a white spot like a 
half moon. The flowers grow on the tops of the stalks in a tuft or 
small fox-tail ear, of a purple colour, and sweet of taste. The seed 
groweth in little husks, round and blackish: the root is long, woody, 
and groweth deep.

2. There is another of the field Trefoils, differing from the 
precedent especially in the colour of the flowers; for as those are 
of a bright purple, contrariwise these are very white, which maketh 
the difference. The leaves, flowers, and all the whole plant is less 
than the former.
Fig. 1680. Great White Trefoil (3) Fig. 1681. Great Purple Trefoil 
(4) 	3, 4. There is also a Trefoil of this kind which is sown in 
fields of the Low Countries, in Italy and divers other places beyond 
the seas, that cometh up ranker and higher than that which groweth in 
meadows, and is an excellent food for cattle, both to fatten them, 
and cause them to give great store of milk. Of this there is one more 
with white flowers, which hath stalks four foot high, and narrow 
hairy leaves, with a root of the thickness of one's little finger. 
This is Clusius his Trifolium maius primum. The other hath stalks 
some cubit high, with larger joints and leaves: the flower or head of 
flowers is also larger, of an elegant red colour. This Clusius calls 
Trifolium maior tertium.

Fig. 1682. Hop Trefoil (5) Fig. 1683. Little Yellow Trefoil (6) 	5, 
6. Likewise we have in our fields a smaller Trefoil that bringeth 
forth yellow flowers, a greater and a lesser, and divers others also, 
differing from these in divers notable points, the which to 
distinguish apart would greatly enlarge our volume, and yet to small 
purpose: therefore we leave them to be distinguished by the curious, 
who may at the first view easily perceive the difference, and also 
that they be of one stock or kindred.

The greater of these yellow Trefoils hath pretty large yellow heads, 
which afterward become of a brownish colour, and somewhat resemble a 
Hop: whence Thalius called it Lupulus sylvaticus, or Trifolium luteum 
alterum lupulinum: Dodonæus calls it Trifolium agrarium. The leaves 
are small, and lightly nicked about the edges. The Lesser hath 
smaller and far lesser yellow heads, which are succeeded by many 
little crooked clustering seeds: the leaves of this are small, and 
also snipped about the edges: both this & the other have two little 
leaves close by the fastening of the footstalks of the leaves to the 
main stalks; wherefore I refer them to the Medicks, and usually call 
this latter, Medica sem. racemoso. It is the Trifolium luteum minimum 
of Pena and Lobel; and Trifolium arvense of Tabernamontanus.

The Place.

Common Meadow Trefoil groweth in meadows, fertile pastures, and 
waterish grounds. The others love the like soil.

The Time.

They flower from May to the end of summer.

The Names.

Meadow Trefoil is called in Latin Trifolium pratensi: in High Dutch, 
Wisenklee: in Low Dutch, Claveren: in French, Treffle and Trainiere, 
and Visumarus, as Marcellus an old writer testifieth: in English, 
Common Trefoil, Three-leaved Grass: of some, Suckles, and 
Honeysuckles, Cocksheads: and in Irish, Shamrocks.

The Temperature.

The leaves and flowers of Meadow Trefoils are cold and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Three-Leaved Grass made with honey, and used in a 
clyster, is good against the frettings and pains of the guts, and 
driveth forth tough and slimy humours that cleave unto the guts.

B. The leaves boiled with a little barrow's grease, and used as a 
poultice, take away hot swellings and inflammations.

C. Oxen and other cattle do feed of the herb, and also calves and 
young lambs. The flowers are acceptable to bees.

D. Pliny writeth, and setteth it down for certain, that the leaves 
hereof do tremble, and stand right up against the coming of a storm 
or tempest.

E. The meadow Trefoil (especially that with the black half-moon upon 
the leaf) stamped with a little honey, takes away the pin and web in 
the eyes, ceaseth the pain and inflammation thereof, if it be 
strained and dropped therein.



CHAP. 495. Of Stinking Trefoil, or Treacle Clover.


Fig. 1684. Treacle Clover

The Description.

Treacle Clover groweth upright like a shrubby plant, with stalks of a 
cubit and a half high, whereupon do grow next the ground broad 
leaves, 3 joined together, those upon the stalks are longer and 
narrower. The stalks are covered over with a rough evil-coloured 
hairiness: the leaves are of a dark black green colour, and of a 
loathsome smell, like the pitch called Bitumen Iudaicum, whereof it 
took his name: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a dark 
purplish colour tending unto blueness, in shape like those of 
Scabious: the seed is broad, rough, long, and sharp pointed: the root 
is small and tender, and cannot endure the coldness of our winter, 
but perisheth at the first approach thereof.

The Place.

It groweth naturally, saith Hippocrates Hippiatros, not Cous, in 
rough places, as Ruellius translateth it: in Germany, France and 
England it never cometh up of itself, but must be sown in gardens, as 
myself have proved divers times, and was constrained to sow it 
yearly, or else it would not come up, neither of his own sowing or 
otherwise.

The Time.

It flowereth not in my garden until the end of August

 The Names.

Nicander calleth this Trefoil Tripetalon: in Latin, Trifolium acutum, 
or sharp pointed Trefoil: of Pliny, Trifolium odoratum, but not 
properly; of others, Trifolium asphaltæum sive bituminosum, or Stone 
Pitch Trefoil.

Avicenna calleth it Tarsilon, and not Handacocha: Avicenna doth 
comprehend Dioscorides his Loti, that is to say, Lotus urbana 
sylvestris, and ægyptia, which Dioscorides confoundeth one with 
another in one chapter: in English it is called Clover Gentle, Pitch 
Trefoil, Stinking Trefoil, & Treacle Clover.

The Temperature.

This Trefoil, called asphaltæum, as Galen saith, is hot and dry, as 
bitumen is, and that in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Being drunk, it taketh away the pain of the sides, which cometh by 
obstructions or stoppings, provoketh urine, and bringeth down the 
desired sickness.

B. Hippocrates writeth, that it doth not only bring them down, but 
likewise the birth, not only inwardly taken, but also outwardly 
applied. If a woman, saith he, be not well cleansed after her child-
bearing, give her this Trefoil to drink in white wine.

C. Dioscorides saith, that the seeds and leaves being drunk in water, 
are a remedy for the pleurisy, difficulty of making water, the 
falling sickness, the dropsy when it first beginneth, and for those 
that are troubled with the mother: the quantity to be taken at once 
is three drams of the seeds, and four of the leaves.

D. The leaves drunk in oxymel, or a syrup of vinegar made with honey, 
is good for those that are bitten with serpents.

E. Some affirm that the decoction of the whole plant, root and 
leaves, taketh away pain from those whom serpents have bitten, if 
they be washed therewith; but if any other man having an ulcer be 
washed with that water wherewith he was bathed that was bitten of the 
serpent, they say that he shall be troubled in the same manner that 
the stinged party was.

F. Some also give with wine three leaves, or a small quantity of the 
seeds in tertian agues, and in quartan four, as a sure remedy against 
the fits.

G. The root also is put into antidotes or counterpoisons, saith 
Dioscorides: but other ancient physicians do not only mix the root 
with them, but also the seed, as we may see in Galen, by a great many 
compositions in his 2nd book Of Antidotes; that is to say, in the 
Treacles of Ælius Gallus, Zeno Laudoceus, Claudius Apollonius, 
Eudemus, Heraclides, Dorothæus, and Heras.

H. The herb stamped and applied upon any envenomed wound, or made 
with poisoned weapon, it draweth the poison from the depth most 
apparently. But if it be applied upon a wound where there is no 
venomous matter to work upon, it doth no less infect that part, than 
if it had been bitten with some serpent or venomous beast: which 
wonderful effect it doth not perform in respect of any viicous 
quality that it hath in itself, but because it doth not find that 
venomous matter to work upon, which it naturally draweth (as the 
loadstone doth iron) whereupon it is constrained through his 
attractive quality, to draw and gather together humours from far unto 
the place, whereby the pain is greatly increased.



CHAP. 496. Of Divers Other Trefoils.

Fig. 1685. American Trefoil (1) Fig. 1686. Burgundy Trefoil (2) 
The Description.

1. Three-leaved Grass of America hath divers crooked round stalks, 
leaning this way and that way, and divided into divers branches: 
whereon do grow leaves like those of the Meadow Trefoil, of a black 
green colour, and of the smell of Pitch Trefoil, or Treacle Clover: 
the flowers grow at the top of the branches, made up in a long spiked 
chaffy ear, of a white colour: after which cometh the seed, somewhat 
flat, almost like to those of Tares: the roots are long strings of a 
woody substance.

2. This three leaved grass (which Dodonæus in his last Edition 
calleth Trifolium cochleatum primum: and Lobel, Fnum Burgundiacum) 
hath divers round upright stalks, of a woody rough substance, yet not 
able of itself to stand without a prop or stay: which stalks are 
divided into divers small branches, whereupon do grow leaves joined 
three together like the other Trefoils, but of a dark swart green 
colour; the flowers grow at the top of the stalks in shape like those 
of the Codded Trefoil, but of a dark purple colour: the seed 
followeth, contained in small wrinkled husks turned round, after the 
manner of a water snail; the root is thick, composed of divers tough 
thready strings, and lasteth long in my garden with great increase.


Fig. 1687. Salamanca Trefoil (3) 

3. This Three-Leaved Grass of Salmanca, a city as I take it of 
Portugal, differeth not much from our field Trefoil: it hath many 
branches weak and tender, trailing upon the ground, of two cubits and 
a half high: whereupon do grow leaves set together by three upon a 
stem; from the bosom whereof thrust forth tender footstalks, whereon 
do stand most fine flowers of a bright red tending unto purple: after 
which come the seed wrapped in small skins, of a red colour.

Fig. 1688. Heart Trefoil (4) Fig. 1689. Small Codded Trefoil (5) 	4. 
The Heart Trefoil hath very many flexible branches, set upon a 
slender stalk of the length of two or three foot, trailing hither and 
thither: whereupon do grow leaves joined together by three on little 
slender footstalks, every little leaf of the fashion of a heart, 
whereof it took his name: among which come forth scaly or chaffy 
yellow flowers: the root is thick and thready. I take this plant to 
be of that Medicks which Camerarius calls Arabica, which grows wild 
in many places with us, having the leaves a little dented in at the 
ends, so that they resemble the vulgar figure of a heart; and each 
leaf is marked with a blackish, or red spot: the flowers be small and 
yellow: the seeds are contained in rough buttons, wound up like the 
other Snail Trefoils, whereof it is a kind.

5. This kind of three leaved grass is a low herb, creeping upon the 
ground: the leaves are like those of the common Trefoil, but lesser, 
and of a greyish green colour: the flowers are fair and yellow, 
fashioned like those of broom, but lesser: after come three or four 
cods, wherein is contained round seed: the root is long and reddish. 
This is the Trifolium corniculatum, or Melilotus coronata of Lobel: 
Lotus pentaphyllos of Gesner.

Another Codded Trefoil is like unto the last described in every 
respect, saving that this plant is altogether larger, having stalks a 
cubit and a half high: the leaves are also four times as large, two 
roundish leaves growing by the stalk, and three longish ones growing 
upon a short footstalk coming forth between the two roundish leaves: 
both the stalk and leaves have a little soft downiness or hairiness 
on them: the flowers grow clustering together on the tops of the 
stalks, in shape, bigness, and colour like that of the last 
described, but commonly more in number: they are also succeeded by 
such cods as those of the former.

Fig. 1690. Crow-Foot Trefoil (6) Fig. 1691. Hoary Clover (7) 	6. 
The figure which Dodonæus hath set forth out of an old manuscript in 
the Emperor's library, being there figured for Coronopus, seems to be 
of the last described, or some plant very like thereto, though the 
five leaves at each joint be not put in such order as they should be, 
yet all the parts are well expressed, according to the drawing of 
those times, for you shall find few ancient expressions come so near 
as this doth.

7. There is a kind of Clover growing about Narbonne in France, that 
hath many twiggy tough branches coming from a woody root, whereon are 
set leaves three together, after the manner of the other Trefoils, 
somewhat long, hairy, and of a hoary or overworn green colour. The 
flowers are yellow, and grow at the tops of the branches like those 
of Broom.


Fig. 1692. Yellow Horned Trefoil (8) 

8. This sends up many branches from one root, some cubit or more 
long, commonly lying along upon the ground, round, flexible, and 
divided into sundry branches: the leaves stand together by threes, 
and are like those of the true Medick, or Burgundy Trefoil, but much 
less: the flowers grow clustering together on the tops of the 
branches, like in shape to those of the former; of a yellow colour, 
and not without smell: they are succeeded by such, yet narrower 
crooked cods, as the Burgundy Trefoil hath (but the painter hath not 
well expressed them:) in these cods are contained seeds like those 
also of that Trefoil, and such also is the root, which lives long and 
much increases. It grows in Hungary, Austria, and Moravia: it flowers 
in June and July: Clusius calls it Medica flore flavo: 
Tabernamontanus, Lens maior repens: and Tragus, Meliloti maioris 
species tertia: Bauhin saith that about Nîmes in Narbonne it is found 
with flowers either yellow, white, green, blue, purple, black, or 
mixed of blue and green; and he calleth it Trifolium sylvestre luteum 
silique cornuta or Medica frutescens.

The Place.

The several titles of most of these plants set forth their natural 
place of growing: the rest grow in most fertile fields of England.

The Time.

They flower and flourish most of the summer months.

The Names.

There is not much to be said as touching their names, more than hath 
been set down.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The temperature and faculties of these Trefoils are referred unto the 
common meadow Trefoils.



CHAP. 497. Of Hare's-Foot Trefoils.

Fig. 1694. Great Hare's-Foot Trefoil (1) Fig. 1695. Great Large-
Headed Hare's-Foot Trefoil (2) 
The Description.

1. The great Hare's-Foot being a kind of Trefoil, hath a hard and 
woody root, full of black thready strings: from whence arise divers 
tough and feeble branches, whereupon do grow leaves, set together by 
threes, making the whole plant to resemble those of the Meadow 
Trefoil: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, composed of a 
bunch of grey hairs: among the which soft matter cometh forth small 
flowers of a most bright purple colour, somewhat resembling the 
flowers of the common Meadow Trefoil, but far greater. Lobel calls 
this Lagopus maximus folio & facie trifolii pratensis: Dodonæus, 
Lagopus maior trifolii.

2. This elegant plant (which Tragus hath set forth for Cytisus, Lobel 
by the name of Lagopus altera folio prinnato, and Clusius for his 
Trifolii maior 3 altera species) hath stalks some foot and better 
high, whereon grow leaves set together by threes, long, hoary and 
lightly snipped about the edges, with elegant nerves or veins, 
running from the middle rib to the sides of the leaves, which are 
most conspicuous in hot countries, and chiefly then when the leaf 
begins to decay. At the tops of the branches, in long and large heads 
grow the flowers, of an elegant sanguine colour. This flowers in May 
and June, and grows wild upon some mountains of Hungary and Austria; 
I have seen them, both this and the former, growing in the gardens of 
some of our florists.

Fig. 1696. Narrow-Leaved Spanish Hare's-Foot (3) Fig. 1697. Small 
Hare's-Foot Trefoil (4) 	3. This other great kind of Hare's-Foot 
sends forth one slender, yet stiff stalk, whereon grow leaves whose 
footstalks are large at the setting on, encompassing the stalks: the 
leaves themselves grow by threes, long, narrow, and sharp pointed, of 
a greyish colour like those of the common Hare's-Foot; the spike at 
the top is soft and downy, with little reddish flowers amongst the 
whitish hairiness. This grows wild in Spain: Clusius calls it Lagopus 
angustifolius hispanicus maior.

There is another sort of this described by Lobel and Pena in the 
Adversaria whose leaves are longer and narrower than this, the whole 
plant also is ofttimes lesser: they call it Lagopus altera 
angustifolio.

4. The Small Hare's-Foot hath a round rough and hairy stalk, dividing 
itself into divers other branches; whereupon do grow small leaves, 
three joined together, like those of the small yellow Trefoil: the 
flowers grow at the very point of the stalks, consisting of a rough 
knap or bush of hairs or down like that of Alopecuros, or Foxtail, of 
whitish colour tending to a light blush, with little white flowers 
amongst the downiness: the root is small and hard.

The Place.

The first groweth in the fields of France and Spain, and is a 
stranger in England; yet it growth in my garden.

The Small Hare's-Foot groweth among corn; especially among Barley, 
and likewise in barren pastures almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in June, July, and August.

The Names.

The great Hare's-Foot Trefoil is called of Tragus, Cytisus: of 
Cordus, Trifolium magnum: of Lobel, Lagopum maximum, and Lagopodium: 
in English, the Great Hare's-foot.

The last, being the smallest of these kinds of Trefoils, is called 
Lagopus, and Pes leporis: in Dutch, Hasen pootkens: in High Dutch, 
Hasen fusz: in French, Pied de lievre: in English Hare's-Foot.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The temperature and faculties are referred unto the other 
Trefoils, whereof these are kinds: notwithstanding Dioscorides saith, 
that the Small Hare's-Foot doth bind and dry. It stoppeth, saith he, 
the lask, if it be drunk with red wine. But it must be given to such 
as are feverish with water.



CHAP. 498. Of Marsh Trefoil, or Buck's Beans.


Fig. 1698. Marsh Trefoil

The Description.

1. The great Marsh Trefoil hath thick fat stalks, weak and tender, 
full of a spongeous pith, very smooth, and of a cubit long: whereon 
do grow leaves like to those of the garden Bean, set upon the stalks 
three joined together like the other Trefoils, smooth, shining, and 
of a deep green colour: among which toward the top of the stalks 
standeth a bush of feather-like flowers of a white colour, dashed 
over slightly with a wash of light carnation: after which the seed 
followeth, contained in small buttons, or knobby husks, of a brown-
yellowish colour like unto Millet, and of a bitter taste: the roots 
creep divers ways in the middle marsh ground, being full of joints, 
white within, and full of pores, and spongy, bringing forth divers 
by-shoots, stalks, and leaves, by which means it is easily increased, 
and largely multiplied.

2. The second differeth not from the precedent saving it is 
altogether lesser, wherein consisteth the difference, if there be 
any: for doubtless I think it is the self-same in each respect, and 
is made greater and lesser, aecording to his place of growing, 
climate, and country.

The Place.

These grow in marsh and fenny places, and upon boggy grounds almost 
everywhere.

The Time.

They flower and flourish from June to the end of August.

The Names.

Marsh Trefoil is called in High Dutch, Biberklee, that is to say, 
Trifolium castoris, or Trifolium fibrinum: in Low Dutch, of the 
likeness that the leaves have with the Garden Beans, Borzboomen, that 
is to say, Faselus hircinus or Boona hircina: the later herbarists 
call it Trifolium palustre, and paludosum: of some, Isopyrum: in 
English, Marsh Clover, Marsh Trefoil, and Buck's-Beans.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The seed of Isopyrum, saith Dioscorides, if it be taken with mead 
or honeyed water, is good against the cough and pain in the chest.

B. It is also a remedy for those that have weak livers and spit 
blood, for as Galen saith it cleanseth and cutteth tough humours, 
having also adjoined with it an astringent or binding quality.



CHAP. 499. Of Sweet Trefoil, or Garden Clover.


Fig. 1699. Sweet Trefoil

The Description.

Sweet Trefoil hath an upright stalk, hollow, and of the height of two 
cubits, dividing itself into divers branches: whereon do grow leaves 
by three and three like to the other trefoils, slightly and 
superficially nicked in the edges: from the bosom whereof come the 
flowers, every one standing on his own single footstalk, consisting 
of little chaffy husks, of a light or pale bluish colour: after which 
come up little heads or knops, in which lieth the seed, of a whitish 
yellow colour, and lesser than that of Fenugreek: the root hath 
divers strings: the whole plant is not only of a whitish green 
colour, but also of a sweet smell, and of a strong aromatical or 
spicy scent, and more sweet when it is dried: which smell in the 
gathered and dried plant doth likewise continue long: and in moist 
and rainy weather, it smelleth more than in hot and dry weather: and 
also when it is yet fresh and green it loseth and recovereth again 
his smell seven times a day; whereon the old wives in Germany do call 
it Sieven gezeiten kraut, that is, the herb that changeth seven times 
a day.

The Place.

It is sown in gardens not only beyond the seas, but in divers gardens 
in England.

The Time.

It is sown in May, it flowereth in June and July, and perfecteth his 
seed in the end of August the same year it is sown.

The Names.

It is commonly called in Latin Trifolium odoratum: in High Dutch as 
we have said Sieven gezeiten: in low Dutch, Sevenghetijcruijt: that 
is to say, an herb of seven times: it is called in Spanish, Trebol 
real: in French, Treffle oderiferant: in English, Sweet Trefoil, and 
Garden Clover: it seemeth to be Lotus urbana, or sativa, of which 
Dioscorides writeth in his fourth book: nevertheless divers authors 
set down Melilot, for Lotus urbana, and Trifolium odoratum, but not 
properly. The gardeners and herb women in Cheapside commonly call it, 
and know it by the name of Balsam, or Garden Balsam.

The Temperature.

Galen saith, that Sweet Trefoil doth in a mean concoct and dry, and 
is in a mean and temperate faculty between hot and cold: the which 
faculties undoubtedly are plainly perceived in this Sweet Trefoil.

The Virtues.

A. The juice pressed forth, saith Dioscorides, with honey added 
thereto, cleanseth the ulcers of the eyes, called in Latin Argema, 
and taketh away spots in the same, called albugines; and removeth 
such things as do hinder the sight.

B. The oil wherein the flowers are infused or steeped, doth perfectly 
cure green wounds in very short space; it appeaseth the pain of the 
gout, and all other aches, and is highly commended against ruptures, 
and burstings in young children.

C. The juice given in white wine cureth those that have fallen from 
some high place, avoideth congealed and clotted blood, and also 
helpeth those that do piss blood, by means of some great bruise, as 
was proved lately upon a boy in Fenchurch street, whom a cart went 
over, whereupon he did not only piss blood, but also it most 
wonderfuly gushed forth, both at his nose and mouth.

D. The dried herb laid among garments keepeth them from moths and 
other vermin.



CHAP. 500. Of Fenugreek.

Fig. 1700. Fenugreek (1) Fig. 1701. Wild Fenugreek (2) 
The Description.

1. Fenugreek hath a long slender trailing stalk, green, hollow 
within, and divided into divers small branches: whereon do grow 
leaves like those of the Meadow Trefoil, but rounder and lesser, 
green on the upper side, on the lower side tending to an ash colour 
among which come small white flowers, after them likewise long 
slender narrow cods, in which do lie small uneven seeds, of a 
yellowish colour: which being dried, have a strong smell, yet not 
unpleasant: the root is small, and perisheth when it hath perfected 
his seed.

2. There is a wild kind hereof serving to little use, that hath small 
round branches, full of knees or joints: from each joint proceedeth a 
small tender footstalk, whereon do grow three leaves and no more, 
somewhat snipped about the edges, like unto those of Burgundy Hay: 
from the bosoms whereof come forth small yellow flowers, which turn 
into little cods: the root is thick, tough, and pliant.

The Place.

Fenugreek is sown in fields beyond the seas: in England we sow a 
small quantity thereof in our gardens.

The Time.

It hath two seasons of sowing, according to Columella, of which one 
is in September, at what time it is sown that it may serve for fodder 
against winter; the other is in the end of January, or the beginning 
of February, notwithstanding we may not sow it until April in 
England.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Telis, or as it is found in Pliny his copies 
Carphos: in Latin; Fnum græcum: Columella saith that it is called 
Siliqua: in Pliny we read Silicia: in Varro, Silicula: in High Dutch, 
Bockshorne: in Italian, Fiengreco: in Spanish, Alfornas: in French, 
Fenegrec: and in English, Fenugreek.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. It is thought according to Galen in his book Of The Faculties of 
Nourishinents, that it is one of those simples which do manifestly 
heat, and that men do use it for food, as they do Lupins; for it is 
taken with pickle to keep the body soluble, and for this purpose it 
is more agreeable than Lupins, seeing it hath nothing in his own 
proper substance, that may hinder the working.

B. The juice of boiled Fenugreek taken with honey is good to purge by 
the stool all manner of corrupt humours that remain in the guts, 
making soluble through his sliminess, and mitigating pain through his 
warmness.

C. And because it hath in it a cleansing or scouring faculty, it 
raiseth humours out of the chest: but there must be added unto it no 
great quantity of honey lest the biting quality should abound.

D. In old diseases of the chest without a fever, fat dates are to be 
boiled with it, but when you have mixed the same juice pressed out 
with a great quantity of honey, and have again boiled it on a soft 
fire to a mean thickness; then must you use it long before meat.

E. In his book Of The Faculties of Simple Medicines he saith, that 
Fenugreek is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first: 
therefore it doth kindle and make worse hot inflammations, but such 
as are less hot and more hard are thereby cured by being wasted and 
consumed away.

F. The meal of Fenugreek, as Dioscorides saith, is of force to 
mollify and waste away: being boiled with mead and applied it taketh 
away inflammations, as well inward as outward.

G. The same being tempered or kneaded with nitre and vinegar, doth 
soften and waste away the hardness of the milt.

H. It is good for women that have either impostume, ulcer, or 
stopping of the matrix, to bathe and sit in the decoction thereof.

I. The juice of the decocttion pressed forth doth cleanse the hair, 
taketh away dandruff, scoureth running sores of the head, called of 
the Grecians Achorai: being mingled with goose grease, and put up in 
manner of a pessary, or mother supposititory, it doth open and 
mollify all the parts, about the mother.

K. Green Fenugreek bruised and pounded with vinegar, is a remedy for 
weak and feeble parts, and that are without skin, ulcerated and raw.

L. The decotion thereof is good against ulcers in the low gut, and 
foul stinking excrements of those that have the bloody flux.

M. The oil which is pressed out thereof scoureth hairs and scars in 
the privy parts.

N. The decoction of Fenugreek seed, made in wine, and drunk with a 
little vinegar, expelleth all evil humours in the stomach and guts.

O. The seed boiled in wine with dates and honey, unto the form of a 
syrup, doth mundify and clean the breast, and easeth the pains 
thereof.

P. The meal of Fenugreek boiled in mead or honeyed water, consumeth 
and dissolveth all cold hard impostumes and swellings, and being 
mixed with the roots of Marsh Mallow and Linseed effecteth the same.

Q. It is very good for women that have any grief or swelling in the 
matrix, or other lower parts, if they bathe those parts with the 
decoction thereof made in wine, or sit over it and sweat.

R. It is good to wash the head with the decoction of the seed, for it 
taketh away the scurf, scales, nits, and all other such-like 
imperfections.



CHAP. 501. Of Horned Clover, and Black Clover.

Fig. 1702. Horned Clover (1) Fig. 1703. Four-Leaved Grass (2) 
The Description.

1. The horned Clover, or codded Trefoil, groweth up with many weak 
and slender stalks lying upon the ground: about which are set white 
leaves, somewhat long, lesser, aud narrower than any of the other 
Trefoils' the flowers grow at the tops, of the fashion of those of 
Peas, of a shining yellow colour: after which come certain straight 
cods, bigger than those of Fenugreek, but blunter at their ends, in 
which are contained little round seed; the root is hard and woody, 
and sendeth forth young springs every year.

2. This kind of Three-Leaved Grass, or rather Four-Leaved Trefoil, 
hath leaves like unto the common Trefoil, saving that they be lesser, 
and of a brown purplish colour, known by the name of Purple-Wort, or 
Purple-Grass; whose flowers are in shape like the Meadow Trefoil, but 
of a dusty overworn colour tending to whiteness; the which doth 
oftentimes degenerate, sometime into three leaves, sometimes in five, 
and also into seven, and yet the plant of his nature hath but four 
leaves & no more. Thus saith our author, but I do not think this to 
be the purple-leaved Trefoil with the white flower, which is commonly 
called Purple-Grass, for I could never observe it to have more leaves 
than three upon a stalk.


Fig. 1704. Square Crimson Velvet Pea (3) 

3. The root of this is small and white, from which arise many weak 
hairy branches some cubit long: whereon grow soft hairy leaves three 
on one footstalk, with two little leaves at the root thereof, & out 
of the bosoms of these upon like footstalks grow three lesser leaves; 
as also flowers of the bigness and shape of those of a Vetch, but of 
a brave deep crimson velvet colour: after these are past come cods 
set with four thin welts or skins which make them them four-square; 
whence Camerarius called it Lotus pulcherrima tetragonolobus: the 
seed is of an ash colour, somewhat less than a pea. It flowers most 
of the summer months, and is for the prettiness of the flower 
preserved in many gardens by yearly sowing the seed, for it is an 
annual plant. Clusius hath it by the name of Lotus siliquosus rubello 
flore: and he saith the seeds were divers times sent out of Italy by 
the name of Sandalida. It is also commonly called in Latin Pisum 
quadratum.

The Place.

The first groweth wild in barren ditch banks, pastures, and dry 
mountains.

The second groweth likewise in pastures and fields, but not so common 
as the other; and is planted in gardens.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

The second is called Lotus trifolia: in English, Horned Clover, or 
Codded Trefoil.

The other is called Lotus quadrifolia, or four-leaved Grass, or 
Purple-Wort; of Pena and Lobel, Quadrifolia phæum fuscum hortorum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Their faculties in working are referred unto the Meadow Trefoils: 
notwithstanding it is reported, that the leaves of Purple-wort 
stamped, and the juice given to drink, cureth young children of the 
disease called in English the Purples.



CHAP. 502. Of Medick Fodder, or Snail Clover.

Fig. 1705. Medick Fodder (1) Fig. 1706.  Prickly Snail Trefoil (2) 
The Description.

1. This kind of Trefoil, called Medica, hath many small and slender 
ramping branches crawling and creeping along upon the ground, set 
full of broad leaves slightly indented about the edges: the flowers 
are very small, and of a pale yellow colour, which turn into round 
wrinkled knobs, like the water snail, or the fish called periwinkle: 
wherein is contained flat seed fashioned like a little kidney, in 
colour yellow, in taste like a vetch or pea; the root is small, and 
dieth when the seed is ripe: it grows in my garden, and is good to 
feed cattle fat.

There are many varieties of these plants, and they chiefly consist in 
the fruit; for some are smooth and flat, as this first described: 
other some are rough and prickly, some with lesser, and other some 
with bigger prickles; as also with them standing divers ways, some 
are only rough, and of those some are as big as a small nut, other 
some no bigger than a pea. I give you here the descriptions of three 
rough ones, (as I received them from M. Goodyer) whereof the last is 
of the sea, which, as you may see, our author did but superficially 
describe.

2. Medicæ maioris Btica, species prima, spinulis intortis.

This hath four-square reddish streaked hairy trailing branches, like 
the small English Medica, greater and longer, four or five foot long: 
the leaves are also smooth, growing three together, neither sharp 
pointed, nor yet so broad at the top as the said English Medica, but 
blunt topped, with a small black spot in the midst, not crooked: the 
flowers are also yellow, three, four, or five on a footstalk: after 
cometh a round writhed fruit fully as big as a hazelnut, with small 
prickles not standing fore-right, but lying flat on the fruit, finely 
wrapped, plaited, folded, or interlaced together, wherein lieth 
wrapped the seed in fashion of a kidney, very like a Kidney Bean, but 
four times smaller, and flatter, of a shining black colour without, 
like polished jet; containing a white kernel within: the root is like 
the former, and perisheth also at winter.

Medicæ maioris Bticæ spinosa species altera.

The branches also creep on the ground, and are streaked smooth four 
square, reddish here and there, three or four foot long: the leaves 
are smooth, finely notched about the edges, sharp pointed, without 
black spots, very like Medica pericarpio plano: the flowers are small 
and yellow like the other: the fruit is round, writhed or twined in 
also, fully as big as a hazelnut, somewhat cottony or woolly, with 
short sharp prickles: wherein lieth also wrapped a shining black 
kidney-like seed, so like the last described, that they are not to be 
discerned apart: the root is also alike, and perisheth at winter.


Fig. 1707. Sea Medick (3) 

3. This kind also of Trefoil, (called Medica marina: in English, Sea 
Trefoil, growing naturally by the seaside about Westchester, and upon 
the Mediterranean sea coast, and about Venice) hath leaves very like 
unto the common meadow Trefoil, but thicker, and covered over with 
flocky hoariness like Gnaphalium, after the manner of most of the sea 
herbs: the flowers are yellow: the seeds wrinkled like the former, 
but in quantity they be lesser.
Medica marinæ spinosæ species.

The branches of this are the least and shortest of all the rest, 
little exceeding a foot or two in length, and are four square, green, 
somewhat hairy, and trailing on the ground: the leaves are like to 
those of Medica pericarpio plano, not fully so sharp pointed, without 
black spots, soft, hairy, three on a footstalk: the flowers grow 
alongst the branches, on very small footstalks, forth of the bosoms 
of the leaves, (not altogether on or near the tops of the branches) 
and are very small and yellow, but one on a footstalk: after cometh 
small round writhed fruit, no bigger than a pea; with very short 
sharp prickles, wherein is contained yellowish seed of the fashion of 
a kidney like the former, and is the hardest to be plucked forth of 
any of the rest; the root is also whitish, like the roots of the 
other, and also perisheth at winter. Aug. 2. 1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.

The first is sown in the fields of Germany, Italy, and other 
countries, to feed their cattle, as we in England do Buckwheat: we 
have a small quantity thereof in our gardens, for pleasures' sake.

The third groweth near unto the sea side in divers places.
The Time.

Medica must be sown in April; it flowereth in June and July: the 
fruit is ripe in the end of August.

The Names

Medick Fodder is called of some Trifolium cochleatum, and Medica: in 
French, L'herbe a Limasson: in Spanish, Mielguas: of the Valentians 
and Catalans, Alfafa, by a word either barbarous or Arabic: for the 
chief of the Arabian writers, Avicenna, doth call Medica, Cot, 
Alaseleti, and Alfasfasa.

The other is called Sea Clover, and Medick Fodder of the Sea.

The Temperature and virtues.

A. Medick Fodder is of temperature cold, for which cause it is 
applied green to such inflammations and infirmities as have need of 
cooling.



CHAP. 503. Of Wood Sorrel, or Starwort.


Fig. 1708. White Wood Sorrel (1) 

The Description.

1. Oxys Pliniana, or Trifolium acetosum, being a kind of Three-Leaved 
Grass, is a low and base herb without stalk; the leaves immediately 
rising from the root upon short stems; at their first coming forth 
folded together, but afterward they do spread abroad, and are of a 
fair light green colour, in number three, like the rest of the 
Trefoils, but that each leaf hath a deep cleft or rift in the middle: 
amongst these leaves come up small and weak tender stems, such as the 
leaves do grow upon, which bear small star-like flowers of a white 
colour, with some brightness of carnation dashed over the same: the 
flower consisteth of five small leaves; after which come little round 
knops or husks full of yellowish seed: the root is very thready, and 
of a reddish colour: the whole herb is in taste like Sorrel, but much 
sharper and quicker, and maketh better green sauce than any other 
herb or Sorrel whatsoever.

My oft mentioned friend Mr. George Bowles sent some plants of this 
with very fair red flowers, which he gathered in April last, in a 
wood of Sir Thomas Walsingham's at Chislehurst in Kent, called 
Stockwell Wood, and in a little round wood thereto adjoining.


Fig. 1709. Yellow Wood Sorrel (2) 

2. The second kind of Oxys or wood Sorrel is very like the former, 
saving that the flowers are of a yellow colour, and yield for their 
seed vessels small and long horned cods; in other respects alike.

The Place.

These plants grow in woods and under bushes, in sandy and shadowy 
places in every country. So saith our author, but I have not as yet 
found any of the yellow growing with us.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of April unto the end of May and midst 
of June.

The Names

Wood Sorrel or Cuckoo Sorrel is called in Latin Trifolium acetosum: 
the apothecaries and herbarists call it Alleluia, and Panis cucili, 
or Cuckoos' meat, because either the Cuckoo feedeth thereon, or by 
reason when it springeth forth and flowereth, the cuckoo singeth 
most, at which time also Alleluia was wont to be sung in churches. 
Hieronymus Fracastoris nameth it Lujula, Alexander Benedictus saith 
that it is called Alimonia: in High Dutch, Saurelklee: in Low 
Coeckoecruijt: in French, Pain de Cocu: in English, Wood Sorrel, Wood 
Sour, Sour Trefoil, Stubwort, Alleluia, and Sorrel du Bois.

It is thought to be that which Pliny, lib. 27. cap. 12 calleth Oxys; 
writing thus: Oxys is three leaved, it is good for a feeble stomach, 
and is also eaten of those that are bursten. But Galen in his fourth 
book Of Simples saith, that Oxys is the same which Oxalis or Sorrel 
is; and Oxys is found in Pliny to be also Iunci species, or a kind of 
Rush.

The Nature.

These herbs are cold and dry like Sorrel.

The Virtues.

A. Sorrel du Bois or Wood Sorrel stamped and used for green sauce, is 
good for them that have sick and feeble stomachs, for it 
strengtheneth the stomach, procureth appetite, and of all Sorrel 
sauces is the best, not only in virtue, but also in the pleasantness 
of his taste.

B. It is a remedy against putrefied and stinking ulcers of the mouth, 
it quencheth thirst, and cooleth mightily an hot pestilential fever, 
especially being made in a syrup with sugar.



CHAP. 504. Of Noble Liverwort, or Golden Trefoil.

Fig. 1710. Noble Liverwort (1) Fig. 1711. Red Noble Liverwort (2) 
The Description.

1. Noble Liverwort hath many leaves spread upon the ground, three 
cornered, resembling the Three-Leaved Grass, of a perfect grass green 
colour on the upper side, but greyish underneath: among which rise up 
divers small tender footstalks of three inches long; on the ends 
whereof stands one small single blue flower, consisting of six little 
leaves, having in the middle a few white chives: the seed is enclosed 
in little round knops, of a whitish colour; which being ripe do start 
forth of themselves: the root is slender, composed of an infinite 
number of black strings.

2. The second is like unto the precedent in leaves, roots, and seeds: 
the flowers hereof are of a shining red colour, wherein consisteth 
the difference.


Fig. 1712. Double-Flowered Noble Liverwort (3) 

3. This strange Three-Leaved Liverwort differeth not from the former, 
saving that this brings forth double blue flowers tending to purple, 
and the others not so.

4. There is another in my garden with white flowers, which in stalks 
and every other respect is like the others.

The Place.

These pretty flowers are found most places of Germany in shadowy 
woods among shrubs and also by highways' sides: in Italy likewise, 
and that not only with the blue flowers, but the same with double 
flowers also, by the report of Alphonsus Pancius Dr of Physic in the 
University of Ferrara, a man excellently well seen in the knowledge 
of simples. They do all grow likewise in my garden, except that with 
double flowers, which as yet is a stranger in England. Thus our 
author: it is now plentiful in many gardens.

The Time.

They flower in March and April, and perfect their seed in May.

The Names.

Noble Liverwort is called Hepatica trifolia, Hepatica aurea, 
Trifolium aureum: of Baptisia Sardus, Herba Trinitatis: in High 
Dutch, Edel Leber Kraut: in Low Dutch, Edel lever cruijt: in French, 
Hepatique: in Engish, Golden Trefoil, Three-Leaved Liverwort, Noble 
Liverwort, and Herb Trinity.

The Temperature.

These herbs are cold and dry, with an astringent or binding quality.

The Virtues.

A. It is reported to be good against the weakeness of the liver which 
proceedeth of an hot cause: for it cooleth and strengtheneth it not a 
little.

B. Baptista Sardus commendeth it, and writeth that the chief virtue 
is in the root; if a spoonful of the powder thereof be given certain 
days together with wine, or with some kind of broth, it profiteth 
much against the disease called Enterocele.



CHAP. 505. Of Melilot, or Plaster Clover.

Fig. 1713. Assyrian Melilot (1) Fig. 1714. Italian Melilot (2) 
The Description.

1. The first kind of Melilot hath great plenty of small tough and 
twiggy branches, and stalks full of joints or knees, in height two 
cubits, set full of leaves three together, like unto Burgundy Hay. 
The flowers grow at the top of the stalk, of a pale yellow colour, 
standing thickly set and compact together, in order or rows, very 
like the flowers of Securidaca altera: which being faded, there 
follow certain crooked cods bending or turning upward with a sharp 
point, in fashion not much unlike a parrot's bill, wherein is 
contained seed like Fenugreek, but flatter and slenderer: the whole 
plant is of a reasonable good smell, much like unto honey, and very 
full of juice: the root is very tough and pliant.

2. The second kind of Melilot hath small and tender upright stalks, a 
cubit high, and somewhat more, of a reddish colour, set full of round 
leaves three together, not snipped about the edges like the other 
Trefoils; and they are of a very deep green colour, thick, fat, and 
full of juice. The flowers grow alongst the tops of the stalks, of a 
yellow colour, which turn into rough round seeds as big as a tare, 
and of a pale colour. The whole plant hath also the savour of honey, 
and perisheth when it hath borne his seed.

Fig. 1715. King's Melilot (3) Fig. 1716. German Melilot (4) 	3. 
The third kind of Melilot hath round stalks and jagged leaves set 
round about, not much unlike the leaves of Fenugreek, always three 
growing together like the Trefoils, and oftentimes covered over with 
an hoariness, as though meal had been strewed upon them. The flowers 
be yellow and small, growing thick together in a tuft, which turn 
into little cods, wherein the seed is contained: the root is small, 
tough, and pliant.

4. The fourth kind of Melilot grows to the height of three cubits, 
set full of leaves like the common Melilot, and of the same savour: 
the flowers grow alongst the top of the stalks, of a white colour, 
which turn into small soft husks, wherein is contained little 
blackish seed: the root is also tough and pliant.

5. The Common Melilot hath weak cornered green stalks some two foot 
and better high, whereon grow longish leaves snipped and oftentimes 
eaten about the edges, of a fresh green colour: out of the bosoms of 
the leaves come little stalks some handful long, set thick on their 
tops with little yellow flowers hanging down and turning up again, 
each flower being composed of two little yellow leaves, whereof the 
uppermost comes up again, and the undermost seems to be parted into 
three. The flowers past, there succeed little cods wherein is the 
seed.

The Place.

These plants grow in my garden: the common English Melilot Pena 
setteth forth for Melilotis germanica: but for certainty no part of 
the world doth enjoy so great part thereof as England, and especially 
Essex; for I have seen between Sudbury in Suffolk, and Clare in 
Essex, and from Clare to Henham, and from thence to Ovington, Bulmer, 
and Pebmarsh, very many acres of arable pasture overgrown with the 
same; insomuch that it doth not only spoil their land, but the corn 
also, as Cockle or Darnel, and as a weed that generally spreadeth 
over that corner of the Shire.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in July and August.

The Names.

Plaster Clover is called by the general name, Melilotus, of some, 
Trifolium odoratum, yet there is another sweet Trefoil, as hath been 
declared. Some call it Trefolium equinum, and caballinum, or Horse-
Trefoil, by reason it is good fodder for horses, who do greedily feed 
thereon: likwise Trifolium ursinum, or Bear's Trefoil: of Fuchsius, 
Saxifraga lutea, and Sertula campana: of Cato, Serta campana, which 
most do name Corona regia: in High Dutch, Groote Steenclaveren: of 
the Romans and Etrurians, Tribolo, as Matthiolus writeth: in English, 
Melilot, and Plaster Clover: in Yorkshire, Hart's Clover.

The Temperature.

Melilot, saith Galen, hath more plenty of hot substance than cold 
(that is to say, hot and dry in the first degree) it hath also a 
certain binding quality, besides a wasting and ripening faculty. 
Disocorides showeth, that Melilot is of a binding and mollifying 
quality, but the mollifying quality is not proper unto it, but 
inasmuch as it wasteth away, and digesteth humours gathered in hot 
swellings, or otherwise: for so far doth it mollify or supple that 
thing which is hard, which is not properly called mollifying, but 
digesting and wasting away by vapors.

The Virtues.

A. Melilot boiled in sweet wine until it be soft, if you add thereto 
the yolk of a roasted egg, the meal of Fenugreek and Linseed, the 
roots of Marsh Mallows and hog's grease stamped together, and used as 
a poultice or cataplasm, plasterwise, doth assuage and soften all 
manner of swellings, especially about the matrix, fundament and 
genitories, being applied unto those places hot.

B. With the juice hereof, oil, wax, rosin and turpentine, is made a 
most sovereign healing and drawing emplaster, called Melilot plaster, 
retaining both the colour and savour of the herb, being artificially 
made by a skilful surgeon.

C. The herb boiled in wine and drunk provoketh urine, breaketh the 
stone, and assuageth the pain of the kidneys, bladder and belly, and 
ripeneth phlegm, and causeth it to be easily cast forth. 

D. The juice thereof dropped into the eyes cleareth the sight, 
consumeth, dissolveth, and clean taketh away the web, pearl, and spot 
in the eyes.

E. Melilot alone with water healeth recentes melicerides, a kind of 
wens or rather apostumes containing matter like honey; and also the 
running ulcers of the head, if it be laid to with chalk, wine and 
galls.

F. It likewise mitigateth the pain of the ears, if the juice be 
dropped therein mixed with a little wine, and taketh away the pain of 
the head, which the Greeks call kephalalgia, especially if the head 
be bathed therewith, and a little vinegar and oil of Roses mixed 
amongst it.



CHAP. 506. Of certain other Trefoils.

Fig. 1717. Moon Trefoil (1) Fig. 1718. Liquorice Trefoil (2) 

Those Trefoils being omitted by our Author, I have thought good to 
put into a chapter a by thernselves, though they have little affinity 
with one another, the two last excepted.

The Description.

1. The first of those in roots, stalks, and manner of growing is like 
the Medick or Snail Trefoils formerly described: the leaves are 
hairy; the flowers yellow and small: after which follow crooked flat 
cods, of an indifferent breadth, wherein is contained seeds made 
after the fashion of little kidneys; this the Italians, according to 
Lobel, call Lunaria radiata; in the Historia Lugdunensis it is called 
Medica sylvestris altera lunata.

2. The root of this is long and thick, covered with a yellowish rind, 
and having a white sweet pith in the inside, covered with a hairiness 
on the top, and sending forth sundry fibres: from this rise up many 
weak long footstalks, whereon grow leaves set together by threes, 
long, narrow, smooth, lightly nicked on the edges: amongst these 
rises up commonly one stalk (yet sometimes two) smooth and naked, 
three or four inches long; on the top thereof grow spike fashion, 8 
or ten pretty large light purple flowers, each of them being set in a 
cup divided into 5 parts. This grows upon divers parts of the Alps: 
and Pena in his Mons Baldus set it forth by the name of Trifolium 
angustifolium alpinum. Bauhin saith, the root hereof tastes like 
Liquorice, wherefore it may be called Glycyrhiza Astragaloides or 
Astragalus dulcis: and he received it out of Spain by the name of 
Glycyrhiza. He calls it in his Prodromus, Trifolium alpinum flore 
magno radice dulci.


Fig. 1719. Prickly Trefoil (3) 

3. This thorny Trefoil hath a long thready root, from which arise 
many short branched stalks some two handfuls high, cornered, and 
spread upon the ground; the joints, which are many, are commonly red, 
and armed with four sharp prickles, and out of each of them, upon 
short footstalks grow two trefoil leaves, green, longish, and ending 
in a little prickle: out of these joints also grow little footstalks, 
which carry single flowers made of five little leaves, of the shape 
and colour of the little Blue Bell-flower, with ten chives in the 
middle tipped with yellow: after these follow five-cornered sharp 
pointed heads, containing a single flat red seed in each corner. 
Clusius set forth this by the name of Trifolium spinosum creticum: he 
questions whether it may not be the true Tribulis terrestris of 
Dioscorides.


Fig. 1720. Strawbery Trefoil (4) 

4. The roots, stalks, and leaves of this pretty Trefoil do not much 
differ from the common White Trefoil, but there is some difference in 
the flowers and seed; for the flowers of this are small, grow thick 
together, & are of a whitish blush colour: after which follow heads 
made of little bladders or thin skins, such a manner as they 
resemable a Strawberry or Raspis, and they are of a greyish colour, 
here and there marked with red: the stalks seldom grow above three 
inches high. It grows in most salt marshes, as in Dartford salt 
marsh, in those below Purfleet, and such like: it flowers in July and 
August. Clusius hath set it forth by the name of Trifolium fragiferum 
frisicum; some had rather call it Trifolium vesicarium, Bladder 
Trefoil.

5. There are two other Trefoils with which I think good to acquaint 
you, and those by the similitude of the cups, which contain the 
flowers, and become the seed vessels, mnay be fitly called stellata; 
and thus Bauhin calls the first Trifolium stellatum; whereto for 
distinctions sake I add hirsutum, calling it Trifolium stellatum 
hirsutum, Rough Hairy-headed Trefoil: it hath a small long white 
root, from which arise stalks four foot high, round, slender, hairy, 
and reddish, having few leaves or branches: the leaves stand three on 
a stalk, as in other Trefoils, smooth on the upper side, and hairy 
below: the flowers are small and red, like in shape to those of the 
common Red Trefoil, but lesser, and they stand each of them in a cup 
reddish and rough below, and on the upper part cut into five long 
sharp leaves standing open as they commonly figure a star: the 
flowers fallen, these cups dilate themselves, and have in the middle 
a longish transverse whitish spot. I saw this flowering in May in the 
garden of Mr Tradescant, who did first bring plants hereof from 
Formentera a small island in the Mediterranean sea.

6. This other (which for anything that I know is not figured nor 
described by any) hath stalks sometimes a foot, otherwhiles little 
above an inch high, hairy, and divided but into few branches: the 
leaves, which stand by threes, are fastened to long footstalks, and 
they themselves are somewhat longish, having two little sharp pointed 
leaves growing at the setting on of the footstalks to the stalks: 
they are green of colour, and not snipped about the edges. The heads 
that grow on the tops of the stalks are round, short, and green, with 
small purple or else whitish flowers like those of the common 
Trefoil, but lesser, standing in cups divided into five parts, which 
when the flowers are fallen become somewhat bigger, harsher, and more 
prickly, but open not themselves so much as those of the former: the 
seed is like that of Millet, but somewhat rounder. This flowers in 
June, and the seed is ripe in July. I first observed it in Dartford 
salt marsh, the tenth of June, 1633. I have named this Trifolium 
stellatum glabrum, Smooth Starry-Headed Trefoil.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These, especially the three last, seem to be of the same temper and 
virtue as the common Meadow Trefoils, but none of them are at this 
day used in physic, or known, unless to some few.



CHAP. 597. Of Pulse.

Fig. 1721. Great Garden Bean (1) Fig. 1722. Wild Bean (2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of pulse, as Beans, Peas, Tares, Chickpeas, and 
such like, comprehended under this title Pulse: and first of the 
great Bean, or garden Bean.

The Description.

1. The Great Bean riseth up with a four-square stalk, smooth, hollow, 
without joints, long and upright, which when it is thick sown hath no 
need of propping, but when it is sown alone by itself soon falleth 
down to the ground: it bringeth forth long leaves one standing from 
another, consisting of many growing upon one rib or stem, every one 
whereof is somewhat fat, set with veins, slippery, more long than 
round. The flowers are eared, in form long, in colour either white 
with black spots, or of a blackish purple: after them come up long 
cods, thick, full of substance, slenderer below, frizzed on the 
inside with a certain white wool as it were, or soft flocks; which 
before they be ripe are green, and afterwards being dry they are 
black and somewhat hard, as be also the cods of broom, yet they be 
longer than those, and greater: in which are contained three, four; 
or five beans, seldom more, long, broad, flat, like almost to a man's 
nail, great, and oftentimes to the weight of half a dram; for the 
most part white, now and then of a red purplish colour; which in 
their upper part have a long black navel as it were, which is covered 
with a nail, the colour whereof is a light green: the skin of the 
fruit or bean is closely compacted, the inner part being dry is hard 
and sound, and easily cleft in sunder; and it hath on the one side an 
evident beginning of sprouting, as have also the little Peas, Great 
Peas, Chickpeas, and many other Pulses. The roots hereof are long, 
and fastened with many strings.

2. The second kind of Bean (which Pena setteth forth under the title 
of Faba sylvestris græcorum, and Dodonæus, Bona sylvestris, which may 
be called in English Greek Bean) hath square hollow stalks like the 
Garden Beans, but smaller. The leaves be also like the common Bean, 
saving that the ends of the rib whereon those leaves do grow have at 
the very end small tendrils or claspers, such as the Pea leaves have. 
The flowers are in fashion like the former, but of a dark red colour: 
which being faded, there succeed long cods which are black when they 
be ripe, within which is enclosed black seed as big as a Pea, of an 
unpleasant taste and savour.

3. The common Bean in stalks, leaves, flowers, and cods is like the 
former great garden Bean, but lesser in them all; yet the leaves are 
more, and grow thicker, and out of the bosoms of the leaves upon 
little footstalks grow the flowers, commonly six in number, upon one 
stalk, which are succeeded by so many cods, lesser and rounder than 
those of the former: the beans themselves are also less; and not so 
flat, but rounder, and somewhat longish: their colour are either 
whitish, yellowish, or else black. This is sown in most places of 
this kingdom, in corn fields, and known both to man and beast. This 
is the Bona or Faselus minor of Dodonæus; and the Faba minor of Pena 
and Lobel.

The Place.

The first Bean is sown in fields and gardens everywhere about London.

This black Bean is sown in a few men's gardens who be delighted in 
variety and study of herbs, whereof I have great plenty in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in April and May, and that by parcels, and they be long 
in flowering: the fruit is ripe in July and August.

The Names.

The Garden Bean is called in Latin Faba: in English, the Garden Bean: 
the Field Bean is of the same kind and name, although the fertility 
of the soil hath amended and altered the fruit into a greater form. 
So saith our author, but the difference between the Garden and Field 
Bean is a specific difference, and not an accidental one caused by 
the soil, as every one that knoweth them may well perceive.

The Black Bean, whose figure we have set forth in the second place, 
is called Faba sylvestris: of some thought to be the true physic Bean 
of the ancients; whereupon they have named it Faba veterum, and also 
Faba græcorum, or the Greek Bean. Some would have the Garden Bean to 
be the true Phaseolus, or Kidney Bean; of which number Dodonæus is 
chief, who hath so wrangled and ruffled among his relatives, that all 
his antecedents must be cast out of doors: for his long and tedious 
tale of a tub we have thought meet to commit to oblivion. (But see 
below*) It is called in Greek Puanos, whereupon the Athenians' feast 
days dedicated to Apollo were named Puanepsia, in which Beans and 
Pulses were sodden: in Latin it is also called Faba fresa or fracta, 
broken or bruised Bean.

*Note: Dodonæus knew well what he did, as any that are either 
judicious or learned may look into the first chapter of the second 
book of his fourth Pemptas. But our author's words are too injurious 
especially being without cause, & against him, from whom he borrowed 
all that was good in this his book, except the figures of 
Tabernamontanus. It may be Dr. Priest did not fit his translation in 
this place to our author's capacity; for Dodonæus did not affirm it 
to be the Phaseolus, but Phaselus, distinguishing between them.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Bean before it be ripe is cold and moist: being dry it hath 
power to bind and restrain, according to some authors: further of the 
temperature and virtues out of Galen.

B. The Bean (as Galen saith in his book Of The Faculties of 
Nourishments) is windy meat, although it be never so much sodden and 
dressed any way.

C. Beans have not a close and heavy substance, but a spongy and 
light, and this substance hath a scouring and cleansing faculty; for 
it is plainly seen, that the meal of Beans cleanseth away the filth 
of the skin; by reason of which quality it passeth not slowly through 
the belly.

D. And seeing the meal of Beans is windy, the Beans themselves if 
they be boiled whole and eaten are yet much more windy.

E. If they be parched they lose their windiness but they are harder 
of digestion, and do slowly descend, and yield unto the body thick or 
gross nourishing juice; but if they be eaten green before they be 
ripe and dried, the same thing happeneth to them which is incident to 
all fruits that are eaten before they be fully ripe; that is to say, 
they give unto the body a moist kind of nourishment, and therefore a 
nourishment more full of excrements, not only in the inward parts, 
but also in the outward, and whole body through: therefore those 
kinds of Beans do less nourish, but they do more speedily pass 
through the belly, as the said author in his book Of The Faculties of 
Simple Medicines saith, that the Bean is moderately cold and dry.

F. The pulp or meat thereof doth somewhat cleanse, the skin doth a 
little bind.

G. Therefore divers physicians have given the whole Bean boiled with 
vinegar and salt to those that were troubled with the bloody flux, 
with lasks and vomitings.

H. It raiseth phlegm out of the chest and lungs: being outwardly 
applied it drieth without hurt the watery humours of the gout. We 
have oftentimes used the same being boiled in water and so mixed with 
swine's grease.

I. We have laid the meal thereof with Oxymel, or syrup of vinegar, 
both upon bruised and wounded sinews, and upon the wounded parts of 
such as have been bitten or stung, to take away the fiery heat.

K. It also maketh a good plaster and poultice for men's stones and 
women's paps: for those parts when they are inflamed, have need of 
moderate cooling, especially when the paps are inflamed through the 
cluttered and congealed milk contained in them.

L. Also milk is dried up with that poultice.

M. The meal thereof (as Dioscorides further addeth) being tempered 
with the meal of Fenugreek and honey, doth take away black and blue 
spots, which come by dry beatings, and wasteth away kernels under the 
ears.

N. With Rose leaves, Frankincense, and the white of an egg, it 
keepeth back the watering of the eyes, the pin and the web, and hard 
swellings.

O. Being tempered with wine it healeth suffusions, and stripes of the 
eyes.

P. The Bean being chewed without the skin, is applied to the forehead 
against rheums and falling down of humours.

Q. Being boiled in wine it taketh away the inflammation of the 
stones.

R. The skins of Beans applied to the place where the hairs were first 
plucked up, wil not suffer them to grow big, but rather consumeth 
their nourishment.

S. Being applied with Barley meal parched and old oil, they waste 
away the King's evil.

T. The decoction of them serveth to dye woollen cloth withal.

V. This Bean being divided into two parts (the skin taken off) by 
which it was naturally joined together, and applied, stancheth the 
blood which doth too much issue forth after the biting of the horse-
leech, if the one half be laid upon the place.

X. The Black Bean is not used with us at all, seeing, as we have 
said, it is rare, and sown only in a few men's gardens, who be 
delighted in variety and study of herbs.



CHAP. 508. Of Kidney Bean.


Fig. 1723. Kinds of Kidney Bean (1-4) 

The Kinds.

The stock or kindred of the Kidney Bean are wonderfully many; the 
difference especially consisteth in the colour of the fruit: there be 
other differences, whereof to write particularly would greatly stuff 
our volume with superfluous matter, considering that the simplest is 
able to distinguish apart the white Kidney Bean from the black, the 
red from the purple, and likewise those of mixed colours from those 
that are only of one colour: as also great ones from little ones. 
Wherefore it may please you to be content with the description of 
some few, and the figures of the rest, with their several titles in 
Latin and English, referring their descriptions unto a further 
consideration, which otherwise would be an endless labour, or at the 
least needless.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Phaseolus or garden Smilax hath long and small 
branches growing very high, taking hold with his clasping tendrils 
upon poles and sticks, and whatsoever standeth near unto him, as doth 
the hop or vine, which are so weak and tender, that without such 
props or supporters they are not able to sustain themselves, but will 
run ramping on the ground fruitless. Upon the branches do grow broad 
leaves almost like Ivy, growing together by three, as in the common 
Trefoil or Three-Leaved Grass: among which come the flowers, that do 
vary and differ in their colours, according to the soil where they 
grow, sometimes white, sometimes red, and oftentimes of a pale 
colour: afterwards there come out long cods, whereof some are 
crooked, and some are straight, and in those the fruit is contained, 
smaller than the common Bean, somwhat flat, and fashioned like a 
kidney, which are of divers colours, like unto the flowers whereto 
for the most part these are like.

2. There is also another Dolichus or Kidney Bean, lesser, shorter, 
and with smaller cods, whose flowers and fruit are like in form to 
the former Kidney Beans, but much lesser, and of a black colour.

3. There is likewise another strange Kidney Bean, which doth also 
wind itself about poles and props near adjoining, that hath likewise 
three leaves hanging upon one stem, as have the other Kidney Beans, 
but every one is much narrower and also blacker: the cods be shorter, 
plainer, and flatter, and contain fewer seeds.

4. This Kidney Bean differeth not from the others, but only in the 
colour of the fruit, which are of a pale yellow colour, wherein 
conlsisteth the difference.

Besides the varieties of these Kidney Beans mentioned by our author, 
there are divers other reckoned up by Clusius, which have been 
brought out of the East and West Indies, and from some parts of 
Africa; I will only give you the figures of two or three of them out 
of Clusius, with the colours of their flowers and fruit.

Fig. 1724. White Indian Kidney bean (5) Fig. 1725. Red Indian Kidney 
Bean (6) 	5. The stalk of this is low and stiff, the flowers of a 
whitish yellow on the outside, and of a violet colour within: the 
fruit is snow white, with a black spot in the eye: This is Phaseolus 
peregrinus 4 Of Clusius.

6. This hath leaves like the Marsh Trefoil, flowers growing many 
together, in shape and magnitude like those of common Pea: the cods 
were narrow, and contained three or four seeds, which were small, no 
bigger than the seeds of Laburnum: the painter expressed two of them 
in the leaf next under the uppermost tuft of flowers: this is Clusius 
his Phaseolus peregrinus 5.


Fig. 1726. Narrow-Leaved Kidney Bean (7) 

7. This grows high, winding about poles or other supporters: the 
leaves are narrower than the former: the fruit lesser and flatter, of 
a reddish colour. This is the Phaseolus peregrinus 6 of Clusius.


Fig. 1727. Kinds of Kidney Bean (8,9) 

8. This winds about poles and grows to a great height, with soft 
hairy leaves and large cods, wherein are contained seeds of divers 
colours; sometimes they are red, otherwhiles of a whitish ash colour, 
sometimes wholly black, and otherwhiles spotted.

9. The Egyptian Bean is somewhat like the other Kidney Beans in his 
growing: his fruit is of the bigness of a small Hazelnut, black on 
one side, and of a golden yellow or orange colour on the other.


Fig. 1728. Kinds of Kidney Bean  Fruit only

Besides these you find here figured, and divers others described by 
Clusius, I think it not amiss to mention two more. The first of 
these, which was procured by Mr Tradescant, and grows in our gardens, 
is a large plant, not differing in manner of growth from the former 
Indian Kidney Beans, but his flowers are large, many, and of an 
elegant scarlet colour: whence it is vulgarly termed by our Florists, 
the Scarlet Bean. The other I have seen grow to a little height, but 
it would not endure; but the cods of it which were brought to us were 
some three inches long, and covered with a hairy down of a reddish 
colour, which put upon the hands or skin in any part of the body 
would sting like a Nettle, ahd this was called the Stinging Bean: I 
think it came from some part of the East Indies.

The Place

Kidney Beans do easily and soon spring up, and grow into a very great 
length, being sown near to long poles fastened hard by them, or hard 
by arbors or banqueting places, otherwise they lie flat on the 
ground, slowly come up, hardly bring forth fruit, and become faulty 
and smitted, as Theophrastus writeth.

The Time.

It is sown in the spring, especially in the midst of April, but not 
before: the fruit is ripe about the end of summer.

The Names.

Hippocrates, Diocles, Theophrastus, and most of the other old Writers 
do call it Siliche; divers of the bigness of the seed do name it 
Lekon and Lekion: in Latin, Siliqua: Dioscorides calleth it Smilax, 
because it climbeth up as Smilax doth, and taketh hold of props, 
stakes, and shrubs standing near unto it: others name it Phasiolon, a 
diminutive derived from Phaselos: for Phaselos and Phaseolos are not 
one and the self-same pulse called by divers names, as some suppose, 
but sundry fruits one differing from the others; as Galen in his 
first book Of The Faculties of Nourishments doth sufficiently 
declare, where he entreateth of them both. For first he disputeth of 
Phaseli and Ochri, Beans, and Peas; then afterward, others coming 
between, he writeth of Dolichus, which also is named Phaseolus: and 
though he may be thought to doubt what manner of pulse that is which 
Theophrastas calleth Dolichus, notwithstanding he gathereth and 
concludeth that it is a fruit of a garden plant in Italy, and in 
Caria, growing in the fields, which is in form longer than the 
Chicklings, and was commonly called in his time Faseolus. Of his 
opinion is Paulus Ægineta, writing of Phaselus, which he nameth 
Dolichus, in the 9th chap of his first book. Moreover, Faselus was in 
times past a common pulse in Italy and Rome, and Dolichus a strange 
pulse; for Columella and Palladius, writers of husbandry, have made 
mention of the sowing of Phaselus: and Virgil calleth it Vilis in the 
first of his Georgics: but concerning the sowing of Dolichus or 
Kidney Bean, none of the Latins have written, by reason that the same 
was rare in Italy, and sown only in gardens, as Galen hath affirmed, 
naming it oftentimes a garden plant, and showing that the same, as we 
have said, is sown in Caria; and likewise Dioscorides nameth it 
Smilax chortea, that is to say Smilax hortensis, or garden Smilax, 
because it groweth in gardens:
who also writing of this in another several chapter, showeth plainly, 
that Smilax hortensis, or Dolichus is another plant differing from 
Faselis, which he nameth Phaseolus.

For which causes it is not to be doubted, but that Phaselus with 
three syllables, differeth from Faseolus with four syllables, no 
otherwise than Cicer, Cicercula, and Cicera differ, which 
notwithstanding be near one to another in names: and it is not to be 
doubted but that they are deceived, who think it to be one and the 
self-same Pulse called by sundry names.

This plant is named in English, Kidney Bean, Sperage Beans: of some, 
Faselles, or Long Peas, French Beans, Garden Smilax, and Roman Beans: 
in French, Feves de Romme: in Dutch, Turcksboonen.

The Temperature.

Kidney Beans, as Dioscorides teacheth, do more loose the belly than 
Peas; they are less windy, and nourish well, and no less than Peas, 
as Diocles saith: they be also without engendering windiness at all: 
the Arabian physicians say that they are hot and moist of nature.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit and cods of Kidney Beans boiled together before they be 
ripe, and buttered, and so eaten with their cods, are exceeding 
delicate meat, and do not engender wind as the other Pulses do.

B. They do also gently loose the belly, provoke urine, and engender 
good blood reasonably well; but if you eat them when they be ripe, 
they are neither toothsome nor wholesome. Therefore they are to be 
taken whilst they are yet green and tender, which are first boiled 
until they be tender; then is the rib or sinew that doth run alongst 
the cod to be taken away; then must they be put into a stone pipkin, 
or some other vessel with butter, and set to the fire again to stew, 
or boil gently: which meat is very wholesome, nourishing, and of a 
pleasant taste.



CHAP. 509. Of the Flat Bean called Lupine.


Fig. 1729. Kinds of Lupine(1-4) 

The Description.

1. The tame or garden Lupine hath round hard stems, which of 
themselves do stand upright without any succour, help or stay: the 
leaves consist of five, six, or seven joined together, like those of 
the Chaste Tree, green on the upper side, and on the nether side 
white and downy; and in the evening about the setting of the sun they 
hang flagging downwards as though they were withered: among these 
there cometh up a tuft of flowers of a pale or light blush colour, 
which turn into great rough cods, wherein is the fruit, which is flat 
and round like a cake, of a white colour, and bitter in taste: and 
where they cleave unto the cod, in that part they have a certain dent 
like a little navel. This Lupine hath but one root, which is slender 
and woody, having hanging on it a few small threads like hairs.

2. The yellow Lupine is like to the garden one in stalk and leaves, 
yet both of these lesser and shorter. It hath beautiful flowers of an 
exceeding fair gold yellow colour, sweet of smell, made up into an 
ear, of the colour of the yellow violet, and somewhat of the smell: 
the cods are small, hard, somewhat hairy: the seeds be little, flat, 
round, in taste extreme bitter, of sundry colours, ill-savoured, far 
lesser than the tame one.

3. The blue Lupines are longer than the yellow, and divided into more 
wings and branches: the leaves be lesser and thinner: the flowers 
small, and lesser than the yellow, of a blue colour: the seeds be 
also of divers colours, bitter, and lesser than any of them all.

4. There is also another blue Lupine, whose leaves, stalks, flowers, 
and cods are like, but larger than those of the first described: the 
flowers are of colour blue, with some whiteness here and there 
intermixed.

The Place and Time.

They require (saith Theophrastus) a sandy and bad soil: they hardly 
come up in tilled places, being of their own nature wild: they grow 
in my garden, and in other men's gardens about London. They are 
planted in April, and bring forth their fruit at two or three sundry 
times, as though it did flower often, and bring forth many crops: the 
first in May, the second in July, the last in September, but it 
seldom cometh to ripeness.

The Names.

This pulse is named in Latin, Lupinus, and Lupinus sativus: in High 
Dutch, Feigbonon: in Italian, Lupino domestico: in Spanish, 
Entramocos: in the Brabanters language, Vijch Boonen, and Lupinen: in 
French, Lupins: in English, Garden Lupine, Tame Lupine, and of some 
after the German name Fig-Bean.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The seed of the garden Lupine is much and often used, as Galen 
saith in his books Of the Faculties of Nourishments: for the same 
being boiled and afterwards steeped in fair water, until such time as 
it doth altogether lose his natural bitterness, and lastly being 
seasoned with a reasonable quantity of salt, it is eaten with pickle. 
The Lupine is of an hard and earthy substance, wherefore it is 
necessarily of hard digestion, and containeth in it a thick juice; of 
which being not perfectly concocted in the veins, is engendered a 
blood or juice which is properly called crude, or raw: but when it 
hath lost all his bitternes by preparing or dressing of it (as 
aforesaid) it is like to such things as are without relish, which is 
perceived by the taste; and being so prepared, it is, as Galen 
writeth in his books Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines, one of the 
emplastics or clammers.

B. But whilst the natural bitterness doth as yet remain, it hath 
power to cleanse and to consume or waste away; it killeth worms in 
the belly, being both applied in manner of an ointment and given with 
honey to lick on, and also drunk with water and vinegar.

C. Moreover, the decoction thereof inwardly taken, voideth the worms; 
and likewise if it be sundry times outwardly used as a bath, it is a 
remedy against the morphew, sore heads, the smallpox, wild scabs, 
gangrenes, venomous ulcers, partly by cleansing, and partly by 
consuming and drying without biting; being taken with Rue and Pepper, 
that it may be the pleasanter, it scoureth the liver and milt.

D. It bringeth down the menses, and expelleth the dead child if it be 
laid to with myrrh and honey.

E. Moreover, the meal of Lupines doth waste or consume away without 
any biting quality, for it doth not only take away black and blue 
spots that come of dry beatings, but also it cureth chradas, and 
phymata: but then it is to be boiled either in vinegar or oxymel, or 
else in water and vinegar, and that according to the temperature of 
the grieved parties, and the diversities of the diseases, Quod ex usu 
est eligendo [as experience has shown to be appropriate]: and it also 
taketh away blue marks, and what thing soever else we have said the 
decoction could do, all the same doth the meal likewise perform.

F. These Lupines, as Dioscorides doth furthermore write, being boiled 
in rainwater till they yield a certain cream, are good to cleanse and 
beautify the face.

G. They cure the scabs in sheep with the root of black Chamæleon 
Thistle, if they be washed with the warm decoction.

H. The root boiled with water and drunk, provoketh urine.

I. The Lupines being made sweet and pleasant, mixed with vinegar and 
drunk, take away the loathsomeness of the stomach, and cause a good 
appetite to meat.

K. Lupines boiled in that strong lye which barbers do use, and some 
Wormwood, Centaury, and bay salt added thereto, stay the running and 
spreading of a gangrena, and those parts that are deprived of their 
nourishment and begin to mortify, and stayeth the ambulative nature 
of running and spreading ulcers, being applied thereto very hot, with 
stufes of cloth or tow.



CHAP. 510. Of Peas.

Fig. 1730. Rounceval Peas (1) Fig. 1731. Garden or Field Peas (2) 
The Kinds.

1. There be divers sorts of Peas, differing very notably in many 
respects, some of the garden, and others of the field, and yet both 
counted tame: some with tough skins or membranes in the cod, and 
others have none at all, whose cods are to be eaten with the peas 
when they be young as those of the young Kidney Bean: others carrying 
their fruit in the tops of the branches, are esteemed and taken for 
Scottish Peas, which is not very common. There be divers sorts 
growing wild, as shall be declared.

The Description.

1. The great Pea hath long stalks, hollow, brittle, of a whitish 
green colour, branched, and spread upon the ground, unless they be 
held up with props set near unto them: the leaf thereof is wide and 
long, made up of many little leaves which be smooth, white, growing 
upon one little stalk or stem, and set one right against another: it 
hath also in the upper part long clasping tendrils, wherewith it 
foldeth itself upon props and stays standing next unto it: the flower 
is white and hath about the middle of it a purple spot: the cods be 
long, round Cilindriforma [cylindrical]: in which are contained seeds 
greater than Ochri, or little Peas, which, being dry are cornered, 
and that unequal, of colour sometimes white and sometimes grey: the 
roots are small.

2. The field Pea is so very well known to all, that it were a 
needless labour to spend time about the description.


Fig. 1732. Kinds of Pea (3-6) 

3. Tufted Peas are like unto those of the field, or of the garden in 
each respect, the difference consisteth only in that, that this plant 
carrieth his flowers and fruit in the tops of the branches in a round 
tuft or umbel, contrary to all other of his kind, which bring forth 
their fruit in the midst, and alongst the stalks: the root is thick 
and fibrous.

4. Peas without skins in the cods differ not from the precedent, 
saving that the cods hereof want that tough skinny membrane in the 
same, which the hogs cannot eat by reason of the toughness; whereas 
the other may be eaten cods and all the rest, even as Kidney beans 
are: which being so dressed are exceeding delicate meat.

5. The wild Pea differeth not from the common field Pea in stalk and 
leaves, saving that this wild kind is somewhat lesser: the flowers 
are of a yellow colour, and the fruit is much lesser.

6. The Pea whose root never dies differeth not from the wild Pea, 
only his continuing without sowing, being once sown or planted, 
setteth forth the difference.

The Place.

Peas are set and sown in gardens, as also in the fields in all places 
of England. The Tufted Peas are in reasonable plenty in the West part 
of Kent, about Sennock or Sevenoaks; in other places not so common.


The wild Peas do grow in pastures and arable fields in divers places, 
especially about the field belonging unto Bishops Hatfield in 
Hertfordshire.

The Time.

They be sown in the spring time, like as be also other pulses, which 
are ripe in Summer; they prosper best in warm weather, and easily 
take harm by cold, especially when they flower.

The Names.

The great Pea is called in Latin Pisum romanum, or Pisum maius: in 
English, Roman Peas, or the greater Peas, also garden Peas: of some, 
Branch Peas, French Peas, and Rouncivals. Theophrastus and other old 
writers do call it in Greek Pisos, in Latin also Pisum: in Low Dutch, 
Roomsche erwiten: in French, Pois. The little Pea is called of the 
apothecaries everywhere Pisum, and Pisum minus: it is called in 
English, Little Pea, or the Common Pea.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Pea, as Hippocrates saith, is less windy than Beans, but it 
passeth sooner through the belly. Galen writeth, that Peas are in 
their whole substance like unto Beans, and be eaten after the same 
manner that Beans are, notwithstandling they differ from them in 
these two things, both because they are not so windy as be the beans, 
and also for that they have nor a cleansing faculty, and therefore 
they do more slowly descend through the belly. They have no effectual 
quality manifest, and are in a mean between those things which are of 
good and bad juice, that nourish much and little, that be windy and 
without wind, as Galen in his book Of the Faculties of Nourishments 
hath written of these and of beans.



CHAP. 511. Of the Tame or Garden Chickpea.


Fig. 1733. Garden Chickpea

The Description.

Garden Chickpea bringeth forth round stalks, branched and somewhat 
hairy, leaning on the one side: the leaves are made of many little 
ones growing upon one stem or rib, and set one right against another: 
of which every one is small, broad, and nicked on the edges, lesser 
than the leaves of wild Germander: the flowers be small, of colour 
either white, or of a reddish purple: after which come up little 
short cods, puffed up as it were with wind like little bladders, in 
which do lie two or at the most three seeds cornered, small towards 
the end, with one sharp corner, not much unlike to a ram's head, of 
colour either white, or of a reddish black purple; in which is 
plainly seen the place where they begin first to sprout. The root is 
slender, white and long: for as Theophrastus saith, the Chickpea 
taketh deepest root of all the pulses.

The Place.

It is sown in Italy, Spain and France, everywhere in the fields. It 
is sown in our London gardens, but not common.

The Time.

It is sown in April, being first steeped in water a day before: the 
fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Chicher arietinum or Ram's Chickpeas & of the 
blackish purple colour, Cicer nigrum, vel rubrum, black or red 
Chickpea: and the other is named Candidum vel album Cicer: or white 
Chickpea: in English, Common Chickpea, or Chickpeas, red Chickpea, of 
some, Sheep's Ciche Peas, or Sheep's Ciche Peason.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Chickpea, as Galen writeth in his book Of the Faculties of 
Nourishments, is no less windy than the true Bean, but it yieldeth a 
stronger nourisment than that doth: it provoketh lust, and it is 
thought to engender seed.

B. Some give the same to stalion horses. Moreover, Chickpeas do scour 
more than do the true Beans: insomuch as certain of them do 
manifestly diminish or waste away the stones in the kidneys: those be 
the black and little Chickpeas called, Arietina or Ram's Chickpeas, 
but it is better to drink the broth of them sodden in water.

C. Both the Ram's Chickpeas, as Dioscorides saith, the white and the 
black, provoke urine, if the decoction thereof be made with Rosemary 
and given unto those that have either the dropsy or yellow jaundice; 
but they are hurtful unto the bladder and kidneys that have ulcers in 
them.



CHAP. 512. Of Wild Chickpeas.

Fig. 1735. Wild Chickpea (1) Fig. 1736. Broad-Leaved Wild Chickpea 
(2) 
The Kinds.

The wild Chickpea is like to the tame (saith Dioscorides) but it 
differeth in seed: the later writers have set down two kinds hereof, 
as shall be declared.

The Description.

1. The first wild Chickpea bringeth forth a great number of stalks 
branched, lying flat on the ground: about which be the leaves, 
consisting of many upon one rib as do those of the garden Chickpea, 
but not nicked in the edges, more like to the leaves of Axcich: the 
flowers come forth fastened on small stems; which grow close to the 
stalks, of a pale yellow colour, and like unto ears: in their places 
come up little cods, in form and bigness of the fruit of garden 
Chickpeas, black and something hairy, in which lieth the seed, that 
is small, hard, flat, and glittering, in taste like that of Kidney 
Bean: the root groweth deep, fastened with many strings.

2. There is another kind of wild Chickpea that hath also a great 
number of stalks lying upon the ground, about which stand soft 
leaves, something hairy and white, consisting of three broad leaves 
standing upon a middle rib, the least of which stand nearest to them, 
and the greatest at the very top: the flowers come forth at the 
bottom of the leaves many together, of colour yellow; after which 
grow small long husks, soft and hairy, in every one whereof is a 
little cod, in which lie two seeds like little Chichlings.

The Place.

These plants are sown in the parts beyond the seas for to feed their 
cattle with in winter, as we do tares, vetches, and such other base 
pulse.

The Time.

The time answereth the Vetch or Tare.

The Names.

The wild Chickpea hath no other name in Latin but Cicer sylvestre: 
the later writers have not found any name at all.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Their temperature and virtues are referred to the garden Chickpea, as 
Theophrastus affirms; and Galen saith that the wild Chickpea is in 
all things like unto that of the garden, but in physic's use more 
effectual, by reason it is more hotter and drier, and also more 
biting and bitter.



CHAP. 513. Of Lentils.

Fig. 1737. Great Lentils (1) Fig. 1738. Little Lentils (2) 
The Description.

1. The first Lentil grows up with slender stalks, and leaves which be 
somewhat hard, growing aslope from both sides of the rib or middle 
stalk, narrow and many in number like those of Tares, but narrower 
and lesser: the flowers be small, tending somewhat towards a purple: 
the cods are little and broad: the seeds in these are in number three 
or four; little, round, plain, and flat: the roots are small and 
thready.

2. The second kind of Lentil hath small tender and pliant branches a 
cubit high, whereon do grow leaves divided or consisting of sundry 
other small leaves, like the wild Vetch, ending at the middle rib 
with some clasping tendrils, wherewith it taketh hold of such things 
as are near unto it: among these come forth little brownish flowers 
mixed with white, which turn into small flat cods, containing little 
brown flat seed, and sometimes white.

The Place.

These Pulses do grow in my garden; and it is reported unto me by 
those of good credit, that about Watford in Middlesex and other 
places of England the husbandmen do sow them for their cattle, even 
as others do Tares.

The Time.

They both flower and wax ripe in July and August.

The Names.

They are called in Latin, Lens, and Lenticula: in High Dutch Linsen: 
in French, Lentille: in Italian, Lentichia: in Spanish, Lenteia: in 
English, Lentils.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Lentils, as Galen saith, are in a mean between hot and cold, yet 
are they dry in the second degree: their skin is astringent or 
binding, and the meat or substance within is of a thick aend earthy 
juice, having a quality that is a little austere or something harsh, 
much more the skin thereof; but the juice of them is quite contrary 
to the binding quality; wherefore if a man shall boil them in fair 
water, and afterwards season the water with salt and pickle, aut cum 
ipsis oleo condiens ["or as pleases his taste"], and then take it, 
the same drink doth loose the belly.

B. The first decoction of Lentils doth loose the belly; but if they 
be boiled again, and the first decoction cast away, then do they 
bind, and are good against the bloody flux or dangerous lasks.

C. They do their operation more effectually in stopping or binding, 
if all or any of these following be boiled therewith, that is to say, 
red Beets, Myrtles, peels of Pomegranates, dried Roses, Medlars, 
Service berries, unripe Pears, Quinces, Plantain leaves, Galls, or 
the berries of Sumach.

D. The meal of Lentils mixed with honey doth mundify and cleanse 
corrupt ulcers and rotten sores, filling them with flesh again; and 
is most singular to be put into the common digestives used among our 
London surgeons for green wounds.

E. The Lentil having the skin or coat taken off, as it loseth that 
strong binding quality, and those accidents that depend on the same, 
so doth it more nourish than if it had the skin on.

F. It engendereth thick and naughty juice, and slowly passeth through 
the belly, yet doth it not stay the loosness as that doth which hath 
his coat on; and therefore they that eat too much thereof do 
necessarily become lepers, and are much subject to cankers, for thick 
and dry nourishments are apt to breed melancholy.

G. Therefore the Lentil is good food for them that through waterish 
humours be apt to fall into the dropsy, and it is a most dangerous 
food for dry and withered bodies; for which cause it bringeth 
dimnness of sight, though the sight be perfect, through his excessive 
dryness, whereby the spirits of the sight be wasted; but it is good 
for them that are of a quite contrary constitution.

H. It is not good for those that want their terms; for it breedeth 
thick blood, and such as slowly passeth through the veins.

I. But it is singular good to stay the menses, as Galen in his book 
Of the Faculties of Nourishments affirmeth.

K. It causeth troublesome dreames (as Dioceorides doth moreover 
write;) it hurteth the head, sinews, and lungs.

L. It is good to swallow down thirty grains of Lentils shelled or 
taken from their husks, against the overcasting of the stomach.

M. Being boiled with parched barley meal and laid to, it assuageth 
the pain and ache of the gout.

N. With honey it filleth up hollow sores, it breaketh aschares, 
cleanseth ulcers: being boiled in wine it wasteth away wens and hard 
swellings of the throat.

O. With a Quince, and Melilot, and oil of Roses it helpeth the 
inflammation of the eyes and fundament; but in greater inflammations 
of the fundament, and great deep ulcers, it is boiled with the rind 
of a pomegranate, dry Rose leaves, and honey.

P. And after the same manner against eating sores that are mortified, 
if sea water be added; it is also a remedy against pushes, the 
shingles, and the hot inflammation called St. Anthony's fire, and for 
kibes, in such manner as we have written being boiled in sea water 
and applied, it helps women's breasts in which the milk is cluttered, 
and cannot suffer too great abundance of milk.



CHAP. 514. Of Cich or True Orobus.


Fig. 1739. True Orobus

The Description.

This Pulse, which of most herbarists is taken for the true Orobus, 
and called of some, Bitter Vetch, is one of the Pulses whose tender 
branches trail upon the ground, as Theophrastus saith, and whose long 
tender branches spread far abroad, whereon do grow leaves like those 
of the field Vetch: among which grow white flowers; after which come 
long cods, that appear bunched on the outside against the place where 
the seeds do lie, which are small, round, russet of colour, and of a 
bitter taste: the root is small and single.

The place.

It prospereth best in a lean soil, according to Columella: it groweth 
in woods and copses in sundry places of Spain and Italy, but here 
only in gardens.

The Time.

This is sown early and late, but if it be sown in the spring it 
easily cometh up, and is pleasant; and unpleasant if it be sown in 
the fall of the leaf.

The Names.

This is called in Greek Orobos: the shops of Germany have kept the 
name Orobus: the Italians call it Macho: the Spaniards, Yervo, and 
Yervos,: in English it is called Bitter Vetch, or Bitter Fitch, and 
Orobus, after the Latin name. Of some, Ers, after the French name.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Galen in his first book Of the Faculties of Nourishments saith, 
That men do altogether abstain from the Bitter Vetch, for it hath a 
very unpleasant taste, and naughty juice, but kine in Asia and in 
most other countries do eat thereof, being made sweet by steeping in 
water; notwithstanding men being compelled through necessity of great 
famine, as Hippocrates also hath written, do oftentimes feed thereof; 
and we also dressing them after the manner of Lupines, use the Bitter 
Vetches with honey, as a medicine that purgeth thick and gross 
humours out of the chest and lungs.

B. Moreover, among the bitter Vetches the white are not so 
medicinable, but those which are near to a yellow, or to the colour 
of Ochre; and those that have been twice boiled, or sundry times 
soaked in water, lose their bitter and unpleasant taste, and withal 
their cleansing and cutting quality, so that there is only left in 
them an earthy substance, which serves for nourishment, that drieth 
without any manifest bitterness.

C. And in his book Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines he saith, 
That Bitter Vetch is dry in the later end of the second degree, and 
hot in the first: moreover, by how much it is bitter, by so much it 
cleanseth, cutteth, and removeth stoppings: but if it be overmuch 
used it bringeth forth blood by urine.

D. Dioscorides writeth, that Bitter Vetch causeth headache and heavy 
dullness, that it troubles the belly, and driveth forth blood by 
urine, notwithstanding being boiled it serveth to fatten kine.

E. There is made of the seed a meal fit to be used in medicine, after 
this manner: the full and white grains are chosen out, and being 
mixed together they are steeped in water, and suffered to lie till 
they be plump, and afterwards are parched till the skin be broken; 
then are they ground, and searced or shaken through a meal sieve, and 
the meal reserved.

F. This looseth the belly, provoketh urine, maketh one well coloured: 
being overmuch eaten or drunk it draweth blood by the stool, with 
gripings, and also by urine.

G. With honey it cleanseth ulcers, taketh away freckles, sunburns, 
black spots in the skin, and maketh the whole body fair and clean.

H. It stayeth running ulcers or hard swellings, and gangrenes or 
mortified sores; it softeneth the hardness of women's breasts, it 
taketh away and breaketh eating ulcers, carbuncles, and sores of the 
head: being tempered with wine and applied it healeth the bitings of 
dogs, and also of venomous beasts.

I. With vinegar it is good against the strangury, and mitigateth pain 
that cometh thereof.

K. It is good for them that are not nourished after their meat, being 
parched and taken with honey in the quantity of a nut.

L. The decoction of the same helpeth the itch in the whole body, and 
taketh away kibes, if they be washed or bathed therewith.

M. Cicer boiled in fountain water with some Orobus doth assuage the 
swelling of the yard and privy parts of man or woman if they be 
washed or bathed in the decoction thereof; and the substance hereof 
may also be applied plasterwise.

N. It is also used for bathing and washing of ulcers and running 
sores, and is applied unto the scurf of the head with great profit.



CHAP. 515. Of the Vetch.


Fig. 1740. Kinds of Vetch (1-4) 

The Description.


1. The Vetch hath slender and four-squared stalks almost three foot 
long: the leaves be long, with clasping tendrils at the end made up 
of many little leaves growing upon one rib or middle stem; every one 
whereof is greater, broader, and thicker than that of the Lentil: the 
flowers are like to the flowers of the Garden Bean, but of a black 
purple colour: the cods be broad, small, and in every one are 
contained five or six grains, not round, but flat like those of the 
Lentil, of colour black, and of an unpleasant taste.

2. There is another of this kind which hath a creeping and living 
root, from which it sendeth forth crested stalks some cubit and half 
high: the leaves are winged, commonly a dozen growing upon one rib, 
which ends in a winding tendril: each peculiar leaf is broader toward 
the bottom, and sharper towards the top, which ends not flat, but 
somewhat round. Out of the bosoms of the leaves towards the tops of 
the stalks, on short footstalks, grow two, three or more pretty large 
pea-fashioned blueish purple flowers, which are succeeded by such 
cods as the former, but somewhat less; which when they grow ripe 
become black, and fly open of themselves, and so scatter their seed. 
This grows in many places wild among bushes, both here and in 
Germany, as appears by that name Bauhin thence gives it, calling it 
Vicia maxima dumetorum. Tragus makes it his Vicia sylvestris altera; 
and judges it to be the Aphace of Dioscorides; and he saith the 
Latins call it Osmundi: the High Dutch, St. Cristoffels kraut, and 
Schwartz Linsen. Tabernamontanus calls it Cracca maior.

3. This also hath a lasting root, which sendeth up round crested 
branches, a foot and sometimes a cubit high, whereon grow such leaves 
as those of the former, but more white and downy: the flowers, which 
grow on short footstalks, out of the bosoms of the leaves, towards 
the top of the stalks, are of a whitish colour, with veins of a dusky 
colour, divaricated over the upper leaf: the cods are like those of 
the common Vetch. Clusius found this in some wild places of Hungary; 
it flowered in May: he calls it Vicia sylvestris albo flore.

4. Strangle Tare, called in some countries Tine, and of others Wild 
Vetch, is a ramping herb like unto the common Tare, ramping and 
climbing among corn where it chanceth, that it plucketh it down to 
the ground, and over-groweth the same in such sort, that it spoileth 
and killeth not only wheat, but all other grain whatsoever: the herb 
is better known than desired, therefore these few lines shall suffice 
for the description. This groweth pretty long, with many slender weak 
branches: the leaves are much smaller than the former, and end in 
clasping tendrils: the flowers are of a purple colour, and commonly 
grow but one at a joint, and they are succeeded by flat sharp pointed 
cods which contain some nine or ten seeds apiece.


Fig. 1741. Small Wild Tare (5) 

5. This also grows a good height, with slenderer stalks than the 
former, which is divided into sundry branches: the leaves grow four 
or six upon footstalks, ending also in clasping tendrils: the flowers 
grow upon pretty long but very slender footstalks, sometimes two or 
three, otherwhiles more, very small, and of a whitish colour 
inclining to blueness: which are succeeded by little short flat cods, 
containing commonly four or five little seeds of a blackish colour: 
this is the Arachus, sive Cracca Minima of Lobel; but I question 
whether it be that which Bauhin in his Pinax hath made the same with 
it, calling it Vicia segetum cum siliquis plurimis hirsutis: for that 
which I have described, and which exactly agrees with this figure of 
Lobel and that description in the Adversaria, hath cods very smooth 
without any hairiness at all. This flowers most part of summer, and 
grows in in most places both in corn fields and meadows.

The Place.

The Tare is sown in any ground or soil whatsoever.

The Time.

It flowereth in May, and perfecteth his seed toward September.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Vicia vinciendo, of binding or wrapping, as 
Varroy noteth, because, saith he, it hath likewise clasping tendrils 
such as the vine hath, by which it crawls upward upon the stalks of 
the weeds which are next unto it: of some, Cracca, and Arachus, and 
also Aphaca: it is called in High Dutch Wicken: in Low Dutch, Vitsen: 
in French, Verce: in most shops it is falsely termed Orobos, and 
Eruum; for Eruum doth much differ from Vicia: it is called in 
English, Vetch, or Fetch. The countrymen lay up this Vetch with the 
seeds and whole plant, that it may be a fodder for their cattle.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Notwithstanding I have known, saith Galen, some, who in time of 
famine have fed hereof, especially in the spring, it being but green; 
yet is it hard of digestion, and bindeth the belly. 

Therefore seeing it is of this kind of nature, it is manifest that 
the nourishment which comes thereof hath in it no good juice at all, 
but engendereth a thick blood, and apt to become melancholy.



CHAP. 516. Of Chichlings, Peas, and Tare Everlasting.

Fig. 1742. Everlasting Pea or Chichling (1) Fig. 1743. White-Flowered 
Chichlings (2) 
The Description.

1. There is a Pulse growing in our high and thick woods, having a 
very thick tough and woody root; from which rise up divers long weak 
and feeble branches, consisting of a tough middle rib, edged on both 
sides with a thin skinny membrane, smooth, and of a grass green 
colour; whereon do grow at certain distances small flat stems, upon 
which stand two broad leaves joining together at the bottom: from 
betwixt those leaves come forth tough clasping tendrils which take 
hold of such things as grow next unto them: from the bosom of the 
stem, whereon the leaves do grow, shooteth forth a naked smooth 
footstalk, on which do grow most beautiful flowers like those of the 
Pea, the middle part whereof is of a light red, tending to a red 
Purple in grain; the outward leaves are somewhat lighter, inclining 
to a blush colour: which being past, there succeed long round cods, 
wherein is contained seed of the bigness of a Tare, but rounder, 
blackish without, and yellowish within, and of a bitter tate.

2. Of which kind there is likewise another like unto the precedent in 
each respect, saving that the leaves hereof are narrower and longer, 
and therefore called of most which set forth the description, 
Lathyrus angustifolia: the flowers of this are white, and such also 
is the colour of the fruit: the root is small, and not lasting like 
that of the former.

Fig. 1744. Purple Flowered Chichling (3) Fig. 1745. Egyptian 
Chichling (4) 	3. The stalks, leaves, and flowers of this are like 
those of the precedent, but the flowers are of a reddish purple 
colour: the cods are lesser than those of the former, and in them are 
contained lesser, harder, and rounder seeds, of a dark or blackish 
colour. This grows not wild with us, but is sometimes sown in 
gardens, where it flowers in June and July.

4. This Egyptian differs not in shape from the rest of his kind; but 
the flowers are of an elegant blue on the inside, but of an ash 
colour inclining to purple on the outside: the cods grow upon long 
footstalks, and are a little winged or welted, and contain but two or 
three little cornered seeds spotted with black spots. This flowers in 
June and July; and the seed thereof was sent to Clusius from 
Constantinople, having been brought thither out of Egypt.

Fig. 1746. Parti-Coloured Chichling (5) Fig. 1747. Everlasting Tare 
(6) 	5. The stalks of this are some two or three foot long, winged, 
weak, and lying on the ground unless they have somewhat to support 
them. Upon these at certain distances grow winged leaves with two 
little ears at their setting on to the stalk: these leaves consist of 
six long and narrow green leaves like those of the other plants of 
this kind; and these six leaves commonly stand upright, by couples 
one against another; otherwhiles alternately: the footstalk whereon 
these stand ends in clasping tendrils: the flowers are in shape like 
the former, but the outer leaf is of a fair red or crimson colour, 
and the inner leaf white: after the flowers come the cods, containing 
some four or five pretty large flat seeds, which swell out of the 
cods where they lie; which in the spaces between each seed are 
depressed, like that of Orobus. This is only a garden plant with us 
and flowers in June and July, the seed is ripe in August.

6. The Yellow Wild Tare or Vetch hath divers very small ramping 
stalks, tough, and leaning this way and that way, not able to stand 
of itself without the help of props or things that stand by it: the 
leaves are very thin and sharp pointed: the flowers grow alongst the 
leaves in fashion of the Pea flowers, of a bright yellow colour: the 
roots are very small, long, tough, and in number infinite, insomuch 
that it is impossible to root it forth, being once gotten into the 
ground, unless the earth be digged up with the roots and both cast 
into the river, or burned. Doubtless it is the most pernicious and 
hurtful weed of all others, unto all manner of green wholesome herbs 
or any wood whatsoever.

The Place.

The first grows in shadowy woods, and among bushes: there groweth 
great store thereof in Swainscombe wood, a mile and a half from 
Greenhithe in Kent, as you go to a village thereby called Betsham, 
and in divers other places.

The sixth groweth in most grassy pastures, borders of fields, and 
among grain almost everywhere.

The Time.

The time answereth the other Pulses.

The Names.

The first is called Lathyrus, to make a difference between it and 
Lathyrus, or Spurge: of Matthiolus, Clymenum: of Cordus, Eruum 
sativum: of Tragus, Pisum Græcorum: in English; Everlasting Peas, 
Great Wild Tare, and Chichling.

The second is the Eruum album sativum of Fuchsius: Lathyrus or 
Cicercula of Dodonæus; Lathyrus angustiore gramineo folio of Lobel.

The third is the Aracus sive Cicera of Dodonæus: the Lathyrus flore 
purpureo of Camerarius.

The fourth by Clusius is called Cicercula ægyptiaca: by Camerarius, 
Aracus hispanicus, sive Lathyrus ægyptiacus.

The fifth is not mentioned by any (that I remember) but Mr. 
Parkinson, in his garden of flowers, and that by the name I give you 
it.

The sixth is the Lathyrus sylvestris flore luteis of Thalius: Legumen 
terræ glandibus simile of Dodonæus: Vicia of Tabernamontanus: and it 
may be, the Aracus flore luteo of the Adversaria. I use for some 
resemblance it hath to Aphaca to call it Aphacoides.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The temperature and virtues are referred to the manured Tare or 
Vetch; notwithstanding they are not used for meat or medicine.



CHAP. 517. Of Sesame.


Fig. 1748. Sesame

The Description.

Sesamum hath a thick and fat upright stalk a cubit and a half high, 
garnished with leaves much like the Peach or Almond, but rougher, and 
cut in with somewhat deep gashes on their sides: flowers, somewhat 
shaped like those of Foxgloves, which turn into round long crested 
cods, containing white flat oleous seed. Theophrastus affirmeth that 
there is a kind thereof which is white, bearing only one root. No 
kind of beast will eat this plant while it is green, because of his 
bitterness; but being withered and dried, the seed thereof becometh 
sweet, and the cattle will feed on the whole plant.

The Place.

It groweth both in Egypt and in India: Sesama, saith Pliny, came from 
the Indies; they make an oil of it. It is a stranger in England.

The Time.

It is one of the summer grains, and is sown before the rising of the 
seven stars, as Pliny writeth; yet Columella saith, that Sesamum must 
be sown after the autumn against the Ides of October: they require 
for the most part a rotten soil, which the husbandmen of Campania do 
call a black mould.

The Names.

The Grecians call this grain Sesamon; the Latins also Sesamum, and 
Sisamum, and often in the feminine gender Sesama: we are constrained 
for want of an English name to use the Latin: it is unknown to the 
apothecaries, especially the plant itself; but the seed and oil 
thereof is to be found among them in other countries: we may call it 
Turkey Millet.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. According to some it is hot and dry in the first degree: the seed 
thereof, as Galen saith, is fat, and therefore being laid up it 
cometh to be oily very quickly; wherefore it speedily filleth and 
stuffeth up those that feed thereof; and overthroweth the stomach, 
and is slow of digestion, and yieldeth to the body a fat nourishment: 
therefore it is manifest that it cannot strengthen the stomach, or 
any part thereof, as also no other kind of fat thing: and the juice 
that cometh thereof is thick, and therefore it cannot speedily pass 
through the veins. Men do not greedily feed of it alone, but make 
cakes thereofwith honey, which they call sesamidos: it is also mixed 
with bread, and is of an hot temperature, for which cause it 
procureth thirst: and in his book Of The Faculties of Simple 
Medicines he saith, that Sesamum is not a little clammy and fat, and 
therefore it is an emplastic, and a softener, and is moderately hot: 
the oil which cometh thereof is of like temperature, and so is the 
decoction of the herb also.

B. Dioscorides writeth, That Sesamum is an enemy to the stomach, it 
causeth a stinking breath, if it remain sticking between the teeth 
after it is chewed.

C. It wasteth away grossness of the sinews; it is a remedy against 
bruises of the ears, inflammations, burnings and scaldings, pains of 
the joints, and biting of the poisonsome horned serpent called 
Cerastes. Being mixed with oil of Roses it takes away the headache 
which cometh of heat.

D. Of the same force is the herb boiled in wine, but it is especially 
good for the heat and pain of the eyes.

E. Of the herb is made an oil used of the Egyptians, which as Pliny 
saith is good for the ears.

F. It is a remedy against the sounding and ringing of the ears.



CHAP. 518. Of Hatchet Vetch.

Fig. 1749. Hatchet Vetch (1) Fig. 1750. Liquorice Hatchet Vetch (2) 
The Description.

1. The first kind of Hatchet Vetch hath many small branches trailing 
here and there upon the ground: upon which grow small leaves spread 
abroad like the leaves of the wild Vetch; among which come forth 
clusters of small yellow flowers, which fade away, and turn into 
little flat thin and brown cods, wherein is contained small reddish 
seed of a bitter taste.

2. The second kind of Hatchet Vetch hath many round tough and 
flexible branches, trailing upon the ground: whereupon do grow leaves 
like the former, but more like the leaves of Liquorice, and having 
the taste of the Liquorice root; which hath given occasion to some to 
deem it a kind of Liquorice: among these leaves come forth pale 
yellow flowers, after which there succeed small crooked cods, turning 
their points inwardly, one answering another like little horns, 
containing small flat seeds four-cornered, and fashioned like a 
little wedge: the root is tough, of a woody substance, and doth 
continue fruitfull a very long time.


Fig. 1751. Kinds of Hatchet Vetch (3-6) 

3. There is another kind of Securidaca or Hatchet Vetch, which hath 
branches, leaves, and roots like the last before remembered, and 
differeth in that, that the flowers of this plant are mixed, and do 
vary into sundry colours, being on the upper part of a flesh colour, 
and on the lower of a white or snowy colour, with a purple stork's 
bill in the middle: the leaves are in taste bitter: the cods are 
small like those of Bird's-Foot, and not much unlike the cods of 
Orobus.

4. There is likewise another kind of Securidaca or Hatchet Vetch, 
which is dedicated unto Carolus Clusius by the aforenamed Dr. Penny, 
who found it in the North parts of England, having leaves, roots, and 
branches like unto the former: but the flowers of this are white, and 
mixed with some purple, and bitter also in taste: the cods are like 
the claw of a crab, or (as Clusius saith) like the knife which shoe-
makers do use in Flanders; in which cods are contained small reddish 
seed: this root also is of long continuance. Clusius doth not say 
that Dr. Penny found this in the North of England, but in the 
territory of Geneva not far from Pontetremile, amongst the bushes, 
and nowhere else.

5. This in the stalks, leaves, colour, and shape of the flowers is 
like, yet less than the first described; the cods are also smaller, 
lesser, and more crooked: and herein only consists the chief 
difference, it is an annual plant and grows only in some gardens. 
Matthiolus,  Lobel, Dodonæus, and other, make this their Hedysarum, 
or Securidaca minor.

6. This hath many erected branches, whereon great winged leaves, that 
is, some twenty or more fastened to one rib: the flowers are like 
those of the other plants of this kind; but the cods are of an inch 
long, flat, or indented or toothed on their sides. But of what colour 
the flowers and seeds are of it is not expressed by Clusius, who only 
set this forth by a picture, and some pieces of a dried plant 
thereof, which he received from Cortusua, by the name of Scolopedria 
leguminosa or Hedysarum peregrinum: Cortusus had it from Honoris 
Bellus, who observed it growing upon the rocks at Seberico, a city of 
Illyria.

Fig. 1752. French Honeysuckle (7) Fig. 1753. Horseshoe (8) 	7. There 
is also another sort of Hatchet Vetch, which hath very long and tough 
branches trailing upon the ground, beset with leaves like the former, 
but much greater: the flowers do grow at the top of the branches, of 
a pale colour, and turn into rough round and flat cods, fashioned 
like little bucklers: the root of this (as of the first) dieth at the 
first approach of winter, as soon as the seed is ripe. The stalks of 
this are stiff and crested, growing to the height of two cubits, with 
leaves as large as those of Liquorice: the flowers are of a fair 
bright red colour: the cods are made as it were of many rough 
buckler-like seeds, or rather seed vessels wherin are contained small 
brown seeds.

8. Horseshoe hath many stalks slender and lying upon the ground: the 
leaves be thin, and lesser than those of Axseed: the flowers along 
the stalks are little: after which come up long cods something broad, 
and a little bowing; which have upon the one side deep round and 
indented cuts, like after a sort to an horseshoe: the root is 
somewhat long.

The Place.

These plants do grow in my garden: the second kind I found growing in 
Suffolk, in the highway on the right hand, as you go from Sudbury to 
Corner Church, about an hundred paces from the end of the town; as 
also in sundry other places of the same country and in Essex about 
Dunmow, and in the towns called Clare and Hedingham. Also it grows by 
Purfleet, about the foot of the hill whereon the windmill stands; and 
in divers parts of Kent.

Horseshoe cometh up in certain untilled and sunny places of Italy and 
Languedoc: it groweth likewise in my garden.

The Time.

These plants do flower in June, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

The Grecians name this, whether it be a pulse or an infirmity among 
corn, Edisaron: the Latins, of the form of the seed, Securidaca, and 
Hedysarum: in English Axseed, Axwort, Ax-Vetch, and Hatchet Vetch: it 
is unknown to the apothecaries.

The second is the Fenugræcum sylvestre of Tragus and Dodonæus: the 
Glycyrhiza sylvestris of Gesner; and the Glaux vulgaris of Lobel.

Horseshoe is commonly called in Italian Sferro de cavallo: you may 
name it in Latin Ferrum equinum: in English, Horseshoe.

The Temperature.

The seeds of these plants are hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.

A. Being drunk it is acceptable to the stomach, and removeth 
stoppings out of the entrails, and of like virtue be the new leaves 
and tender crops of the whole plant.

B. Dioscorides showeth that it is also good for the stomach being 
taken in drink, and is mixed with counterpoisons.

C. And it is thought to hinder conception, if it be applied with 
honey before the act.

D. The seed of Axwort openeth the stoppings of the liver, the 
obstruction of the spleen, and of all the inward parts.

E. Horseshoe is bitter and like in nature to Axseed.



CHAP. 519. Of Pea Earth-Nut.

Fig. 1754. Pea Earth-Nut (1) Fig. 1755. Wood or Heath Pea (2) 
The Description.

1. The Pea Earth-Nut cometh up with slender and weak stalks: the 
leaves be thin, and little, growing upon slender stems, with clasping 
tendrils at the ends, with which it embraceth and taketh hold of such 
things as stand near unto it: the flowers on the tops of the stalks 
are like to those of Peas, but lesser, of a red purple colour, in 
smell not unpleasant: in their places come up long cods, in which are 
three or four round seeds: the roots be thick, long, like after a 
sort to acorns, but much greater, black without, grey within, in 
taste like to the Chestnut: out of which beneath doth hang a long 
slender string: there grow out of the same also other strings, hard 
to the setting on of the stalk, unto which creeping aslope do grow 
other kernelled roots whilst the plant doth thus multiply itself.

2. This with Thalius in his Sylva Hercynia, set forth by the name of 
Astragalus sylvaticus, was by our author taken for, and confounded 
with the Terræglandes, and therefore I have put it with it, that the 
difference might the better appear, which is not a little to such as 
heedfully observe it: But our author in this is to be pardoned, 
seeing Dr. Turner, a man more exquisite in the knowledge of plants, 
and who had seen the true Terræglandes in Germany, mistook this for 
it, as may appear by that little tract of his of the names of plants 
in Latin and English, set forth Anno. 1548; for there he saith, [I 
have seen this herb of late in Coombe Park more astringent than it of 
Germany] and indeed this grows there, and is much more astringent and 
woody than that of Germany, and no wise fit to be eaten. The root 
consists of many black tuberous particles, here and there sending 
forth fibres: from hence arise cornered stalks some foot high, small 
below, & somewhat larger above: the leaves grow forth of the stalks, 
consisting sometimes of two, & otherwhiles of 4 longish narrow leaves 
fastened to one footstalk, which at the setting on hath two little 
leaves or ears: forth of the bosoms of these leaves grow stalks some 
two inches long, each of which usually carry a couple of Pea-
fashioned flowers of a purple colour: which fading, usually become 
blue: after these follow cods, straight, round, and, black; and in 
each of them are commonly contained nine or ten white round seeds: it 
flowers most part of summer, and perfects the seed in July and 
August.

The Place.

1. This groweth in corn fields; both with the corn itself and also 
about the borders of fields among briers and brambles: it is found in 
divers places of Germany, but not with us that I can yet learn.

2. This is found in the woods and pastures of England, especially in 
Hampstead wood near London: it groweth in Richmond Heath, and in 
Coombe park likewise.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July, the nuts after harvest be digged up 
and gathered.

The Names.

It is called in High Dutch, Erdnussen: in low Dutch, Erdnoten, 
Erdeekelen, and Muysen metsteerten, that is to say, tailed mice, of 
the similitude or likeness of domestical mice, which the black, 
round, and long nuts, with a piece of the slender string hanging out 
behind, do represent: the later writers do call it in Latin Terræe 
glandes or Terrestres glandes: and in Greek, Chama balani: in 
English, Pea Earth-Nut.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Nuts of these Peas being boiled and eaten, are hardlier 
digested than be either Turnips or Parsnips, yet do they nourish no 
less than the Parsnips: they are not so windy as they, they do more 
slowly pass through the belly, by reason of their binding quality, 
and being eaten raw they be yet harder of digestion, and do hardlier 
and slowlier descend.

B. They be of temperature meanly hot, and somewhat dry, being withal 
not a little binding: whereupon also they do not only stay the fluxes 
of the belly, but also all issues of blood, especially from the 
mother or bladder.

C. The root of Pea Earth-Nut stoppeth the belly, and the inordinate 
course of women's sickness.



CHAP. 520. Of Milk Vetch.

Fig. 1756. Portuguese Milk Vetch (1) Fig. 1757. Assyrian Milk Vetch 
(2) 
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of herbs contained under the title of 
Astragalus, whether I may, without breach of promise made in the 
beginning, insert them among the Legumina, pulses, or herby plants, 
it is doubtful: but seeing the matter is disputable, I think it not 
amiss to suffer them thus to pass, until some other shall find a 
place more convenient and agreeing unto them in neighbourhood.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Astragalus hath reddish stalks, a cubit high, a 
finger thick, somewhat crested or furrowed, and covered over with an 
hairy mossiness; which divide themselves into sundry small brancbes, 
beset with leaves consisting of sundry little leaves set upon a 
middle rib, like the wild Vetch, placed on the small pliant branches 
like feathers, which are likewise covered over with a woolly 
hoariness; in taste astringent at the first, but afterwards burning 
hot: among these leaves come forth many small white flowers, in 
fashion like the flowers of Lupines, which before their opening seem 
to be somewhat yellow; the root is marvellous great and large, 
considering the smallness of the plant; for sometimes it groweth to 
the bigness of a man's arm, keeping the same bigness for the space of 
a span in length, and after divideth itself into two or more forks or 
branches, black without, and wrinkled; white within, hard and woody, 
and in taste unpleasant, which being dried becometh harder than an 
horn.

2. The second kind of Astragalus is a rare and gallant plant and may 
well be termed Planta Leguminosa, by reason that it is accounted for 
a kind of Astragalus, resembling the same in the similitude of his 
stalks and leaves, as also in the thickness of his roots, and the 
creeping and folding thereof; and is garnished with a most thick and 
pleasant comeliness of his delectable red flowers, growing up 
together in great tufts, which are very seemly to behold.

Fig. 1758. Matthiolus' Milk Vetch (3) Fig. 1759. Bastard Milk Vetch 
(4) 	3. There hath been some controversy about this third kind, which 
I am not willing to prosecute or enter into: it may very well be 
Astragalus of Matthiolus his description, or else his Polygala, which 
doth exceeding well resemble the true Astragalus: his small stalks 
grow a foot high, beset with leaves like Cicer or Galega, but that 
they are somewhat lesser: among which come forth small Pea-like 
flowers of an orange colour, very pleasant in sight: the root is 
tough and flexible, of a finger thick.

4. The fourth is called of Mutonus and other learned herbarists, 
Astragaloides, for that it resembleth the true Astragalus, which 
groweth a cubit high, and in show resembleth Liquorice: the flowers 
grow at the tops of the stalks, in shape like the Pea bloom, of a 
fair purple colour, which turn into small black cods when they be 
ripe: the root is tough and very long, creeping upon the upper part 
of the earth, and of a woody substance.

The Place.

They grow amongst stones, in open places, or as Oribasius writeth, in 
places subject to winds, and covered with snow: Dioscorides' copies 
do add, in shadowy places: it groweth plentifully in Phenea a city in 
Arcadia, as Galen and Pliny report: in Diosciorides his copies there 
is read, in Memphis a city of Arcadia; but Memphis is a city of 
Egypt, and in Arcadia there is none of that name: some of them grow 
in my garden, and in sundry other places in England wild; they grow 
in the meadows near Cambridge, where the scholars use to sport 
themselves: they grow also in sundry places of Essex, as about Dunmow 
and Clare, and many other places of that country.

Thus our author, but I should be glad to know which or how many of 
these he here affirms to grow wild in England; for as yet I have not 
heard of, nor seen any of these wild; nor in gardens with us, except 
the last described, which grows in some few gardens.

The Time.

They flower in June and July; and their seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

Milk Vetch is called of Matthiolus, Polygala, but not properly: of 
most it is called Astragalus; in Spanish, Garavancillos: in the 
Portuguese tongue, Alphabeca: in Dutch, Cleyne Ciciren.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Astragalus, as Galen saith, hath astringent or binding roots, and 
therefore it is of the number of those simples that are not a little 
drying, for it glueth and healeth up old ulcers, and stayeth the flux 
of the belly, if they be boiled in wine and drunk: the same things 
also touching the virtues of Astragalus Dioscorides hath mentioned: 
the root, saith he, being drunk in wine stayeth the lask, and 
provoketh urine, being dried and cast upon old ulcers it cureth them: 
it likewise procureth great store of milk in cattle that do eat 
thereof, whence it took his name.

B. It stoppeth bleeding, but it is with much ado beaten, by reason of 
his hardness.



CHAP. 521. Of Kidney Vetch.

Fig. 1760. Kidney Vetch (1) Fig. 1761. Starry Kidney Vetch (2) 
The Description.

1. Kidney Vetch hath a stalk of the height of a cubit, dividing 
itself into other branches, whereon do grow long leaves, made of 
divers leaves, like those of the Lentil, covered as it were with a 
soft white downiness: the flowers on the tops of the stalks of a 
yellow colour, very many joined together, as it were in a spoky 
roundel: after which grow up little cods, in which is contained small 
seed: the root is slender, and of a woody substance. This is 
sometimes found with white flowers: whereupon Tabernamontanus gave 
two figures, calling the one Lagopodium flore luteo, and the other 
Lagopodium flore albo. 

2. The Starry Kidney Vetch, called Stella leguminosa, or according to 
Cortusus, Arcturo, hath many small flexible tough branches, full of 
small knots or knees, from each of which springeth forth one long 
small winged leaf, like Bird's-Foot, but bigger: from the bosom of 
those leaves come forth little tender stems, on the ends whereof do 
grow small whitish-yellow flowers, which are very slender, and soon 
faded, like unto them of Bird's-Foot: these flowers turn into small 
sharp pointed cods, standing one distant from another, like the 
divisions of a star, or as though it consisted of little horns; 
wherein is contained small yellowish seeds: the root is tough, and 
deeply growing in the ground.

Fig. 1762. Great Bird's-Foot (3) Fig. 1763. Small Bird's-Foot (4) & 
Small Horned Pulse (5) 	3. There is another sort of Kidney Vetch 
called Bird's-Foot, or Ornithopodium, which hath very many small and 
tender branches, trailing here and there close upon the ground, set 
full of small and soft leaves, of a whitish green, in shape like the 
leaves of the wild Vetch, but a great deal lesser, and finer, almost 
like small feathers; amongst which the flowers do grow, that are very 
small, yellowish, and sometimes whitish; which being faded there come 
in place thereof little crooked cods, five or six growing together, 
which in show and shape are like unto a small bird's foot, and each 
and every cod resembling a claw; in which are enclosed small seed 
like that of Turnips.

4. There is also another kind of Ornithopodium, or Bird's-Foot, 
called small Bird's-Foot, which is very like unto the first, but that 
it is much smaller: the branches or sprigs grow not above a hand or 
half a hand in length, spreading themselves upon the ground with his 
small leaves and branches, in manner of the lesser Arachus: the 
flowers are like unto those of the former, but very small, and of a 
red colour.

5. This Small Horned Pulse may fitly here take place: the root 
thereof consists of many little fibres, from which arise two or three 
little slender straight stalks some handful and a half or foot high: 
at the tops of these grow little sharp pointed crooked horns, rounder 
and slenderer than those of Fenugreek, turning their ends inwards 
like the tails of scorpions and so jointed; the flowers are small and 
yellow; the leaves little, and winged like those of Bird's-Foot. Pena 
and Lobel found this amongst the corn in the fields in Narbonne in 
France, and they set it forth by the name as I have here given you 
it.

The Place.

1, 3, 4. These plants I found growing upon Hampstead Heath near 
London, right against the Beacon, upon the right hand as you go from 
London, near unto a gravel pit: they grow also upon Blackheath, in 
the highway leading from Greenwich to Charlton, within half a mile of 
the town.

The Time.

They flower from June to the middle of September.

The Names.

1. This Gesner calls Vulneraria rustica: Dodonæus, Lobel, and 
Clusius, call it Anthyllis, and Anthyllis leguminosa.

3, 4. I cannot find any other name for there plants, but 
Ornithopodium: the first is called in English, Great Bird's-Foot; the 
second Small Bird's-Foot.

The Nature and Virtues.

These herbs are not used either in meat or medicine, that I know of 
as yet; but they are very good food for cattle, and procure good 
store of milk, whereupon some have taken them for kinds of Polygala.



CHAP. 522. Of Black Milk Tare.


Fig. 1764. Black Milk Tare

The Description.

The true Glaux of Dioscorides hath very tough and woody branches 
trailing upon the ground, set full of small winged leaves, in shape 
like the common Glaux; but a great deal smaller, resembling the 
leaves of Tares, but rather like Bird's-Foot, of a very grey colour: 
amongst which come forth knobby and scaly, or chaffy heads, very like 
the Meadow Trefoil, of a fair purple colour: the root is exceeding 
long and woody, which the figure doth not express and set forth.

The Place.

The true Glaux groweth upon Barton Hill, four miles from Luton in 
Bedfordshire, upon both the sides of the declination of the hill.

The Time.

These plants do flower and flourish about Midsummer.

The Names.

These plants have in times past been called Glaux, i. folia habens 
glauca, sive pallentia; that is, having sky coloured, or pale leaves. 
Sithens that in times past, some have counted Glaux among the kinds 
of Polygala, or Milk Vetches, we may therefore call this kind of 
Glaux, Black Milk Tare.

The Nature.

These herbs are dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seeds of the common Glaux are in virtue like the Lentils, but 
not so much astringent: they stop the flux of the belly, dry up the 
moisture of the stomach, and engender store of milk.



CHAP. 523. Of Red Vetchling, Medick Vetch, and Cock's-Head.

Fig. 1765. Medick Vetchling (1) Fig. 1766. Purple Cock's-Head (2) 
The Description.

1. The first kind of Onobrychis hath many small and twiggy pliant 
branches, ramping and creeping through and about bushes, or 
whatsoever it groweth near unto: the leaves and all the rest of the 
pulse or plant is very like to the wild Vetch or Tare: the flowers 
grow at the top of small naked stalks, in shape like the Pea bloom, 
but of a purple colour laid over with blue, which turn into small 
round prickly husks, that are nothing else but the seed.

2. The second kind of Vetchling or Cock's-Head, of Clusius his 
description, hath very many stalks, especially when it is grown to an 
old plant, round, hard, and leaning to the ground like the other 
pulses; and leaves very like Galega, or the wild Vetch, of a bitter 
taste and loathsome savour: among which come forth small round stems, 
at the ends whereof do grow flowers spike fashion, three inches long, 
in shape like those of the great Lagopus, or Meadow Trefoil, but 
longer, of an excellent shining purple colour, but without smell: 
after which there follow small cods, containing little hard and black 
seed, in taste like the Vetch. The root is great and long, hard, and 
of a woody substance, spreading itself far abroad, and growing very 
deep into the ground.

Fig. 1767. Blue Medick Vetch (3) Fig. 1768. Pale Medick Vetch (4) 
	3. The third kind of Vetchling or Cock's-Head hath from a tough 
small and woody root, many twiggy branches growing a cubit high, full 
of knots, ramping and creeping on the ground. The leaves are like the 
former, but smaller and shorter: among which come forth small tender 
stems, whereupon do grow little flowers like those of the Tare, but 
of a blue colour tending to purple: the flowers being faded, there 
come the small cods, which contain little black seed like a Kidney, 
of a black colour.

4. The fourth kind of Vetchling hath firm green hard stalks a cubit 
and a half high, whereupon grow leaves like to the wild Tare or 
Galega; but smaller and somewhat hairy, bitter and unpleasant in 
taste, and in the end somewhat sharp. At the top of the stalks come 
forth long spiked flowers, of a pale colour, and in shape like those 
of the second kind; which being faded, there follow small bottle 
cods, wherein is contained little black seed like the seed of 
Fenugreek, but smaller. The root is thick and hard, and of a woody 
substance, and lasting very long.


Fig. 1769. Mountain Medick Vetch (5) 

5. The fifth kind of Onobrychis hath many gross and woody stalks, 
proceeding immediately from a thick, fat, and fleshy tough root: the 
upper part of which are small, round, and pliant, garnished with 
little leaves like those of Lentils, or rather Tragacantha, somewhat 
soft, and covered over with a woolly hairiness: amongst which come 
forth little long and naked stems, eight or nine inches long, whereon 
do grow many small flowers of the fashion of the Vetch or Lentil, but 
of a blue colour tending to purple; and after them come small cods, 
wherein the seed is contained.

The Place.

The first and second grow upon Barton hill, four miles from Luton in 
Bedfordshire, upon both the sides of the hill: and likewise upon the 
grassy banks between the lands of corn two miles from Cambridge, near 
to a water mill towards London; & divers other places by the way from 
London to Cambridge: the rest are strangers in England.

The Time.

These plants do flower in July; their seed is ripe shortly after.

The Names.

It is anonymos, or without a name among the later writers: the old 
and ancient physicaans do call it Onobrychis: for all those things 
that are found written in Dioscorides or Pliny concerning Onobrychis, 
do especially agree hereunto. Dioscorides writeth thus; Onobrychis 
hath leaves like a Lentil, but longer; a stalk a span high; a crimson 
flower; a little root: it groweth in moist and untilled places: and 
Pliny in like manner; Onobrychis hath the leaves of a Lentil, 
somewhat longer, a red flower, a small and slender root: it groweth 
about springs or fountains of water.

All which things and every particular are in this anonymos, or 
nameless herb, as it is manifest: and therefore it is not to be 
doubted at all, but that the same is the Onobrychis of the old 
writers: it may be called in English Red Vetchling, or as some 
suppose Medick Vetch, or Cock's-Head.

The Temperature.

These herbs as Galen hath written in his books of the Faculties of 
Simple Medicines, do rarefy or make thin and waste away.

The Virtues.

A. Therefore the leaves thereof when it is green, being but as yet 
laid upon hard swellings, waxen kernels, in manner of a salve, do 
waste and consume them away, but being dried and drunk in wine they 
cure the strangury; and laid on with oil it procureth sweat.

B. Which things also concerning Onybrychis, Dioscorides hath in these 
words set down: the herb stamped and applied wasteth away hard 
swellings of the kernels; but being drunk with wine it helpeth the 
strangury, and rubbed on with oil it causeth sweatings.



CHAP. 524. Of Bastard Dittany.


Fig. 1770. Bastard Dittany

The Description.

Bastard Dittany is a very rare and gallant plant, having many brown 
stalks, somewhat rough, divided into sundry small branches, garnished 
with leaves like Liquorice, or rather like the leaves of the Ash 
tree, but blacker, thicker, and more full of juice, of an unpleasant 
savour: among which grow flowers, consisting of five whitish leaves 
striped with red, whereof one which groweth undermost hangeth down 
low; but the four which grow uppermost grow more stiff and upright: 
out of the midst of this flower cometh forth a tassel, which is like 
a beard, hanging also downwards, and somewhat turning up at the lower 
end: which being faded, there come in place four husks joined 
together, much like the husks or cods of Columbines, somewhat rough 
without, slimy to handle, and of a loathsome savour, almost like the 
smell of a goat; whereupon some herbarists have called it Tragium; in 
the cods are contained small black shining seeds like Peony seeds in 
colour: the roots are white, a finger thick, one twisting or knotting 
within another, in taste somewhat bitter.

There is another kind hereof growing in my garden, not very much 
differing: the leaves of the one are greater, greener, harder, and 
sharper pointed: of the other blacker, not so hard, nor so sharp 
pointed: the flowers also hereof be something more bright coloured, 
and of the other a little redder.

The Place.

Bastard Dittany groweth wild in the mountains of Italy and Germany, 
and I have it growing in my garden.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July: the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.

The later herbarists name it Fraxinella: most, Chamomilion, as though 
they should say Humilis fraxinus or a low Ash: in English, Bastard, 
or False Dittany: the shops call it Dictamnum, and Diptamum, but not 
truly, and use oftentimes the roots hereof instead of the right 
Dittany. That it is not the right Dittany it is better known than 
needful at all to be confuted; and it is as evident that the same is 
not Dioscorides his Pseudodictamnum, or Bastard Dittany: but it is 
plain to be a kind of Tragium of the old Writers, wherewith it 
seemeth to agree in show, but not in substance.

The root of this is only used in shops, and there known by the name 
of Radix Diptamni, or Dictamni.

The Temperature.

The root of Bastard Dittany is hot and dry in the second degreee, it 
is of a wasting, attenuating, and opening faculty.

The Virtues.

A. It bringeth down the menses, it also bringeth away the birth and 
afterbirth; it helpeth cold diseases of the matrix: and it is 
reported to be good for those that have ill stomachs and are short-
winded.

B. They also say, that it is profitable against the stingings and 
bitings of venomous serpents; against deadly poisons, against 
contagious and pestilent diseases, and that it is with good success 
mixed with counterpoisons.

C. The seed of Bastard Dittany taken in the quantity of a dram is 
good against the strangury, provoketh urine, breaketh the stone in 
the bladder, and driveth it forth.

D. The like virtue hath the leaves and juice taken after the same 
sort, and being applied outwardly, it draweth thorns and splinters 
out of the flesh.

E. The root taken with a little Rhubarb killeth and driveth forth 
worms.

F. Dioscorides reporteth, that the wild goats being stricken with 
darts or arrows, will eat Dictam, and thereby cause them to fall out 
of their bodies; which is meant of the right Dictam, though Dodonæus 
reporteth that this plant will do the like (saith our author, which I 
do not believe, nor doth Dodonæus affirm it.) 



CHAP. 525. Of Land Caltrops.


Fig. 1771. Land Caltrops

The Description.

Land Caltrops hath long branches full of joints, spread abroad upon 
the ground, garnished with many leaves set upon a middle rib, after 
the manner of Vetches; amongst which grow little yellow branches, 
consisting of five small leaves, like unto the flowers of Tormentil: 
I never saw the plant bear yellow, but white flowers, agreeing with 
the description of Dodonæus in each respect, save in the colour of 
the flowers, which do turn into small square fruit, rough, and full 
of prickles, wherein is a small kernel or seed: the root is white, 
and full of strings.

The Place.

It groweth plentifully in Spain in the fields: it is hurtful to corn, 
but yet as Pliny saith, it is rather to be accounted among the 
diseases of corn than among the plagues of the earth: it is also 
found in most places of Italy & France; I found it growing in a moist 
meadow adjoining to the wood or park of Sir Francis Carew, near 
Croydon, not far from London, and not elsewhere; from whence I 
brought plants for my garden.

The Time.

It flowereth in Tune and July: the fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Tribulus: and that it may differ from the other 
which groweth in the water, it is named Tribulus terrestris: it may 
be called in English, Land Caltrops, of the likeness which the fruit 
hath with caltrops, that are instruments of war cast in the way to 
annoy the feet of the enemy's horses, as is before remembered in the 
Water Saligot.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. In this Land Caltrop there is an earthy and cold quality 
abounding, which is also binding, as Galen saith.

B. The fruit thereof being drunk wasteth away stones in the kidneys, 
by reason that it is of thin parts.

C. Land Caltrops, saith Dioscorides, being drunk to the quantity of a 
French crown weight, and so applied, cureth the bitings of the Viper.

D. And if it be drunk in wine it is a remedy against poisons: the 
decoction thereof sprinkled about killeth fleas.



CHAP. 526. Of Spring or Mountain Peas or Vetches.

Fig. 1772. Venice Pea (1) Fig. 1773. Spring Pea (2) 
The Description.

1. This, which Clusius calls Orobus venetus, hath many cornered 
stalks some foot long, whereon grow winged leaves, four or six 
fastened to one rib, standing by couples one against another, without 
any odd leaf at the end: these leaves are of an indifferent 
largeness, and of a light green colour: the flowers grow upon long 
footstalks coming forth of the bosoms of the leaves, many together, 
hanging down, small, yet shaped like those of other pulses, and of a 
purple colour: after these follow cods almost like those of Vetches, 
but rounder, red when they be ripe, and containing in them a longish 
white seed: the root is hard and woody, running divers ways with many 
fibres, and living sundry years: this varies somtimes with yellower 
green leaves and white flowers. It flowers in May, and grows only in 
some few gardens with us.

2. The stalks of this also are a foot or more high, stiff, cornered, 
and green; on these do grow winged leaves six or eight on a rib, 
after the manner of those of the last described: each of these leaves 
hath three veins running alongst it: the flowers in shape and manner 
of growing are like those of the former, but of a more elegant purple 
colour: which fading, they become blue. The flowers are succeeded by 
such cods as the former, wherein are contained longish small 
variegated seed: which ripe, the cods fly open, and twine themselves 
round, as in most plants of this kind: the root is black, hard, 
tuberous and woody, sending forth each year new shoots. This flowers 
in April and May, and ripeneth the seed in June. This was found by 
Clusius in divers mountainous woody places of Hungary: he calls it 
Orobus Pannonicus 1.

Fig. 1774. White Mountain Pea (3) Fig. 1775. Narrow-Leaved Mountain 
Pea (4) 	3. This hath stalks some cubit high, stiff, straight, and 
crested; whereon by turns are fastened winged leaves, consisting of 
four sufficiently large and sharp pointed leaves, whereto sometimes 
at the very end grows a fifth: the veins in these run from the middle 
rib towards their edges: their taste is first somewhat sourish, 
afterwards bitterish. The flowers grow upon short stalks coming forth 
of the bosoms of the leaves, five or six together, like those of the 
Vetch, but of colour white, with some little yellowness on the two 
little leaves that turn upwards. The cods are like those of the last 
described, and contain in them a brownish seed, larger than in any of 
the other kinds. This is an annual plant, and perishes as soon as it 
hath perfected the seed. Clusius gives us this by the name of Orobus 
Pannonicus 4. Dodonæus gives the same figure for his Arachus 
latifolius: and Bauhin affirms this to be the Galega montana, in the 
Hist. Lugd. pag. 1139. But these seem to be of two several plants; 
for Dodonæus affirms his to have a living root, and such seems also 
that in the Hist. Lugd. to be: yet Clusius saith expressly that this 
is an annual, and flowereth in April and May, and groweth in some 
woody mountainous places of the Kingdom of Hungary.

4. This fourth hath straight firm cornered stalks some foot or more 
high, whereupon grow leaves usully four upon a footstalk, standing 
two against two, upright, being commonly almost three inches long, at 
first of a sourish taste, but afterwards bitter: it hath no 
clavicles, because the stalks need no supporters; the flowers grow 
upon long footstalks spike-fashion like those of Peas, but less, and 
white of colour: after these follow long blackish cods, full of a 
black or else spotted seed: the roots are about the length of one's 
little finger, fashioned like those of the Asphodel or Lesser Female 
Peony, but lesser, black without, and white within. Clusius found 
this on the mountainous places nigh the baths of Baden, and in the 
like places in Hungary: he calls it Orobus Pannonicus 3.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These are not known nor used in physic; yet if the third be the 
Galega montana of the Hist. Lugd., then it is there said to be 
effectual against poison, the worms, the falling sickness, and the 
plague.



CHAP. 527. Of Some Other Pulses.

Fig. 1776. Birds' Pea (1) Fig. 1777. Crimson Grass Vetch (2) 
The Description.


1. The first of these hath cornered broad stalks like those like 
those of Everlasting Peas, and they are weak, and commonly lie upon 
the ground, unless they have something to support them: the lower 
leaves are broad, and commonly welt the stalk at their setting on, 
and at the end of the first leaf do usually grow out after an unusual 
manner, two, three, or more other pretty large leaves more long than 
broad, and the middle rib of the first leaf runs out beyond the 
setting on of the highest of the out-growing leaves, and then it ends 
in two or three clasping tendrils. Those leaves that grow the lowest 
upon the stalks have commonly the fewest coming out of them them. The 
flowers are like those of other pulses, of colour white: the cods are 
some inch and half long, containing some half dozen dark yellow or 
blackish small peas: these cods grow one at a joint, on short 
footstalks coming forth of the bosoms of the leaves, and are welted 
on their broader side' which stands towards the main stalk. This 
grows with us only in gardens. Dodonæus, Pena, and Lobel call it 
Ochrus sylvestris, sive ervilia.

2. The stalks of this grow up sometimes a cubit high, being very 
slender, divided into branches, and set unorderly with many grass-
like long narrow leaves: on the tops of the stalks and branches, upon 
pretty long footstalks grow pretty pea-fashioned flowers of a fair 
and pleasant crimson colour: which fallen, there follow cods, long, 
small, and round, wherein are nine, ten, or more round hard black 
shining grains: the root is small, with divers fibres, but whether it 
die when the seed is perfected, or no, as yet I have not observed. 
This grows wild in many places with us, as in the pasture and meadow 
grounds about St. Pancras' Church. Lobel and Dodonæus call this Ervum 
sylvestre; and they both partly judge it to be the first Catanance of 
Dioscorides, and by that name it is usually called. It flowers in 
June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.


Fig. 1778. Small Yellow Vetch (3) 

3. This also, though it be not frequently found, is no stranger with 
us; for I have found it in the corn fields about Dartford in Kent and 
some other places. It hath long slender jointed creeping stalks, 
divided into sundry branches, whereon stand pretty green three-
cornered leaves two at a joint, in shape and bigness like those of 
the Lesser Bindweed. Out of the bosoms of these leaves at each joint 
comes a clasping tendril, and commonly together with it a footstalk 
some inch or more long, bearing a pretty little pea-fashioned yellow 
flower, which is succeeded by a short flattish cod containing six or 
seven little seeds. This flowers in June, July, and August, and so 
ripens the seed. It is by Lobel and others thought to be the Aphace 
of Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny: and the Pitine of Theophrastus, by 
Anguillara.

I find mention in Stowe's Chronicle, in Anno 1555, of a certain pulse 
or pea, as they term it, wherewith the poor people at that time, 
there being a great dearth, were miraculously helped: he thus 
mentions it; In the month of August (saith he) in Suffolk, at a place 
by the seaside all of hard stone and pebble, called in those parts a 
shelf, lying between the towns of Orford and Aldeburgh, where neither 
grew grass, nor any earth was ever seen; it chanced in this barren 
place suddenly to spring up without any tillage or sowing, great 
abundance of Peas, whereof the poor gathered (as men judged) above an 
hundred quarters, yet remained some ripe and some blossoming, as many 
as ever there were before: to the which place rode the Bishop of 
Norwich and the Lord Willoughby, with others in great number, who 
found nothing but hard rocky stone the space of three yards under the 
roots of these Peas: which roots were great and long, and very sweet.

Gesner also, De Aquatilibus, lib. 4, pag. 256, making mention, out of 
Dr. Caius his letters, of the spotted English Whale, taken about that 
time at Lynn in Norfolk, also thus mentions those peas: "These peas, 
which by their great increase did such good to the poor that year, 
without doubt grew there for many years before, but were not observed 
till hunger made them take notice of them, and quickened their 
invention, which commonly in our people is very dull, especially in 
finding out food of this nature."

My worshipful friend Dr. Argent hath told me, that many years ago he 
was in this place, and called his man to pull away the beach with his 
hands, and follow the roots so long, until he got some equal in 
length unto his height, yet could come to no ends of them: he brought 
these up with him to London, and gave them to Dr. Lobel, who was then 
living; and he caused them to be drawn, purposing to set them forth 
in that work which he intended to have published, if God had spared 
him longer life. Now whether these Peas be truly so called, and be 
the same with the Pisum sylvestre perenne, or different; or whether 
they be rather of the stock of the Lathyrus maior, or of some other 
pulse here formerly described, I can affirm nothing of certainty, 
because I have seen no part of them; nor could gather by any that 
had, any certainty of their shape or figure: yet would I not pass 
them over in silence, for that I hope this may come to be read by 
some who live thereabout, that may by sending me the things 
themselves, give me certain knowledge of them; that so I may be made 
able, as I am always willing, to impart it to others.

The Temperatue and Virtues.

A. I have not have not found anything written of the faculties of the 
two first; but of Aphace, Galen saith it hath an astringent faculty 
like as the Lentil, and also is used to he eaten like as it, yet it 
is harder of concoction, but it dries more powerfully, and heats 
moderately. The seeds (saith he) have an astringent faculty; 
wherefore parched, broken, and boiled, they stay fluxes of the belly. 
We know (saith Dodonæus) by certain experience, that the Aphace here 
described hath this astringent force and faculty.



CHAP. 528. Of Bastard Rhubarb.

Fig. 1779. Great Bastard Rhubarb (1) Fig. 1780. Small Bastard Rhubarb 
(2) 
The Description.

1. The great Thalietrum or Bastard Rhubarb hath large leaves parted 
or divided into divers other small leaves somewhat snipped about the 
edges, of a black or dark green colour: the stalks are crested or 
streaked, of a purple colour, growing to the height of two cubits: at 
the top whereof grow many small and hairy white flowers, and after 
them come small narrow husks like little cods, four or five growing 
together: the root is yellow, long, round, and knotty, dispersing 
itself far abroad on the upper crust of the earth.

2. The Small Bastard Rhubarb is very like unto the precedent, but 
that it is altogether lesser: his stalks are a span or a foot long: 
his leaves be thin and tender; the root fine and slender: the little 
flowers grow together in small bundles or tufts, of a light yellow 
colour, almost white, and are of a grievous savour.

3. There is kept in some gardens a plant of this kind growing up with 
large stalks to the height of three cubits: the leaves are very like 
those of Columbines: the flowers are made of many white threads: it 
flowers in June, and is called Thalictrum maius hispanicum, Great 
Spanish Bastard Rhubarb.

The Place.

These Plants do grow alongst the ditch sides leading from Kentish 
street unto Saint Thomas a-Waterings (the place of execution) on the 
right hand. They grow also upon the banks of the Thames, leading from 
Blackwall to Woolwich, near London, and in sundry other places also.

The Time.

The flower for the most part in July and August.

The Names.

Divers of the later herbarists do call it Pigamum, as though it were 
Rue; whereupon most call it Ruta palustris, or Fen Rue: others, 
Pseudo-Rhabarbarum, and Rhabarbarum monachorum, by reason of the 
yellow colour of the root. But neither of their judgements is greatly 
to be esteemed of: they judge better that would have it to be 
Thalictrum, which Dioscorides describeth to have leaves something 
flatter than those of Coriander; and the stalk like that of Rue, upon 
which the leaves do grow. Pena calleth it Thalictrum, Thalietrum, and 
Ruta pratensis: in English, Bastard Rhubarb, or English Rhubarb: 
which names are taken of the colour, and taste of the roots.
The Temperature.

These herbs are hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Bastard Rhubarb with other pot-herbs do somewhat 
move the belly.

B. The decoction of the root doth more effectually.

C. Dioscorides saith, that the leaves being stamped do perfectly cure 
old ulcers. Galen addeth, that they dry without biting.



CHAP. 529. Of Goat's Rue.


Fig. 1781. Goat's Rue

The Description.

Galega or Goat's Rue hath round hard stalks two cubits or more high, 
set full of leaves displayed or winged abroad; every leaf consisting 
of sundry small leaves set upon a slender rib, resembling the leaves 
of the field Vetch or Tare, but greater and longer. The flowers grow 
at the top of the stalk, clustering together after the manner of the 
wild Vetch, of a light sky colour, which turn into long cods small 
and round, wherein the seed is contained. The root is great, thick, 
and of a white colour.

The Place.

It groweth plentifully in Italy everywhere in fat grounds and by 
rivers' sides: it groweth likewise in my garden.

The Time.

It flowereth in July and August.

The Names.

The Italians call it Galega, and Ruta Capraria: divers name it 
corruptly Gralega: Hieronymus Frascatorius calleth it Herba Galleca: 
the Etruscans, Lavanese; and it is also called by divers other names 
in sundry places of Italy, as Gesner saith, as are Castracane, 
Lavanna, Thorina, or Taurina, Martanica, Sarracena, Capragina, 
Herbanesa, Fnum græcum sylvestre, and as Brasavolus witnesseth, 
Giarga. It is named in English, Italian Vetch, and Goat's Rue.

Some judge that the old physicians were wont to call it Onobrychis: 
others, Glauce: divers would have it to be Polemonium, but not so 
much Petr. And. Matthiolus in his commentaries, as every one of the 
descriptions mentioned by Dioscorides do gainsay them; as also those, 
who think that Galega is Polygalon, & that the name of Galega came of 
Polygalon, the very description also of Polygalon is against them, 
for Galega is higher and greater, than that it may be called a little 
shrub, only of an hand-breadth high.

The Temperature.

This plant is in a mean temperature between hot and cold.

The Virtues.

A. Goat's Rue is a singular herb against all venom and poison, and 
against worms, to kill and drive them forth, if the juice be given to 
little children to drink.

B. It is of like virtue if it be fried with linseed oil, and bound 
upon the child's navel.

C. It is ministered unto children which are possessed with the 
falling evil, a spoonful every morning in milk.

D. Being boiled in vinegar, and drunk with a little treacle, it is 
very good against the infection of the plague, especially if the 
medicine be taken within twelve hours.

E. The herb itself is eaten, being boiled with flesh, as we use to 
eat cabbage and other worts, and likewise in salads, with oil, 
vinegar and pepper; as we do eat boiled Spinach, and such like; which 
is most excellent being so eaten, against all poison and pestilence, 
or any venomous infirmity whatsoever, and procureth sweat.

F. It also helpeth the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, if 
either the juice or the herb stamped be laid upon the wound.

G. Half an ounce of the juice inwardly taken is reported to help 
those that are troubled with convulsions, cramps, and all other the 
diseases aforesaid.

H. The seeds do feed pullen exceedingly, and cause them to yield 
greater store of ggs than ordinary.

I. The juice of the leaves, or the leaves themselves bruised and 
applied to any part swollen by the sting, of a bee or wasp, mitigate 
the pain, and are a present remedy, as Mr Cannon a lover of plants, 
and friend of mine, hath assured me he hath seen by frequent 
experience.



CHAP. 530. Of Pliny's Leadwort.


Fig. 1782. Leadwort

The Description.

Dentaria or Dentillaria hath offended in the superlative degree, in 
that he hath hid himself like a runagate soldier, when the assault 
should have been given to the plant Lepidium, whereof doubtless it is 
a kind. But if the fault be mine, as without question it is, I crave 
pardon for the oversight, and do entreat thee gentle reader to 
censure me with favour, whereby I may more boldly insert it in this 
place, rather than to leave it untouched. The learned of Narbonne 
(especially Rondeletius) have not without good cause accounted this 
goodly plant for a kind thereof, because the whole plant is of a 
biting taste, and a burning faculty, and that in such extremity, that 
it will raise blisters upon a man's hand: for which cause some of the 
learned sort have accounted it Pliny's Molybdæna, or Ægineta his 
Lepidium: but the new herbarists call it Dentaria, or Dentillaria 
rondeletii, who made the like use hereof, as he did of Pyrethrum, & 
such burning plants, to appease the immoderate pain of the toothache 
and such like. This plant hath great thick tough roots, of a woody 
substance, from whence spring up long and tough stalks two cubits 
high, confusedly garnished and beset with long leaves, in colour like 
Woad, of a sharp and biting taste. The flowers grow at the top of the 
stalks of a purple colour; which being past, there succeed close 
glistering and hairy husks, wherein is contained small blackish seed.

The Place.

Pena reporteth that Dentillaria groweth about Rome, nigh the hedges 
and corn fields: it likewise groweth in my garden in great plenty.

The Time.

It flowereth in July and August.

The Names.

Leadwort is called Molybdæna, Plumbago plinii, & Dentillaria 
rondeletii: in Italian, Crepanella: the Romans, Herba St. Antonii: in 
Illyria, Cucurida: in English, Leadwort.

The Temperature.

Dentillaria is of a caustic quality.

The Virtues.

A. It helpeth the toothache, and that as some say if it be holden in 
the hand some small while.



CHAP. 531. Of Rue, or Herb-Grace.


Fig. 1783. Kinds of Rue (1, 3-5) 

The Description.

1. Garden Rue or planted Rue, is a shrub full of branches, now and 
then a yard high, or higher: the stalks whereof are covered with a 
whitish bark, the branches are more green: the leaves hereof consist 
of divers parts, and be divided into wings, about which are certain 
little ones, of an odd number, something broad, more long than round, 
smooth and somewhat fat, of a grey colour, or greenish blue: the 
flowers in the top of the branches are of a pale yellow, consisting 
of four little leaves, something hollow: in the middle of which 
standeth up a little head or button four-square, seldom five-square, 
containing as many little coffers as it hath corners, being compassed 
about with divers little yellow threads: out of which hang pretty 
fine tips of one colour; the seed groweth in the little coffers: the 
root is woody, and fastened with many strings: this Rue hath a very 
strong and rank smell, and a biting taste.

2. The second being the wild or mountain Rue, called Ruta sylvestris, 
is very like to garden Rue, in stalks, leaves, flowers, seed, colour, 
taste, and savour, saving that every little leaf hath smaller cuts, 
and is much narrower: the whole plant dieth at the approach of 
winter, being an annual plant, and must either stand till it do sow 
himself, or else must be sown of others. Thus saith our author, but 
this second is a variety of the garden Rue differing from the former 
only in smallness.

3. This plant is likewise a wild kind of Rue, and of all the rest the 
smallest, and yet more virulent, biting, and stinking than any of the 
rest: the whole plant is of a whitish pale green, agreeing with the 
last before mentioned in each respect, save in greatness, and in that 
the venomous fumes or vapors that come from this small wild Rue are 
more noisome and hurtful than the former. The leaves lie spread upon 
the ground, & are very finely cut and divided: the whole plant is of 
such acrimony, that Clusius saith he hath oftener than once observed 
it to pierce through three pair of gloves to the hand of the 
gatherer; and if any one rub his face with his hand that hath newly 
gathered it, forthwith it will mightily inflame his face. He tells a 
history of a Dutch student of Montpellier that went with him a-
simpling, who putting some of it between his hat and his head to keep 
him the cooler, had by that means all his face presently inflamed and 
blistered wheresoever the sweat ran down.

4. There is another wild Rue growing upon the mountains of Savoy and 
other places adjoining, having a great thick root, from which do 
arise great shoots or stalks; whereon do grow leaves very thick and 
fat, parted into divers longish sections, otherwise resembling the 
leaves of the first described, of a strong and stinking smell: the 
flowers grow on the tops of the stalks, consisting of four small 
yellow leaves: the seeds are like the other.

5. Harmel is one of the wild Rues: it bringeth forth immediately from 
the root divers stalks of a cubit high; whereupon do grow green 
leaves diversely cut into long pieces, longer and narrower than those 
of the wild strong smelling Rue: the flowers be white, composed of 
five white leaves: the fruit is three square, bigger than that of the 
planted Rue, in which the seed lieth: the root is thick, long, and 
blackish: this Rue in hot countries hath a marvellous strong smell; 
in cold countries not so.


Fig. 1784. Dog's Rue (6) 

6. This, which Matthiolus gave for Sideritis 3, and Lobel, Clusius, 
and others for Ruta canina, hath many twiggy branches some cubit and 
half high; whereon grow leaves resembling those of the Papaver Rhæas 
or Argemone, lesser, thicker, and of a blackish green: the flowers 
are of a whitish purple colour, fashioned somewhat like those of 
Antirrhinum: the seed is small, and contained in such vessels as 
those of Rue, or rather those of Blattaria. The whole plant is of a 
strong and ungrateful smell: it grows in the hot and dry places about 
Narbonne in France, Ravenna and Rome in Italy.

The Place.

Garden Rue joyeth in sunny and open places: it prospereth in rough 
and bricky ground, and among ashes: it cannot in no wise away with 
dung.

The wild are found on mountains in hot countries, as in Cappadocia, 
Galatia, and in divers provinces of Italy and Spain, and on the hills 
of Lancashire and York.

Pliny saith that there is such friendship between it and the fig 
tree, that it prospers nowhere so well as under the fig tree. The 
best for physic's use is that which groweth under the fig tree, as 
Dioscorides saith: the cause is alleged by Plutarch in the first book 
of his Symposiacs or Feasts, for he saith it becometh more sweet and 
mild in taste, by reason it taketh as it were some part of the 
sweetness of the fig tree, whereby the over-rank quality of the Rue 
is allayed; unless it be that the fig tree whilst it draweth 
nourishment unto itself, it likewise draweth away the rankness of the 
Rue.

The Time.

They flower in these cold countries in July and August; in other 
countries sooner.

The Names.

The first, which is Ruta hortensis, Garden Rue: in High Dutch, 
Rauten: in Low Dutch, Ruijte: the Italians and apothecaries keep the 
Latin name: in Spanish, Aruda: in French, Rue de jardin: in English, 
Rue, and Herb-Grace.

Wild Rue is called in Greek, Peganon: in Latin, Ruta sylvestris, or 
wild Rue: in Galatia and Cappadocia, Moly: of divers, Harmala: of the 
Arabians, Harmel: of the Syrians, Besara.

The Temperature.

Rue is hot and dry in the later end of the third degree; and wild Rue 
in the fourth: it is of thin and and subtle parts: it wastes and 
consumes wind, it cutteth and digesteth gross and tough humours.

The Virtues

A. Rue or Herb-Grace provokes urine, brings down the sickness, expels 
the dead child and afterbirth, being inwardly taken, or the decoction 
drunk; and is good for the mother, if but smelled to.

B. Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 13, saith it opens the matrix, and brings it 
into the right place, if the belly all over and the share (the breast 
say the old false copies) be anointed therewith: mixed with honey it 
is a remedy against the inflammation and swelling of the stones, 
proceeding of long abstinence from venery, called of our English 
mountebanks the colt's evil, if it be boiled with barrow's grease, 
Bay leaves, and the powders of Fenugreek and Linseed be added 
thereto, and applied poultice-wise.

C. It takes away crudity and rawness of humours, and also windiness 
and old pains of the stomach.

D. Boiled with vinegar it easeth pains, is good against the stitch of 
the side and chest, and shortness of breath upon a cold cause, and 
also against the pain in the joints and huckle bones.

E. The oil of it serves for the purposes last recited: it takes away 
the colic and pangs in the guts, not only in a clyster, but also 
anointed upon the places affected. But if this oil be made of the oil 
pressed out of linseed it will be so much the better, and of singular 
force to take away hard swellings of the spleen or milt.

F. It is used with good success against the dropsy, being applied to 
the belly in manner of a poultice.

G. The herb a little boiled or scalded, and kept in pickle as 
Samphire, and eaten, quickens the sight.

H. The same applied with honey and the juice of Fennel is a remedy 
against dim eyes.

I. The juice of Rue made hot in the rind of a pomegranate and dropped 
into the ears, takes away the pain thereof.

K. St. Anthony's fire is quenched therewith: it killeth the shingles, 
and running ulcers and sores in the heads of young children, if it be 
tempered with ceruse or white lead, vinegar, and oil of roses, and 
made into the form of nutritum or triapharmicon.

L. Dioscorides saith, that Rue put up in the nostrils stayeth 
bleeding.

M. Of whose opinion Pliny also is; when notwithstanding it is of 
power rather to procure bleeding through the sharp and biting quality 
that it hath.

N. The leaves of Rue beaten and drunk with wine, are an antidote 
against poisons, as Pliny saith.

O. Dioscorides writeth, that a twelve-penny weight of the seed drunk 
in wine is a counterpoison against deadly medicines or the poison of 
Wolf's-Bane, Ixia, Mushrooms, or Toadstools, the biting of serpents, 
stinging of scorpions, spiders, bees, hornets, and wasps; and it is 
reported that if a man be anointed with the juice of Rue these will 
not hurt him; and that the serpent is driven away at the smell 
thereof when it is burned, insomuch that when the weasel is to fight 
with the serpent, she armeth herself by eating Rue against the might 
of the serpent.

P. The leaves of Rue eaten with the kernels of walnuts or figs 
stamped together and made into a mass or paste, is good against all 
evil airs, the pestilence or plague, resists poison and all venom.

Q. Rue boiled with Dill, Fennel seed, and some sugar, in a sufficient 
quantity of wine, asssuageth the torments and griping pains of the 
belly, the pains in the sides and breast, the difficulty of 
breathing, the cough, and stopping of the lungs, and helpeth such as 
are declining to a dropsy.

R. The juice taken with Dill, as aforesaid, helpeth the cold fits of 
agues, and alters their course: it helpeth the inflammation of the 
fundament, and pains of the gut called Rectum intestinum.

S. The juice of Rue drunk with wine purgeth women after their 
deliverance, driving forth the secondine, the dead child, and the 
unnatural birth.

T. Rue used very often either in meat or drink, quencheth and drieth 
up the natural seed of generation, and the milk of those that give 
suck.

V. The oil wherein Rue hath been boiled, and infused many days 
together in the Sun, warmeth and chafeth all cold members if they be 
anointed therewith: also it provoketh urine if the region of the 
bladder be anointed therewith.

X. If it be ministered in clysters it expels windiness, and the 
torsion or gnawing pains of the guts.

Y. The leaves of garden Rue boiled in water and drunk, causeth one to 
make water, provoketh the terms, and stoppeth the lask.

Z. Ruta sylvestris or wild Rue is much more vehement both in smell 
and operation, and therefore the more virulent or pernicious; for 
sometimes it fumeth out a vapor or air so hurtful that it scorcheth 
the face of him that looketh upon it, raising up blisters, weals, and 
other accidents; it venometh their hands that touch it, and will 
infect the face also, if it be touched with them before they be clean 
washed; wherefore it is not to be admitted unto meat or medicine.

The End of the Second Book.


