GERARD'S HERBAL
Volume 5


THE THIRD BOOK OF
THE HISTORY OF
PLANTS

Containing the Description, Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Virtues,
of Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, Fruit-bearing Plants, Resins, Gums, Roses,
Heath, Mosses: some Indian Plants, and other rare Plants not
remembered in the Proem to the first book. Also Mushrooms, Coral,
and their several kinds, &c.

The Proem.

Having finished the treatise of herbs and plants in general, used
for meat, medicine, or sweet smelling use, only some few omitted for
want of perfect instruction, and also being hindered by the
slackness of the cutters or gravers of the those; which wants we
intend to supply in this third and last part.

CHAP. 1. Of Roses.

The Kinds.

The plant of Roses, though it be a shrub full of prickles, yet it
had been more fit and convenient to have placed it with the most
glorious flowers of the world, than to insert the same here among
base and thorny shrubs: for the Rose doth deserve the chiefest and
most principal place among all flowers whatsoever; being not only
esteemed for his beauty, virtues, and his fragrant and odoriferous
smell; but also because it is the honour and ornament of our English
sceptre, as by the conjunction appeareth in the uniting of those two
most royal houses of Lancaster and York. Which pleasant flowers
deserve the chiefest place in crowns and garlands, as Anacreon Thius
a most ancient Greek poet (whom Henricus Stephanus hath translated
in a gallant Latin verse) affirms in those verses of a Rose,
beginning thus

Rosa honos, decusque florum,
Rosa, cura, amorque Veris.
Rosa, cælitum voluptas,
Roseis puer Cytheres.
Caput implicat Corollis,
Charitum choros frequentans.

The Rose is the honour and beauty of flowers,
The Rose is the care and love of the spring,
The Rose is the pleasure of th'heavenly powers:
The Boy of fair Venus, Cythera's darling,
Doth wrap in his head round with garlands of Rose,
When to the dances of the Graces he goes.

Augerius Busheckius speaking of the estimation and honour of the
Rose, reporteth that the Turks can by no means endure to see the
leaves of Roses fall to the ground, because that some of them have
dreamed, that the first or most ancient Rose did spring of the blood
of Venus; and others of the Muhammadans say, that it sprang of the
sweat of Muhammad.
But there are many kinds of Roses differing either in the bigness of
the flowers, or the plant itself, roughness or smoothness, or in the
multitude of the flowers, or in the fewness, or else in colour and
smells: for divers of them are high and tall, others short and low;
some have five leaves, others very many. Theophrastus telleth of a
certain rose growing about Philippi, with an hundred leaves, which 
the inhabitants brought forth of Pangæum, and planted it in
Campania, as Pliny saith; which we hold to be the Holland Rose, that
divers call the Provençe Rose, but not properly.
Moreover, some be red, others white, and most of them or all,
sweetly smelling, especially those of the garden.


Fig. 1786. The White Rose (1)
Fig. 1787. The Red Rose (2)

The Description.

1. If the curious could so be content, one general description might
serve to distinguish the whole stock or kindred of the Roses, being
things so well known: notwithstanding I think it not amiss to say
something of them severally, in hope to satisfy all. The white Rose
hath very long stalks of a woody substance, set or armed with divers
sharp prickles: the branches whereof are likewise full of prickles,
whereon do grow leaves consisting of five leaves for the most part,
set upon a middle rib by couples; the odd leaf standing at the point
of the same, and every one of those small leaves somewhat snipped
about the edges, somewhat rough, and of an overworn green colour:
from the bosom whereof shoot forth long footstalks, whereon do grow
very fair double flowers, of a white colour, and very sweet smell,
having in the middle a few yellow threads or chives; which being
past there succeedeth a long fruit, green at the first, but red when
it is ripe, and stuffed with a downy choking matter, wherein is
contained seed as hard as stones. The root is long, tough, and of a
woody substance.

2. The Red Rose groweth very low in respect of the former: the
stalks are shorter, smoother, and browner of colour: the leaves are
like, yet of a worse dusty colour: the flowers grow on the tops of
the branches, consisting of many leaves, of a perfect red colour:
the fruit is likewise red when it is ripe: the root also woody.

Fig. 1788. The Provençe or Damask Rose (3)
Fig. 1789. The Thornless Rose (5)

3. The common Damask Rose in stature, prickly branches, and in other
respects is like the white Rose; the especial difference consisteth
in the colour and smell of the flowers; for these are of a pale red
colour, and of a more pleasant smell, and fitter for meat or
medicine.

4. The Rosa provincialis minor, or lesser Provençe Rose differeth
not from the former, but is altogether lesser: the flowers and fruit
are like: the use in physic also agreeth with the precedent.

5. The Rose without prickles hath many young shoots coming from the
root, dividing themselves into divers branches, tough, and of a 
woody substance as are all the rest of the Roses, of the height of
two or three cubits, smooth and plain without any roughness or
prickles at all; whereon do grow leaves like those of the Holland
Rose, of a shining deep green colour on the upper side, underneath
somewhat hoary and hairy. The flowers grow at the tops of the
branches, consisting of an infinite number of leaves, greater than
those of the Damask Rose, more double, and of a colour between the
Red and Damask Roses, of a most sweet smell. The fruit is round, red
when it is ripe, and stuffed with the like flocks and seeds of those
of the Damask Rose. The root is great, woody, and far spreading.

Fig. 1790. The Great Holland or Provençe Rose (6)

6. The Holland or Provençe Rose hath divers shoots proceeding from a
woody root, full of sharp prickles, dividing itself into divers
branches, whereon do grow leaves consisting of five leaves set upon
a rough middle rib, and those snipped about the edges: the flowers
grow on the tops of the branches, in shape and colour like the
Damask Rose, but greater and more double, insomuch that the yellow
chives in the middle are hard to be seen; of a reasonable good
smell, but not full so sweet as the common Damask Rose: the fruit is
like the other of his kind.

We have in our London gardens one of the red Roses, whose flowers
are in quantity and beauty equal with the former, but of greater
estimation, of a perfect red colour, wherein especially it differeth
from the Provençe Rose; in stalks, stature, and manner of growing it
agreeth with our common red Rose.

The Place.

All these sorts of Roses we have in our London gardens, except that
Rose without prickles, which as yet is a stranger in England. The
double white Rose doth grow wild in many hedges of Lancashire in
great abundance, even as Briers do with us in these southerly parts,
especially in a place of the country called Leyland, and in a place
called Roughford, not far from Latham. Moreover, in the said Leyland
fields doth grow our garden Rose wild, in the ploughed fields among
the corn in such abundance, that there may be gathered daily, during
the time, many bushels of Roses, equal with the best garden Rose in
each respect: the thing that giveth great cause of wonder is, that
in a field in the place aforesaid, called Glover's Field, every year
that the field is ploughed for corn, that year the field will be
spread over with Roses; and when it lieth as they call it ley, and
not ploughed, then shall there be but few Roses to be gathered, by
the relation of a curious gentleman there dwelling, so often
remembered in our history.

Thus our author, but I have heard that the Roses which grow in such
plenty in Glover's field, every year the field is ploughed, are no
other than Corn Rose, that is, red Poppies, however our author was
informed.

The Time.

These flower from the end of May to the end of August, and divers
times after, by reason the tops and superfluous branches are cut
away in the end of their flowering: & then do they sometimes flower
even until October, and after.

The Names.

The Rose is called in Latin Rosa: in Greek Rodon, (as Plutarch
saith) because it sendeth forth plenty of smell.

The middle part of the Roses, that is, the yellow chives, or seeds
and tips, is called Anthos, and Flos Rosæ, the flower of the Rose:
in shops, Anthera, or the blowing of the rose.

The white parts of the leaves of the flower itself, by which they
are fastened to the cups, be named Ungues or nails. That is called
Calix, or the cup, which containeth and holdeth in together the
yellow part and leaves of the flower.

Alabastri, are those parts of the cup which are deeply cut, & that
compass the flower close about before it be opened, which be in
number five, two have beards and two have none, and the fifth hath
but half one: most do call them Cortices Rosarum, or the husks of
the roses: the shoots of the plant of roses, Strabo Gallus in his
little garden doth call Viburna.

The white Rose is called Rosa album: in English, the White Rose: in
High Dutch, Weisz Roosen: in Low Dutch, Witte Roosen: in French,
Rose Blanche: of Pliny, Spineola Rosa, or Rosa campana.

The red Rose is called in Latin, Rosa rubra: the Frenchmen, Rose
Franche, Rose de Provins, a town in Champagne: of Pliny, Trachinia,
or Prænestina.

The Damask Rose is called of the Italians Rosa incarnata: in High
Dutch, Leibfarbige Roosen: in Low Dutch, Provencie Roose: of some,
Rosa provincialis, or Rose of Provençe: in French of some, Melesia:
the Rose of Melaxo, a city in Asia, from whence some have thought it
was first brought into those parts of Europe.

The great Rose, which is generally called the great Provençe rose,
which the Dutch men cannot endure; for say they, it came first out
of Holland, and therefore to be called the Holland Rose: but by all
likelihood it came from the Damask rose, as a kind thereof, made
better and fairer by art, which seemeth to agree with truth.

The rose without prickles is called in Latin, Rosa sine spinis, and
may be called in English, the rose without thorns, or the Rose of
Austria, because it was first brought from Vienna, the metropolitan
city of Austria, and given to that famous herbarist Carolus Clusius.

The Temperature.

The leaves of the flowers of roses, because they do consist of
divers parts, have also divers and sundry faculties: for there be in
them certain that are earthy and binding, others moist and watery,
and sundry that are spiritual and airy parts, which notwithstanding
are not all after one sort, for in one kind these excel, in another
those, all of them have a predominant or overruling cold
temperature, which is nearest to a mean, that is to say, of such as
are cold in the first degree, moist, airy, and spiritual parts are
predominant in the White roses, Damask and Musk.

The Virtues.

A. The distilled water of roses is good for the strengthening of the
heart, & refreshing of the spirits, and likewise for all things that
require a gentle cooling.

B. The same being put into junketting dishes, cakes, sauces, and
many other pleasant things, giveth a fine and delectable taste.

C. It mitigateth the pain of the eyes proceeding of a hot cause,
bringeth sleep, which also the fresh Roses themselves provoke
through their sweet and pleasant smell.

D. The juice of these roses, especially of Damask, doth move to the
stool, and maketh the belly soluble: but most effectually that of
the Musk roses: next to them is the juice of the Damask, which is
more commonly used.

E. The infusion of them doth the same, and also the syrup made
thereof, called in Latin Drosatum, or Serapium: the apothecaries
call it Syrup of Roses solutive, which must be made of the infusion
in which a great number of the leaves of these fresh roses are
divers and sundry times steeped.

F. It is profitable to make the belly loose & soluble, whenas either
there is no need of other stronger purgation, or that it is not fit
and expedient to use it: for besides those excrements which stick to
the bowels, or that in the first and nearest veins remain raw,
phlegmatic, and now and then choleric, it purgeth no other
excrements, unless it be mixed with certain other stronger
medicines.

G. This syrup doth moisten and cool, and therefore it allayeth the
extremity of heat in hot burning fevers, mitigateth the
inflammations of the entrails, and quencheth thirst: it is scarce
good for a weak and moist stomach, for it leaveth it more slack and
weak.

H. Of like virtue also are the leaves of these preserved in sugar,
especially if they be only bruised with the hands, and diligently
tempered with sugar, and so heat at the fire rather than boiled.

The Temperature of Red Roses.

There is in the red Roses, which are common everywhere, and in the
other that be of a deep purple, called Provençe Roses, a more earthy
substance, also a drying and binding quality, yet not without
certain moisture joined, being in them when they are as yet fresh,
which they lose when they be dried: for this cause their juice and
infusion doth also make the body soluble, yet not so much, as of the
others aforesaid. These roses being dried and their moisture gone,
do bind and dry; and likewise cool, but lesser than when they are
fresh.

The Virtues.

I. They strengthen the heart, and help the trembling and beating
thereof.

K. They give strength to the liver, kidneys, and other weak
entrails; they dry and comfort a weak stomach that is flashy and
moist; stay the whites and reds, stanch bleedings in any part of the
body, stay sweatings, bind and loose, and moisten the body.

L. And they are put into all manner of counterpoisons and other like
medicines, whether they be to be outwardly applied or to be inwardly
taken, to which they give effectual binding, and certain
strengthening quality.

M. Honey of Roses, or Mel Rosarum, which is made of them, is most
excellent good for wounds, ulcers, issues, and generally for such
things as have need to be cleansed and dried.

N. The oil doth mitigate all kinds of heat, and will not suffer
inflammations or hot swellings to rise, and being risen it doth at
the first assuage them.

The Temperature and Virtues of the parts.

O. The flowers or bloomings of Roses, that is to say, the yellow
hairs and tips, do in like manner dry and bind, and that more
effectually than of the leaves of the roses themselves: the same
temperature the cups and beards be of; but seeing none of these have
any sweet smell, they are not so profitable, nor so familiar or
beneficial to man's nature: notwithstanding in fluxes at the sea it
than avail the chirurgeon greatly, to carry store thereof with him,
which doth there prevail much more than at the land.

P. The same yellow called Anthera, stayeth not only those lasks and
bloody fluxes which do happen at the sea, but those at the land
also, and likewise the white flux and red in women, if they tbe
dried, beaten to powder, and two scruples thereof given in red wine,
with a little powder of Ginger added thereto: and being at the sea,
for want of red wine you may use such liquor as you can get in such
extremity.

Q. The little heads or buttons of the Roses, as Pliny writeth, do
also stanch bleeding, and stop the lask.

R. The nails or white ends of the leaves of the flowers are good for
watering eyes.

S. The juice, infusion, or decoction of Roses, are to be reckoned
among those medicines which are soft, gentle, loosing, opening and
purging gently the belly, which may be taken at all times and in all
places, of every kind or sex of people, both old and young, without
danger or peril.

T. The syrup made of the infusion of Roses is a most singular &
gentle loosing medicine, carrying downwards choleric humours,
opening the stoppings of the liver, helping greatly the yellow
jaundice, the trembling of the heart, & taking away the extreme heat
in agues and burning fevers which is thus made:

V. Take two pound of Roses, the white ends cut away, put them to
steep or infuse in six pints of warm water in an open vessel for the
space of twelve hours: then strain them out, and put thereto the
like quantity of Roses, and warm the water again, so let it stand
the like time: do thus four or five times; in the end add unto that
liquor or infusion, four pound of fine sugar in powder; then boil it
unto the form of a syrup, upon a gentle fire, continually stirring
it until it be cold; then strain it, and keep it for your use,
whereof may be taken in white wine, or other liquor, from one ounce
unto two.

X. Syrup of the juice of Roses is very profitable for the griefs
aforesaid, made in this manner:

Y. Take Roses, the white nails cut away, what quantity you please,
stamp them, and strain out the juice, the which you shall put to the
fire, adding thereto sugar, according to the quantity of the juice:
boiling them on a gentle fire unto a good consistence.

Z. Unto these syrups you may add a few drops of oil of Vitriol,
which giveth it a most beautiful colour, and also helpeth the force
in cooling hot and burning fevers and agues: you likewise may add
thereto a small quantity of the juice of Lemons, which doth the
like.

AA. The conserve of Roses as well that which is crude and raw, as
that which is made by ebullition or boiling, taken in the morning
fasting, and last at night, strengtheneth the heart, and taketh away
the shaking and trembling thereof, strengtheneth the liver, kidneys,
and other weak entrails, comforteth a weak stomach that is moist and
raw; stayeth the whites and reds in women, and in a word is the most
familiar thing to be used for the purposes aforesaid, and is thus
made:

BB. Take the leaves of Roses, the nails cut off, one pound, put them
into a clean pan; then put thereto a pint and a half of scalding
water, stirring them together with a wooden slice, so let them stand
to macerate, close covered some two or three hours; then set them to
the fire slowly to boil, adding thereto three pounds of sugar in
powder, letting them to simmer together according to discretion,
some hour or more; then keep it for your use.

CC. The same made another way, but better by many degrees: take
Roses at your pleasure, put them to boil in fair water, having
regard to the quantity; for if you have many roses, you may take the
more water; if fewer, the less water will serve: the which you shall
boil at the least three or four hours, even as you would boil a
piece of meat, until in the eating they be very tender, at which
time the Roses will lose their colour, that you would think your
labour lost, and the thing spoiled. But proceed, for though the
Roses have lost their colour, the water hath gotten the tincture
thereof; then shall you add unto one pound of Roses, four pound of
fine sugar in pure powder, and so according to the rest of the
roses. Thus shall you let them boil gently after the sugar is put
thereto, continually stirring it with a wooden spatula until it be
cold, whereof one pound weight is worth six pound of the crude or
raw conserve, as well for the virtues and goodness in taste, as also
for the beautiful colour.

DD. The making of the crude or raw conserve is very well known, as
also sugar roset, and divers other pretty things rnade of roses and
sugar, which are impertinent unto our history, because I intend
neither to make thereof an apothecary's shop, nor a sugar baker's
storehouse, leaving the rest for our cunning confectioners.

CHAP. 2. Of the Musk Roses.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Roses planted in gardens, besides those
written of in the former chapter, which are of most writers reckoned
among the wild Roses, notwithstanding we think it convenient to put
them into a chapter between those of the garden and the brier Roses,
as indifferent whether to make them of the wild roses, or of the
tame, seeing we have made them denizens in our gardens for divers
respects, and that worthily.


Fig. 1791. The Single Musk Rose (1)
Fig. 1792. The Double Musk Rose (2)

The Description.

1. The single Musk Rose hath divers long shoots of a greenish colour
and woody substance, armed with very sharp prickles, dividing itself
into divers branches whereon do grow long leaves, smooth & shining,
made of divers leaves set upon a middle rib, like the other roses:
the flowers grow on the tops of the branches, of a white colour, and
pleasant sweet smell, like that of Musk, whereof it took his name;
having certain yellow seeds in the middle, as the rest of the roses
have: the fruit is red when it is ripe, and filled with such chaffy
flocks and seeds as those of the other roses: the root is tough and
woody.

2. The double Musk rose differeth not from the precedent in leaves,
stalks, and roots, nor in the colour of the flowers, or sweetness
thereof, but only in the doubleness of the flowers, wherein
consisteth the difference.


Fig. 1793. The Great Musk Rose (3)
Fig. 1794. The Velvet Rose (4)

3. Of these roses we have another in our London gardens, which of
most is called the Blush Rose; it flowereth when the Damask rose
doth: the flowers hereof are very single, greater than the other
Musk roses, and of a white colour, dashed over with a light wash of
carnation, which maketh that colour which we call a blush colour:
the proportion of the whole plant, as also the smell of the flowers,
are like the precedent.

4. The Velvet Rose groweth always very low, like unto the red rose,
having his branches covered with a certain hairy or prickly matter,
as fine as hairs, yet not so sharp or stiff that it will harm the
most tender skin that is: the leaves are like the leaves of the
white Rose: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, doubled with
some yellow thrums in the midst, of a deep and black red colour,
resembling red crimson velvet, whereupon some have called it the
Velvet rose: when the flowers be faded, there follow red berries
full of hard seeds, wrapped in a down or woolliness like the others.


Fig. 1795. The Yellow Rose (5)
Fig. 1796. The Double Yellow Rose (6)

5. The Yellow rose which (as divers do report) was by art so
coloured, and altered from his first estate, by grafting a wild rose
upon a Broom stalk; whereby (say they) it doth not only change his
colour, but his smell and force. But for my part I having found the
contrary by mine own experience, cannot be induced to believe the
report: for the roots and offsprings of this rose have brought forth
yellow roses, such as the main stock or mother bringeth out, which
event is not to be seen in all other plants that have been grafted.
Moreover, the seeds of yellow roses have brought forth yellow roses,
such as the flower was from whence they were taken; which they would
not do by any conjectural reason, if that of themselves they were
not a natural kind of rose. Lastly, it were contrary to that true
principle, Naturæ sequitur fmina quodque sua: that is to say; Every
seed and plant bringeth forth fruit like unto itself, both in shape
and nature: but leaving that error, I will proceed to the
description: the yellow rose hath brown and prickly stalks or
shoots, five or six cubits high, garnished with many leaves, like
unto the Musk rose, of an excellent sweet smell, and more pleasant
than the leaves of the Eglantine: the flowers come forth among the
leaves, and at the top of the branches of a fair gold yellow colour:
the thrums in the middle, are also yellow: which being gone, there
follow such knops or heads as the other roses do bear.

6. Of this kind there is another more rare and set by, which in
stalks, leaves, and other parts is not much different from the last
described, only the flower is very double, and it seldom fairly
shows itself about London, where it is kept in our chief gardens as
a prime rarity.


Fig. 1797. The Double Cinnamon Rose (7)
Fig. 1798. The Single Cinnamon Rose(8)

7. The Canel or Cinnamon rose, or the rose smelling like Cinnamon,
hath shoots of brown colour, four cubits high, beset with thorny
prickles, and leaves like unto those of Eglantine, but smaller and
greener, of the savour or smell of cinnamon, whereof it took his
name, and not of the smell of his flowers (as some have deemed)
which have little or no savour at all: the flowers be exceeding
double, and yellow in the middle, of a pale red colour, and
sometimes of a carnation: the root is of a woody substance.

8. We have in our London gardens another Cinnamon or Canel rose, not
differing from the last described in any respect, but only in the
flowers. for as the other hath very double flowers, contrariwise
these of this plant are very single, wherein is the difference.

The Place.

These Roses are planted in our London gardens, and elsewhere, but
not found wild in England.

The Time.

The Musk Rose flowereth in autumn, or the fall of the leaf: the rest
flower when the Damask and red Rose do.

The Names.

The first is called Rosa moschata, of the smell of Musk, as we have
said: in Italian, Rosa Moschetta: in French Roses Musquées, or
Muscadelles: in Low Dutch, Musket roosen: in English, Musk Rose: the
Latin and English titles may serve for the rest.

The Temperature.

The Musk Rose is cold in the first degree, wherein airy and
spiritual parts are predominant: the rest are referred to the Brier
rose and Eglantine.

The Virtues.

A. Conserve or syrup made of the Musk rose, in manner as before told
in the Damask and red roses, doth purge very mightily waterish
humours, yet safely, and without all danger, taken in the quantity
of an ounce in weight.

B. The leaves of the flowers eaten in the morning, in manner of a
salad, with oil, vinegar and pepper, or any other way according to
the appetite and pleasure of them that shall eat it, purge very
notably the belly of waterish and choleric humours, and that
mightily, yet without all peril or pain at all, insomuch as the
simplest may use the quantity, according to their own fancy; for if
they do desire many stools, or sieges, they are to eat the greater
quantity of the leaves; if fewer, the less quantity; as for example:
the leaves of twelve or fourteen flowers give six or eight stools,
and so increasing or diminishing the quantity, more or fewer, as
myself have often proved.

C. The white leaves stramped in a wooden dish with a piece of alum,
and the juice strained forth into some glass vessel, dried in the
shadow, and kept, is the most fine and pleasant yellow colour that
may be devised, not only to limn or wash pictures and imagery in
books, but also to colour meats and sauces, which notwithstanding
the alum is very wholesome.

There is not anything extant of the others, but are thought to be
equal with the white Musk Rose, whereof they are taken and holden to
be kinds.

CHAP. 3. Of the Wild Roses.

Fig. 1799. The Eglantine or Sweet Brier (1)

The Description.

The sweet Brier doth oftentimes grow higher than all the kinds of
Roses; the shoots of it are hard, thick, and woody; the leaves are
glittering, and of a beautiful green colour, of smell most pleasant:
the Roses are little, five-leaved, most commonly whitish, seldom
tending to purple, of little or no smell at all: the fruit is long,
of colour somewhat red, like a little olive stone, and like the
little heads or berries of the others, but lesser than those of the
garden: in which is contained rough cotton, or hairy down and seed,
folded and wrapped up in the same, which is small and hard: there be
likewise found about the slender shoots hereof, round, soft, and
hairy sponges, which we call Brier Balls, such as grow about the
prickles of the Dog-rose.


Fig.1800. Double Eglantine (2)
Fig. 1801. Brier Rose (3)

2. We have in our London gardens another sweet Brier, having greater
leaves, and much sweeter: the flowers likewise are greater, and
somewhat doubled, exceeding sweet of smell, wherein it differeth
from the former.

3. The Brier Bush or Hip tree is also called Rosa canina, which is a
plant so common and well known, that it were to small purpose to use
many words in the description thereof: for even children with great
delight eat the berries thereof when they be ripe, make chains and
other pretty gewgaws of the fruit: cooks and gentlewomen make tarts
and such like dishes for pleasure thereof, and therefore this shall
suffice for the description.

Fig. 802. Pimpinell Rose (4)

4. The Pimpinell Rose is likewise one of the wild ones, whose stalks
shoot forth of the ground in many places, of the height of one or
two cubits, of a brown colour, and armed with sharp prickles, which
divide themselves toward the tops into divers branches, whereon do
grow leaves consisting of divers small ones, set upon a middle rib
like those of Burnet, which is called in Latin Pimpinella, whereupon
it was called Rosa Pimpinella, the Burnet Rose. The flowers grow at
the tops of the branches, of a white colour, very single, and like
unto those of the Brier or Hip tree: after which come the fruit,
black, contrary to all the rest of the roses, round as an apple;
whereupon some have called it Rosa pomifera, or the Rose bearing
apples: wherein is contained seed, wrapped in chaffy or flocky
matter, like that of the Brier: the root is tough and woody.

The Place.

These wild Roses do grow in the borders of fields and woods, in most
parts of England. The last groweth very plentifully in a field as
you go from a village in Essex, called Grays (upon the brink of the
river Thames) unto Horndon-On-The-Hill, insomuch that the field is
full fraught therewith all over.

It groweth likewise in a pasture as you go from a village hard by
London called Knightsbridge, unto Fulham, a village thereby, and in
many other places.

We have them all except the Brier Bush in our London gardens, which
we think unworthy the place.

The Time.

They flower and flourish with the other Roses.

The Names.

The Englantine Rose, which is Cynorrhodi, or Caninæ Rosæ species, a
kind of Dog's-Rose: and Rosa sylvestris, the wild Rose: in Low
Dutch, Eglantier: in French, Esglentine; and as Ruellius testifies,
Eglenterium: who also suspects it to be Cynosbaton, or Canirubus: of
which Dioscorides hath written in these words; Cynosbatus, or
Canirubus, which some call Oxycantha, is a shrub growing like a
tree, full of prickles, with a white flower, long fruit like an
olive stone, red when it is ripe, and downy within: in English we
call it Eglantine, or sweet Brier.

The spongy balls which are found upon the branches are most aptly
and properly called Spongiolæ sylvestris Rosæ, the little sponges of
the wild Rose. The shops mistake it by the name of Bedeguar; for
Bedeguar among the Arabians is a kind of Thistle, which is called
Spina alba, the White Thistle.

The Brier or Hip tree is called Rosa sylvestris, the wild Rose: in
High Dutch, Wilde Rosen: in French, Roses sauvages: Pliny, lib. 8.
cap. 25, saith that it is Rosa canina, Dog's Rose: of divers,
Caninasentis, or Dog's Thorn: in English, Brier bush, and Hip tree:
the last hath been touched in the description.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The faculties of these wild Roses are referred to the manured
Rose, but not used in physic where the other may be had:
notwithstanding Pliny affirmeth, that the root of the Brier bush is
a singular remedy found out by oracle against the biting of a mad
dog, which he sets down in his eighth book, chap. 41.

B. The same author, lib. 25. cap. 2. affirmeth, that the little
spongy Brier ball stamped with honey and ashes causeth hairs to grow
which are fallen through the disease called Alopecia, or the Fox's
evil, in plain terms the French pox.

C. Fuchsius affirms, that the spongy excrescence or ball growing
upon the Brier are good against the stone and strangury, if they be
beaten to powder and inwardly taken.

D. They are good not as they be diuretics or provokers of urine, or
as they are wearers away of the stone, but as certain other binding
medicines that strengthen the weak and feeble kidneys; which do no
more good to those that be subject to the stone, than many of the
diuretics, especially of the stronger sort; for by too much using of
diuretics or pissing medicines, it happeneth that the kidneys are
over-weakened, and oftentimes too much heated, by which means not
only the stones are not diminished, worn away, or driven forth, but
oftentimes are also increased and made more hard: for they separate
and take away that which in the blood is thin, watery, and as it
were wheyish; and the thicker part, the stronger sorts of diuretics
do draw together and make hard: and in like manner also others that
are not so strong, by the overmuch using of them, as Galen. lib. 5.
Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines reporteth.

E. The fruit when it is ripe maketh most pleasant meats and
banqueting dishes, as tarts and such like; the making whereof I
commit to the cunning cook, and teeth to eat them in the rich man's
mouth.

CHAP. 4. Of the Bramble or Blackberry bush.


Fig. 1803. Bramble or Blackberry (1)
Fig. 1804. Raspis or Raspberry (3)

The Description.

1. The common Bramble bringeth forth slender branches, long, tough,
easily bowed, ramping among hedges and whatsoever stands near unto
it; armed with hard and sharp prickles, whereon do grow leaves
consisting of many set upon a rough middle rib, green on the upper
side, and underneath somewhat white: on the tops of the stalks stand
certain flowers, in shape like those of the Brier Rose, but lesser,
of colour white, and sometimes washed over with a little purple: the
fruit or berry is like that of the Mulberry, first red, black when
it is ripe, in taste between sweet and sour, very soft, and full of
grains: the root creepeth, and sendeth forth here and there young
springs.

Rubus repens fructu cæsio

2. This hath a round stalk set full of small crooked and very sharp
pricking thorns, and creepeth on hedges and low bushes of a great
length, on the upper side of a light red colour, and underneath
green, and taketh root with the tops of the trailing branches,
whereby it doth mightily increase: the leaves grow without order,
composed of three leaves, and sometimes of five, or else the two
lower leaves are divided into two parts, as Hop leaves are now and
then, of a light green colour both above and underneath. The flowers
grow on the tops of the branches, racematim,[like a bunch of grapes]
many together, sometimes white, sometimes of a very light purple
colour, every flower containing five leaves, which are crumpled or
wrinkled, and do not grow plain: the fruit follows, first green, and
afterwards blue, every berry composed of one or two grains, seldom
above four or five growing together, about the bigness of currants,
wherein is contained a stony hard kernel or seed, and a juice of the
colour of Claret wine, contrary to the common Rubus or Bramble,
whose leaves are white underneath: the berries being ripe are of a
shining black colour, and every berry contains usually above forty
grains closely compacted and thrust together. The root is woody and
lasting. This grows common enough in most places, and too common in
ploughed fields. Sept. 6. 1619. John Goodyer.

3. The Raspis or Framboise bush hath leaves and branches not much
unlike the common Bramble, but not so rough nor prickly, and
sometimes without any prickles at all, having only a rough hairiness
about the stalks: the fruit in shape and proportion is like those of
the Bramble, red when they be ripe, and covered over with a little
downiness; in taste not very pleasant. The root creepeth far abroad,
whereby it greatly increaseth. This grows either with prickles upon
the stalks, or else without them: the fruit is usually red, but
sometimes white of colour.


Fig. 1805. Stone Bramble (4)
Fig. 1806. Knotberry (5)

4. Stone Bramble seldom groweth above a foot high, having many small
flexible branches without prickles, trailing upon the ground,
covered with a reddish bark, and somewhat hairy: the leaves grow
three together, set upon tender naked footstalks somewhat snipped
about the edges: the flowers grow at the end of the branches,
consisting of four small white leaves like those of the Cherry tree:
after which come small grape-like fruit, consisting of one, two, or
three large transparent berries, set together as those of the common
Bramble, of a red colour when they be ripe, and of a pleasant taste;
but somewhat astringent. The roots creep along in the ground very
far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.

4. Chamæmorus (called in the North part of England, where they
especially do grow, Knot-berries, and Knought-berries) is likewise
one of the Brambles, though without prickles: it brings forth small
weak branches or tender stems of a foot high; whereon do grow at
certain distances rough leaves in shape like those of the Mallow,
not unlike to the leaves of the Gooseberry bush: on the top of each
branch standeth one flower and no more, consisting of five small
leaves of a dark purple colour: which being fallen, the fruit
succeedeth, like unto that of the Mulberry, whereof it was called
Chamæmorus, dwarf Mulberry; at the first white and bitter, after red
and somewhat pleasant: the root is long, something knotty; from
which knots or joints thrust forth a few thready strings. (I take
that plant to which our author hereafter hath allotted a whole
chapter, and called Vaccinia nubis, or Cloud-berries, to be the same
with this, as I shall show you more largely in that place.)

The Place.

The Bramble groweth for the most part in every hedge and bush.

The Raspis is planted in gardens: it groweth not wild that I know
of, except in the field by a village in Lancashire called Harwood,
not far from Blackburn.

I found it among the bushes of a causeway, near unto a village
called Wistaton, where I went to school, two miles from Nantwich in
Cheshire.

The stone Bramble I have found in divers fields in the Isle of
Thanet, hard by a village called Birchington, near Queake's house,
sometimes Sir Henry Crispe's dwelling place. (I fear our author 
mistook that which is here added in the second place, for that which
he figured and described in the third (now the fourth) which I know
not yet to grow wild with us.)

Knot-berries do love open snowy hills and mountains; they grow
plentifully upon Ingleborough hills among the heath and ling, twelve
miles from Lancashire, being thought to be the highest hill in
England.

They grow upon Stanmore between Yorkshire and Westmorland, and upon
other wet fells and mountains.

The Time.

These flower in May and June with the Roses: their fruit is ripe in
the end of August and September.

The Names.

The Bramble is called in French, Rouges, Loi Duyts Brelmers: in
Latin, Rubus, and Sentis, and Vepres, as Ovid writeth in his first
book of Metamorphosis.

Aut lepori qui vepre latens hostilia cernit
Ora canum
Or to th' hare, that under bramble closely lying, spies
The hostile mouths of dogs.

Of divers it is called Cynosbatus, but not properly; for Cynosbatus
is the wild Rose, as we have written: in High Dutch, Bremen: in Low
Dutch, Breemen: in French, Rouce: in Italian, Garza: in English,
Bramble bush, and Blackberry bush.

The fruit is named in Latin Morum rubi; and as Fuchsius thinketh,
Vacinium, but not properly; in shops, Mora Bati: and in such shops
as are more barbarous, Mora bassi: in English, Blackberries.

The Raspis is called in Latin, Rubus idæus, of the mountain Ida on
which it groweth: in English, Raspis, Framboise, and Hind-berry.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The young, buds or tender tops of the Bramble bush, the flowers,
the leaves, and the unripe fruit, do very much dry and bind withal:
being chewed they take away the heat and inflammation of the mouth,
and almonds of the throat: they stay the bloody flux, and other
fluxes, and all manner of bleedings: of the same force is their
decoction, with a little honey added.

B. They heal the eyes that hang out, hard knots in the fundament,
and stay the hemorrhoids, if the leaves be laid thereunto.

C. The juice which is pressed out of the stalks, leaves, and unripe
berries, and made hard in the sun, is more effectual for all those
things.

D. The ripe fruit is sweet, and containeth in it much juice of a
temperate heat, therefore it is not unpleasant to be eaten.

E. It hath also a certain kind of astriction or binding quality.

F. It is likewise for that cause wholesome for the stomach, and if a
man eat too largely thereof, saith Galen, he shall have the
headache: but being dried whilst it is yet unripe it bindeth and
drieth more than the ripe fruit.

G. The root besides that it is binding, containeth in it much thin
substance, by reason whereof it wasteth away the stone in the
kidneys, saith Galen.

H. Pliny writeth, that the berries and flowers do provoke urine, and
that the decoction of them in wine is a present remedy against the
stone.

I. The leaves of the Bramble boiled in water, with honey, alum, and
a little white wine added thereto, make a most excellent lotion or
washing water to heal the sores in the mouth, the privy parts of man
or woman, and the same decoction fasteneth the teeth.

K. The Raspis is thought to be like the Bramble in temperature and
virtues, but not so much binding or drying. The Raspis, saith
Dioscorides, performeth those things which the Bramble doth. The
fruit is good to be given to those that have weak and queasy
stomachs.

CHAP. 5. Of Holly Roses, or Cistus.

The Kinds.

Cistus hath been taken of divers to be a kind of Rose: the old
writers have made two sorts thereof, male and female; and likewise a
third sort, which is called Ledum: the later herbarists have
discovered divers more, as shall be declared.

A General Description, wherein all the sorts of Cistus are
comprised.

Cistus and his kinds are woody shrubs full of branches, of the
height of two or three cubits; some have broad leaves, others rough,
uneven, wrinkled, somewhat downy, and most like the leaves of Sage;
although some have the leaves of Rosemary, others the form of those
of the Poplar tree: the flowers grow on the tops of the branches,
like unto the wild Rose, yet such as very quickly fade, perish, and
fall away: those of the male are most of a reddish blue or purple 
colour; and of the female white: in their places come up little
heads or knops somewhat round, in which is contained small seed; the
roots of them all are woody.

There groweth up sometimes under the shrub hard to the roots, a
certain excrescence or hypocist, which is thick, fat, gross, full of
juice, without leaves, wholly consisting of many little cases or
boxes, as do those of Henbane or of the Pomegranate tree; of a
yellowish red colour in one kind; and in another white, and in
certain other green or grassy, as Dioscorides saith.


Fig. 1807. Male Cistus or Holly Rose (1)
Fig. 1808. Male Cistus with an Excrescence (2)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Cistus groweth up like a small bush or shrub,
of a woody substance, three or four cubits high, garnished with many
small and brittle branches, set full of crumpled or rugged leaves
very like unto Sage leaves: at the top of the branches come flowers
of a purple colour, in shape like unto a single Brier Rose, having
leaves somewhat wrinkled like a cloth new dried before it be
smoothed, and in the midst a few yellow chives or thrums: the
flowers for the most part do perish and fall away before noon, and
never cease flowering in such manner from the month of May unto the
beginning of September, at which time the seed is ripe, being of a
reddish colour, and is contained in an hard hairy husk not much
unlike the husk of Henbane.

The second sort of Cistus, being another kind of the male Cistus,
which Pena calls Cistus mas cum Hypocistide, is like unto the
former, but that from the root of this kind there cometh a certain
excrescence or out-growing, which is sometimes yellow, sometimes
green; and sometimes white; from which is drawn by an artificial
extraction a certain juice called in shops Hypocistis.

Fig. 1809. Kinds of Cistus (3-7)

3. This kind of Cistus hath many woody stalks divided into divers
brittle branches of a russet colour; whereon do grow rough leaves
somewhat cut or toothed on the edges, and of an overworn colour: the
flowers grow on the tops of the branches, in form of a Musk Rose,
but of an excellent bright purple colour: after which come round
knops, wherein is contained small reddish seed: the root is tough
and woody.

4. This fourth sort of Cistus hath divers woody branches, whereon
are set, thick thrust together, divers small leaves narrow like
those of winter Savoury, but of an overworn russet colour: the root
and flowers are like the precedent.

5. The first of the females is like unto the male Cistus in each
respect, saving that the flowers hereof are of a white colour, with
divers yellow thrums in the middle; and the others purple, wherein
consisteth the difference.

6. The second female of Matthiolus' description hath many hard and
woody stalks, branched with divers arms or wings: whereon are set by
couples rough hoary and hairy leaves, of a dark russet colour: among
which come forth small white flowers like unto those of the Jasmine:
the root is tough and woody. (Thus saith our author, but I judge
this all one with the former, and therefore have omitted the figure
as impertinent, although our author followed it, making the flower
so little in his description.)

7. The seventh sort of Cistus groweth up to the height of a small
hedge bush, having divers brittle branches full of pith: whereon are
set leaves by couples, like those of Sea Purslane, that is to say,
soft, hoary, and as it were covered over with a kind of mealiness:
the flowers are yellow, and less than those of the former.

Fig. 1810. Lavender-Leaved Cistus (8)
Fig. 1811. Thyme-Leaved Cistus (9)

8. The eighth Cistus hath likewise shrubby stalks in manner of a
hedge tree, whereon do grow at certain distances divers leaves close
joined together at the stalk, like those of the former, but somewhat
lower and narrower: the flowers we have not expressed in the figure,
by reason we have no certain knowledge of them.

9. This ninth Cistus is likewise a woody shrub some foot high: the
stalks are very brittle, as are all the rest of his kind; whereon do
grow very small leaves like those of Thyme: the flowers are white,
which maketh it one of the females.

Fig. 1812. Kinds of Cistus (10-13)

10. The Low or Base Cistus with broad leaves, groweth like a small
shrub, of a woody substance: the leaves are many, of a dark green
colour: the flowers are in form like the other, but of yellow
colour: the roots are likewise woody.

11. This Narrow-Leaved low Cistus hath divers tough branches leaning
to the ground, whereon do grow without order many small narrow
leaves somewhat long, of a gummy taste at the first, afterwards
bitter: the flowers grow on the tops of the branches, of a yellow
colour, consisting of five leaves, with certain chives in the
middle; after which follow three square cods or seed-vessels: the
root is tough and woody.

12. The Low or Base Cistus of Austria groweth likewise leaning to
the ground, having many woody branches very firm and tough, covered
with a blackish bark; whereon do grow very many rough and hairy
leaves in shape like those of the small Myrtle, of a shining green
on the upper-side, and of an astringent taste: on every branch
standeth one flower, seldom two, in form like the other, but
consisting of one leaf deeply divided into five parts, and of a
white colour tending to a flesh colour.

13. This low sort of Cistus hath many long tough branches trailing
upon the ground, of a reddish colour, whereon do grow small leaves
like those of wild Thyme, of a dark green colour, very thick and
fat, and somewhat hairy: the flowers grow at the top of the
branches, of a yellow gold colour, consisting of five small leaves
of a very sweet smell. The root is thick, hard, and. woody.


Fig. 1813. Lobel's Strange Cistus (14)
Fig. 1815. Dr. Penny's Cistus (16)

14. This strange and rare plant of Lobel's observation I have
thought meet to be inserted amongst the kinds of Cistus, as a friend
of theirs, if not one of the kind: it hath leaves like unto the male
Cistus (the first in this chapter described) but more hairy, bearing
at the top of his branches a small knop in shape like a rotten
Strawberry, but not of the same substance; for it is compact of a
scaly or chaffy matter such as is in the midst of the Camomile
flowers, and of a russet colour.

15. This adulterine or counterfeit or forged Cistus grows to the
height of a hedge bush: the branches are long or brittle, whereon do
grow long leaves like those of the Willow, of an overworn russet
colour: the flowers are small, consisting of five little yellow
leaves: the whole plant being well viewed seemeth to be a Willow,
but at the first sight one of the Cistus; so that it is a plant
participating of both: the root is woody. Bauhine judges this (which
our author out of Tabernamontanus figured and named Cistus
adulterinus) to be the Cistus set forth in the eighth place of the
next chapter save one: but I rather judge it to be of the Ledum
Silesiacum set forth in the eleventh place of that chapter, and
again in the twelfth, where you may find more thereof.

16. This kind of Cistus, which Dr. Penny (a famous physician of
London deceased) did gather upon the islands of Majorica or Majorca,
and called it by the name in Latin, Myrtocistus Balearica, is a
shrub growing to the height of three cubits, having a very rough
bark, beset roundabout with rough and scabbed warts; which bark will
of itself easily fall away from the old branches or boughs of the
tree. The leaves of this tree are almost like them of Myrtus, very
rough underneath like the branches aforesaid; but the leaves that
grow higher, and toward the top of the branches, are smooth, growing
about the branches very thick together, as in the other kinds of
Cistus. The flowers are yellow, growing on the top of the twigs,
consisting of five long leaves full of many very long chives within.
When the flowers be faded, there followeth a very long and five-
square head or husk full of seed. The whole tree is very sweet, out
of which issueth a gum or resin, or rather a thick clammy and fat
juice, such as cometh forth of the kinds of Ledum.


Fig. 1815. Annual Cistus (17)
Fig. 1816. Long-leaved Annual Cistus (18)

17. This Annual Cistus groweth up from seed with one upright stalk
to the height of a cubit, oft-times divided into other small
branches; whereon grow rough leaves somewhat long, of a dark green
colour. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, consisting of 5
small yellow leaves: which being past, there followeth a three-
square seed vessel full of small reddish seed. The root is small and
woody, and perisheth when the seed is perfected.

18. This other Cistus that lasteth but one year hath long stalks
divided into other branches of the height of two cubits; whereon do
grow long rough leaves, set three together at certain distances, the
middlemost whereof is longer than the other two: the flowers grow on
the sides of the branches, like the female Cistus, of a white
colour: the root is of a woody substance, as are all the rest of his
kind.


Fig. 1817. Spotted Annual Cistus (19)
Fig. 1818. Marjoram-Leaved Cistus (20)

19. This grows some foot high, with a square rough greenish stalk,
whereon by couples at certain spaces stand little longish rough
leaves, yet toward the top of the stalk they stand sometimes three
together: upon the top of the little branches grow flowers like
those of the other Cistus, of colour yellow, with a fine sanguine
spot upon each leaf of the flower. It groweth in some parts of
France, as also on the Alps in Italy. Clusius describes it by the
name of Cistus annuus 2. Pona in his Mons Baldus calls it Cistus
annuus flore guttato.

20. This hath many slender branches whereon grow small roundish
leaves, hoary, and somewhat like those of Marjoram, somewhat less,
with the middle rib standing out. The flowers grow upon the tops of
the branches, and consist of five white leaves, with a dark purple
spot in the middle of each leaf: the threads in the middle of the
flower are of a yellow colour: their seed-vessels are of the bigness
of those of Flax, but three-square, containing a seed of the bigness
of that of Henbane. Clusius found this in divers parts of Spain, and
sets it forth by the name of Cistus folio sampsuchi.

The Place.

Holly Roses grow in Italy, Spain, and Languedoc, and in the
countries bordering upon the river Padus, in all Etruria and
Massilia, and in many other of the hotter provinces of Europe, in
dry and stony places, varying infinitely according to the diversity
of the regions where they do grow; of which I have two sorts in my
garden, the first, and the Cistus annuus.

The Time.

They flower from May to September.
The Names.

The Holly Rose is called in Greek Kistos, and Latin, also Cistus,
and Rosa sylvatica: of divers, Rosa canina, as Scribonius Largus
writeth, but not properly: in Spanish, Estepa: of the Portugals,
Rosella: in English, Holly Rose, and Cistus, after the Greek name.
The fungous excrescence growing at the root of Cistus, is called in
Greek, ipokistis, because it groweth under the shrub Cistus: it is
also called Limodoron: some call it kytinos, among whom is Paulus
Ægineta, who also doth not call that Hypocistis which groweth under
the shrub Cistus, but the juice hereof; whereupon might grow the
word Hypocistis, by which name the apothecaries call this juice when
it is hardened: of some it is called Erithanon, Citinus, and
Hypoquistidos.

The Temperature.

Cistus, as Galen saith, doth greatly dry, near hand in the second
degree, and it is of that coldness, that it hath withal a temperate
heat: the leaves and the first buds being beaten do only dry and
bind, in such sort as they may close up ulcers, and join together
green wounds.

The Virtues.

A. The flowers are of most force, which being drunk with wine are
good against the bloody flux, weakness of the stomach, fluxes, and
overflowings of moist humours.

B. They cure putrefied ulcers being applied in manner of a poultice:
Dioscorides teacheth that they are a remedy for eating ulcers, being
anointed therewith; and that they cure burnings, scaldings, and old
ulcers.

C. Hypocistis is much more binding: it is a sure remedy for all
infirmities that come of fluxes, as voiding of blood, the whites,
the lask, and the bloody flux: but if it be requisite to strengthen
that part which is overweakned with a superfluous moisture, it doth
notably comfort and strengthen the same.

D. It is excellent to be mixed with fomentations that serve for the
stomach and liver.

E. It is put into the Treacle of Vipers, to the end it should
comfort and strengthen weak bodies, as Galen writeth.

CHAP. 6. Of other Plants Reckoned for Dwarf Kinds of Cistus.

Fig.1819. English Dwarf Cistus (1,2)
The Description.

1. The English dwarf Cistus, called of Lobel, Panax chironium (but
there is another Panax of Chiron's description, which I hold to be
the true and right Panax, notwithstanding he hath inserted it
amongst the kinds of Cistus, as being indifferent to join with us
and others for the insertion) is a low and base plant creeping upon
the ground, having many small tough branches, of a brown colour;
whereupon do grow little leaves set together by couples, thick, fat,
and full of substance, and covered over with a soft down: from the
bosom whereof come forth other lesser leaves: the flowers before
they be open are small knops or buttons, of a brown colour mixed
with yellow; and being open and spread abroad are like those of the
wild Tansy, and of a yellow colour, with some yellower chives in the
middle: the root is thick, and of a woody substance.

2. The second is very like unto the precedent, saving that the
leaves are long, and do not grow so thick thrust together, and are
more woolly: the flowers are greater, and of a white colour, wherein
the especial difference consisteth. The root is like the former.

Fig. 1820. Yellow Dwarf Cistus of Germany (3)

3. There is found in Germany, a certain plant like to Cistus, and
Ledon, but much lesser, creeping upon the ground, unless it be
propped up, having a multitude of twiggy branches, slender, and
fine: whereupon do grow leaves lesser than those of Ledon or Cistus,
very like to that of our English white dwarf Cistus, of a full
substance, slightly haired: wherein is contained a tough juice: the
flowers are small like little Roses, or the wild Tansy, of a yellow
colour the roots be slender, woody, and something red.

Fig. 1821.White Dwarf Cistus of Germany (4)

4. This differeth not from the last described, saving that the
flowers hereof are very white, and the others yellow, wherein they
especially differ.


Fig. 1822. Dwarf Cistus of Savoy (5)
Fig. 1823. Narrow-Leaved Dwarf Cistus(6)

5. The Dwarf Cistus of Savoy hath divers tough branches, of a
reddish colour, very tough and woody, divided into divers other
branches: whereon are set small leaves, four together, by certain
spaces; the flowers grow at the top of the branches like those of
our yellow Dwarf Cistus, of a yellow colour: the root is very woody.

6. This Dwarf Cistus with narrow leaves, hath very many small
flexible branches, of a brown colour, very smooth, and ramping upon
the ground; whereon do grow small, long, narrow leaves, like those
of Thyme of Candy, from the bosom whereof come forth divers other
smaller leaves: the flowers grow on the tops of the branches, of a
bleak yellow colour: the root is likewise woody.

Fig. 1824. Thyme-Leaved Dwarf Cistus (7)
Fig. 1825. Frisian Dwarf Cistus (8)

7. To these I may fitly add two more: the first of these hath
creeping stalks, some foot or two long, blackish, and divided into
sundry smaller branches: the leaves grow thick and many together,
set by couples (though the figure do not well express so much:)
these leaves are small, of the bigness of those of Thyme, thick,
green above, and whitish underneath, and of a bitter taste: at the
ends of the branches grow two or four flowers near together, very
small, composed of five little leaves, of a kind of flesh colour: to
these succeed heads opening themselves when they come to ripeness
into five parts, and containing a very small seed: the root is hard
and woody, sending out certain fibres: also the branches here and
there put forth some fibres. This plant dried hath a pretty pleasing
smell. This grows upon the highest Austrian and Styrian Alps, and is
set forth by Clusius by the name of Chamæcistus septimus.

8. The same author also in his Curæ Posteriores gives us the history
of this, which he received with some other rare plants from John
Dortman, a famous and learned apothecary of Groeningen: This little
plant is in leaf and root almost like and near of the same bigness
with the Celtic Nard, yet the stalks are unlike, which are small,
set with a few longish leaves, and at the tops they carry five or
six pretty flowers like those of Crowfoots, consisting of six leaves
apiece, of a yellow colour, yet with some few spots of another
colour, and these set in a double ring about the middle; after these
follow heads or seed vessels with forked tops, filled with a chaffy
seed: the whole plant smells somewhat strong. It grows together with
Gramen Pernassi in rotten moorish places about a village in the
county of Drenthe. Dortman called this Hirculus Frisicus: Clusius
addes, qui Chamæcisti genus ["which is of the Dwarf Cistus genus"]

The Place.

Their several titles have touched their natural countries: they grow
in rough, dry, and sunny places, in plain fields and upon mountains.

Those of our English growing, I have found in very many places,
especially in Kent, upon the chalky banks about Gravesend,
Southfleet, and for the most part all the way from thence unto
Canterbury and Dover.

The Time.

They flower from July to the end of August.

The Names.

Travis calleth dwarf Cistus in the High Dutch tongue, Heyden Yiope:
in Latin, Gratia Dei, but there is another herb called also of the
later herbarists Gratia Dei, which is Gratiola: Valerius Cordus
nameth it Helianthemum, and Solis flos, or sun flower: of Clusius,
Chamæcistus, or Dwarf Cistus.

Pliny writeth, that Helianthe groweth in the champion country
Temiscyra in Pontus, and in the mountains of Cilicia near to the
sea: and he saith further, that the wise men of those countries, and
the kings of Persia do anoint their bodies herewith, boiled with
Lion's fat, a little saffron, and wine of dates, that they may seem
fair and beautiful; and therefore have they called it Heliocaliden,
or the beauty of the sun: Matthiolus saith, that Helianthemum is
taken of some to be Panacea Chironium, or Chiron's All-Heal: but it
is nothing likely, as we have said.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The faculties and temperature are referred to the kinds of
Cistus, for it healeth wounds, stancheth blood, and stoppeth the
spittings of blood, the bloody flux, and all other issues of blood.

B. The same boiled in wine healeth ulcers in the mouth and privy
parts, if they be washed therewith: to be brief, it joineth together
and strengtheneth: which things do plainly and evidently show, that
it is not only like to Cistus and Ledon in form, but in virtues and
faculties also, and therefore it is manifest, that it is a certain
wild kind of Cistus and Ledon.

CHAP. 7. Of Cistus Ledon, and Ladanum.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Cistus, whereof that gummy matter is
gathered, called in shops Ladanum, and Labdanum, but unproperly.

Fig. 1826. Kinds of Cistus Ledon (1-4)
The Description.

1. Cistus Ledon is a shrub, growing to the height of a man, and
sometimes higher; having many hard woody branches, covered with a
blackish bark: whereupon do grow leaves set together by couples, one
right against another like unto wings, of an inch broad, of a black
swart green on the uppersides, and whitish underneath: whereon is
gathered a certain clammy transparent or through-shining liquor, of
a very hot sweet smell, which being gathered and hardened, is that
which in shops is called Labdanum: the flowers grow at the ends of
the branches like little roses, consisting of five white leaves,
every one decked or beautified toward the bottom with pretty dark
purplish spots tending to blackness, having in the middle very many
yellow chives, such as are in the middle of the Rose: after come the
knaps or seed vessels full of most small reddish seed; the whole
plant being dried, groweth somewhat whitish, and of a pleasant
smell, the which it retaineth many years.

2. The second groweth likewise to the height of an hedge bush, the
branches are long, and very fragile or easy to break, whereon do
grow leaves greener than any other of his kind; yet underneath of a
hoary colour; growing toward winter to be somewhat reddish, of a
sour and binding taste: the flowers are like the precedent: the form
whereof the graver hath omitted, in other respects like the former.

3. The third sort of Cistus Ledon groweth up to the height of a
small hedge bush, having many twiggy branches; whereon do grow
leaves like those of the Poplar tree, sharp at the point, covered
over with that clammy dew that the others are: the flowers grow at
the tops of the branches, of a white colour like the precedent.

4. The fourth of Clusius' description groweth likewise to the height
of a shrubby bush, having many branches, flexible, hoary, and hairy:
the leaves are like the rest of his kind, but softer, more hairy, of
a swart green colour, dashed over with that dewy fatness, not only
in the spring time, but in the heat of summer likewise: the flowers
are white, with yellow thrums in the middle: the rest answereth the
last described.

Fig. 1827. Kinds of Cistus Ledon (5-8)

5. The fifth groweth up like a hedge bush with many tough branches,
whereon are set long rough leaves, hoary underneath, somwhat dashed
over with that fatty dew or humour that the rest are possessed of:
the flowers are likewise of a white colour, with certain yellow
chives in the middle: the root is woody.

6. The sixth hath divers small branches covered with a blackish
bark: the flowers are set together at the tops of the branches by
certain spaces: they are yellow, and like the former in each
respect.

7. The seventh is a low shrub growing to the height of two cubits,
having many branches covered with a bark of the colour of ashes;
whereon are confusedly set divers leaves at certain distances,
small, narrow, like those of Winter Savory, of an overworn russet
colour, very thick, fat, and glutinous: the flowers are white, &
differ not, nor the seed from the rest.

8. The eighth groweth up like a little hedge bush, having leaves
like the common female Cistus, saving that those of this plant are
sprinkled over with that clammy moisture, and the other not so: the
flowers and seed are also like. From the root of this plant cometh
such like excrescence called Limodoron, Orobranche, or Hypocistus,
as there doth from the first male Cistus, wherein it differeth from
sll the rest under the name Ledon.


Fig. 1828. Clusius' Tenth Cistus Ledon (9)
Fig. 1829. Myrtle-Leaved Cistus Ledon (10)

9. The ninth hath divers brittle stalks of an ash colour tending to
a russet; whereon are set very many leaves like those of Thyme, of
an overworn colour: the flowers are white, with certain chives in
the middle, which the graver hath omitted in the figure.

10. The tenth groweth up like a small shrub, having brittle stalks,
covered with a blackish bark, and divided into divers branches;
whereon are set upon short truncheons or fat footstalks, four or
five like those the Myrtle tree, of a strong smell: the flowers are
likewise of a white coour.


Fig. 1830. Silesian Cistus Ledon (11)
Fig. 1831. Rosemary-Leaved Cistus Ledon (12)

11,12. The twelfth kind of Cistus Ledon groweth upright with a
straight body or stock, bringeth at the top many small twigs or rods
of a cubit long, covered with a bark of the colour of ashes, which
divide themselves into other branches, of a purplish colour, beset
with long and narrow leaves, not much unlike to Rosemary, but 
longer; of a green colour above, but underneath having as it were a
long rib, made or compact of wool or down; of a sweet and pleasant
smell, and somewhat sharp in taste: on the tops of the branches grow
knops or heads, compact as it were of many scales, of an iron or
rusty colour: out of which cometh and proceedeth a certain round and
long mane, or hairy panicled tuft of flowers, with many long,
tender, green, and somewhat woolly stalks or twigs growing unto
them, of a sweet scent and smell: the flowers consist of five little
white leaves, within which are contained ten white chives with a
long style or pointel in the midst of the flower: when the flowers
be faded, there succeed long knops or heads which are five-cornered,
in shape and bigness like unto the fruit and berries of Cornus,
which being green, are bespeckled with many silver spots, but being
ripe, are of a red colour; containing within them a long yellow
seed, which is so small and slender, that it is like to the dust or
powder that falleth out of wormholes. This is the Ledum Silesiacum
of Clusius; and the Ledum Rosmarini folio of Tabernamontanus; it is
also the Rosmarinum sylvestre of Matthiolus, and Chamæpeuce of
Cordus: and I am deceived if the figure which Tabernamontanus and
our author out of him gave by the name of Cistus adulterinus were
not of this.


Fig. 1832. Matthiolus' Cistus Ledon (13)
Fig. 1833. Mountain Cistus (14)

13. Among the shrubby bushes comprehended under the title of Cistus
Ledum, Matthiolus hath set forth one, whereof to write at large were
impossible, considering the author is so brief, and of ourselves we
have not any acquaintance with the plant itself: Dioscorides to help
what may he, saith, that it is a shrub growing like unto the stock
or kindred of the Cisti: from whose leaves is gathered a clammy dew
which maketh that gummy matter that is in shops called Lapdanum: it
groweth, saith he, in hot regions (but not with us:) the
Mauritanians call the juice or clammy matter, Leden, and Laden: of
some, Ladano and Odano: in Spanish, Xara, and further saith, it
groweth in Arabia, where the bush is called Chasus: thus much for
the description. Our author here seems to make Dioscorides to
comment upon Matthiolus, which shows his learning, and how well he
was exercised in reading or understanding anything written of
plants. But of this enough; The plant here figured which Matthiolus
judges to be the true Ledon, or Cistus Ladanifera of Dioscorides,
hath large stalks and branches, whereon grow very thick leaves,
broad also and long, with the nerves running alongst the leaves: the
flower of this consists of five white leaves, and the seed is
contained in a three-cornered seed vessel.

14. The foureteenth Cistus, being one of those that do grow upon the
Alpish mountains, which Lobel setteth down to be Balsamum alpinum of
Gesner: notwithstanding I think it not amiss to insert it in this
place, having for my warrant that famous herbarist Carolus Clusius:
this plant is one of beautifullest, differing in very notable
points, and yet resembleth them in the woody branches and leaves: it
riseth up having many weak branches leaning to the ground, yet of a
woody substance, covered over with an ash coloured bark: the leaves
are broad, and very rough, of a shining green colour, and a binding
taste: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches like little
bells, hanging down their heads, divided at the lips or brims into
five divisions, of a deep red color on the outside, and dashed over
here and there with some silver spots; on the inside of a bright
shining red colour, with certain chives in the middle, and of a very
sweet smell, as is all the rest of the plant; after which come small
heads or knaps, full of seed like dust, of a very strong smell,
making the head of them to ache that smell thereto: the root is
long, hard, and very woody: oftentimes there is found upon the trunk
or naked part of the stalks certain excrescences, or outgrowings in
manner of galls, of a fungous substance, like those of Touchwood,
white within, and red without, of an astringent or binding taste.

Fig. 1834. Rosemary-Leaved Cistus Ledon (15)

15. This grows some cubit and better high, and hath long narrow
glutinous leaves like in shape to those of Rosemary, set by couples,
but not very thick: the branches whereon the flowers do grow are
slender, and the seed vessels are divided into five parts as in
other plants of this kind. This Clusius found in Spain, and sets
forth for his Ledum nonum.

The Place.

Cistus Ledon groweth in the island of Candy, as Bellonius doth
testify, in untilled places everywhere: it is also found in Cyprus,
as Pliny showeth, and likewise in many places of Spain that lie open
to the sun: moreover both the form and bigness of the leaves, and
also of the plants themselves, as well of those that bring forth
Ladanum, as the other Cistus, do vary in this wonderful manner
according to the diversity of the places and countries where they
grow: they are strangers in these Northerly parts, being very
impatient of our cold climate.
The Time.

They flower for the most part from May to the end of August: the
clammy matter which falleth upon the leaves, which is a liquid kind
of resin of a sweet smell, is gathered in the spring time as
Dioscorides saith: but as Petrus Bellonius affirmeth (being an eye-
witness of the gathering) in the midst of summer, and in the extreme
heat of the dog-days, the which in our time not without great care
and diligence, and as great labour, is gathered from the whole plant
(with certain instruments made in manner of tooth-picks, or ear-
picks, which in their tongue they call Ergastiri) and not gathered
from the beards of goats, as it is reported in the old fables of the
lying monks themselves, called Calohieros, that is to say Greekish
monks, who of very mockery have foisted that fable among others
extant in their works.

Thus saith our author, but I think it not amiss for the better
explanation of the matter here treated of, as also to show you after
what manner our author in divers places gave the testimonies of
sundry writers, and how well he understood them, here to set down in
English the words of Bellonius concerning the gathering of Ladanum,
which are these. "The Greeks (saith he) for the gathering of
Ladanum, provide a peculiar instrument which in their vulgar tongue
they term Ergastiri: This is an instrument like to a rake without
teeth, to this are fastened sundry thongs cut out of a raw and
untanned hide; they gently rub these upon the Ladanum-bearing
shrubs, that so the liquid moisture concrete about the leaves may
stick to them, which afterwards with knives they shave off these
thongs in the heat of the day. Wherefore the labour of gathering
Ladanum is exceeding great, yea intolerable, seeing they must of
necessity stay in the mountains all the day long in the greatest
heat of the dog-days: neither usually shall you find any other who
will take the pains to gather it, besides, the Calohieroi, that is
the Greek monks. It is gathered nowhere in the whole Island of Candy
in greater plenty, than at the foot of the mountain Ida at a village
called Cogualino, and at Milopotamo."

The Names.

The shrub itself is called in Greek and Latin Ledon, or Ladon: it is
a kind of Cistus or Holly Roses: the fat or clammy matter which is
gathered from the leaves, is named Ladanon and Ledanon, according to
the Greek: the apothecaries corruptly call it Lapdanum: Dioscorides
counteth that to be the best which is sweet of smell, and somewhat
green, that easily waxeth soft, is fat, without sand, and is not
easily broken, but very full of resin or gum.

The Temperature.

Ladanum, saith Galen, is hot in the later end of the first degree,
having also a little astrictive or binding quality; it is likewise
of a thin substance, and therefore it softeneth, and withal doth
moderately digest, and also concoct.

The Virtues.

A. Ladanum hath a peculiar property against the infirmities of the
mother, it keepeth hairs from falling; for it wasteth away any
setled or putrefied humour that is at their roots.

B. Dioscorides saith, that Ladanum doth bind, heat, supple, & open,
being tempered with wine, myrrh, and oil of Myrtles; it keepeth
hairs from falling, being anointed therewith; or laid on mixed with
wine, it maketh the marks or scars of wounds fair and well coloured.

C. It taketh away the pain in the ears if it be poured or dropped
therein, mixed with honeyed water, or with oil of roses.

D. A fume made thereof draweth forth the afterbirth, and taketh away
the hardness of the matrix.

E. It is with good success mixed with mollifying plasters that
mitigate pain.

F. Being drunk with wine, it stoppeth the lask, and provoketh urine.

G. There is made hereof divers sorts of pomanders, chains, and
bracelets, with other sweets mixed therewith.

CHAP. 8. Of Rosemary.


Fig. 1835. Garden Rosemary (1)
Fig. 1836. Wild Rosemary (2)
The Description.

1. Rosemary is a woody shrub, growing oftentimes to the height of
three or four cubits, especially when it is set by a wall: it
consisteth of slender brittle branches whereon do grow very many
long leaves, narrow, somewhat hard, of a quick spicy taste, whitish
underneath, and of a full green colour above, or in the upper side,
with a pleasant sweet strong smell; among which come forth little
flowers of a whitish blue colour: the seed is blackish: the roots
are tough and woody.

2. The wild Rosemary Clusius hath referred unto the kinds of Cistus
Ledon; we have as a poor kinsman thereof inserted it in the next
place, in kindred or neighbourhood at the least. This wild Rosemary
is a small woody shrub, growing seldom above a foot high, having
hard branches of a reddish colour, dividing themselves into other
smaller branches of a whitish color: whereon are placed without
order divers long leaves, green above, and hoary underneath, not
unlike to those of the dwarf Willow, or the common Rosemary, of a
dry and astringent taste, of little smell or none at all: the
flowers stand on the tops of the branches, set upon bare or naked
footstalks, consisting of five small leaves of a reddish colour,
somewhat shining; after which appear little knops full of small
seed: the root is tough and woody.

Fig. 1837. Poets' Rosemary (3)

3. This plant grows up like an hedge shrub of a woody substance, to
the height of two or three cubits; having many twiggy branches of a
green colour: whereupon do grow narrow leaves like unto Linaria or
Toad-flax, of a bitter taste; among which come forth small mossy
flowers, of a greenish yellow colour like those of the Cornel tree,
and of the smell of Rosemary: which hath moved me to place it with
the Rosemaries as a kind thereof, not finding any other plant so
near unto it in kind and neighbourhood: after the flowers be past,
there succeed fruit like those of the Myrtle tree, green at the
first, and of a shining red colour when they be ripe, like Coral, or
the berries of Asparagus, soft and sweet in taste, leaning a certain
acrimony or sharp taste in the end: the stone within is hard as is
the nut, wherein is contained a small white kernel, sweet in taste:
the root is of a woody substance: it flowereth in the summer; the
fruit is ripe in the end of October: the people of Granada,
Montpellier, and of the kingdom of Valencia, do use it in their
presses and wardrobes, whereupon they call it Guardalobo. This in
Clusius his time when he lived about Montpellier was called Osyris;
but afterwards they called it Casia, thinking it that mentioned by
the poet Virgil; the which it cannot be, for it hath no sweet smell.
Pena and Lobel judge it to be the Casia of Theophrastus, wherewith
also it doth not well agree.

The Place.

Rosemary groweth in France, Spain, and in other hot countries, in
woods, and in untilled places: there is such plenty thereof in
Languedoc, that the inhabitants burn scarce any other fuel: they
make hedges of it in the gardens of Italy and England, being a great
ornament unto the same: it groweth neither in the fields nor gardens
of the Eastern cold countries; but is carefully and curiously kept
in pots, set into the stoves and cellars, against the injuries of
their cold Winters.

Wild Rosemary groweth in Lancashire in divers places, especially in
a field called Little Reed, amongst the Whortleberries, near unto a
small village called Maudsley; there found by a learned gentleman
often remembered in our history (and that worthily) Mr. Thomas
Hesketh.

The Time.

Rosemary flowereth twice a year, in the spring, and after in August.
The wild Rosemary flowereth in June and July.

The Names.

Rosemary is called in Latin, Rosmarinus coronaria: it is surnamed
coronaria, for difference sake between it and the other Libanotides,
which are reckoned for kinds of Rosemary, and also because women
have been accustomed to make crowns and garlands thereof: in
Italian, Rosmarino coronario: in Spanish, Romero: in French and
Dutch Romarin.

Wild Rosemary is called Rosmarinus sylvestris: of Cordus,
Chamæpeuce.

The Temperature.

Rosemary is hot and dry in the second degree, and also of an
astringent or binding quality, as being compounded of divers parts,
and taking more of the mixture of the earthy substance.

The Virtues.

A. Rosemary is given against all fluxes of blood; it is also good,
especially the flowers thereof, for all infirmities of the head and
brain, proceeding of a cold and moist cause; for they dry the brain,
quicken the senses and memory, and strengthen the sinewy parts.

B. Serapio witnesseth, that Rosemary is a remedy against the
stuffing of the head, that cometh through coldness of the brain, if
a garland thereof be put about the head, whereof Abin Mesue giveth
testimony.

C. Dioscorides teacheth that it cureth him that hath the yellow
jaundice, if it it be boiled in water and drunk before exercise, &
that after the taking thereof the patient must bathe himself & drink
wine

D. The distilled water of the flowers of Rosemary being drunk at
morning and evening first and last, taketh away the stench of the
mouth and breath, and maketh it very sweet, if there be added
thereto, to steep or infuse for certain days, a few cloves, mace,
cinnamon, and a little aniseed.

E. The Arabians and other physicians succeeding, do write, that
Rosemary comforteth the brain, the memory, the inward senses, and
restoreth speech unto them that are possessed with the dumb palsy,
especially the conserve made of the flowers and sugar, or any other
way confected with sugar, being taken every day fasting.

F. The Arabians, as Serapio witnesseth, give these properties to
Rosemary: it heateth, say they, is of subtle parts, is good for the
cold rheum which falleth from the brain; driveth away windiness,
provoketh urine, and openeth the stoppings of the liver and milt.

G. Tragus writeth, that Rosemary is spice in the German kitchens,
and other cold countries. Further, he saith, that the wine boiled
with Rosemary, and taken of women troubled with the mother, or the
whites, helpeth them, the rather if they fast three or four hours
after.

H. The flowers made up into plates with sugar after the manner of
sugar roset and eaten, comfort the heart, and make it merry, quicken
the spirits, and make them more lively.

I. The oil of Rosemary chemically drawn, comforteth the cold, weak
and feeble brain in most wonderful manor.

K. The people of Thuringia do use the wild Rosemary to provoke the
desired sickness.

L. Those of Marchia use to put it into their drink the sooner to
make their clients drunk, and also do put it into chests and presses
among clothes, to preserve them from moths or other vermin.

[The virtues in the last two places properly belong to the
Rosmarinum sylvestre of Matthiolus, which is the Chamæpeuce of
Cordus, and is described in the 11th place of the foregoing chapter,
by the name of Cistus ledum silesiacum.]

CHAP. 9. Of Upright Woodbine.


Fig. 1838. Savoy Honeysuckle (1)
Fig. 1839. German Honeysuckle (2)

The Description.

1. This strange kind of Honeysuckle, found in the woods of Savoy,
represents unto us that shrub or hedge-bush called Cornus fmina,
the Dog-berry tree, or Prick-timber tree, having leaves and branches
like the common Woodbine, saving that this doth not clamber or climb
as the others do, but contrariwise groweth upright, without leaning
to one side or other, like a small tree or hedge-bush: the flowers
grow upon the tender sprays or twiggy branches, by couples, not
unlike in shape and colour to the common Woodbine, but altogether
lesser, and of a white colour, having within the same many hairy
chives like the other of his kind: after which come red berries
joined together by couples: the root is tough and woody.

2. The stalks of the second be oftentimes of a mean thickness, the
woody substance somewhat whitish and soft: the branches be round,
and covered with a whitish bark; notwithstanding in the beginning
when the sprays be young they are somewhat reddish. The leaves be
long, like those of the common Honeysuckle, soft, and of a white
green: on the lower side they be whiter, and a little hairy: the
flowers be lesser than any of the Woodbines, but yet of the same
fashion, and of a whitish colour, joined together by couples upon
several slender footstalks, like little wild Cherries, of a red
colour, the one lesser oftentimes than the other.

Fig. 1840. Blueberry Woodbine (3)
Fig. 1841. Cherry Woodbine (4)

3. This strange kind of Woodbine, which Carolus Clusius hath set
forth in his Pannonic Observations, riseth up oftentimes to the
height of a man, even as the former doth; which divides itself into
many branches, covered with a rough black bark; that choppeth and
gapeth in sundry clefts as the bark of the Oak. The tender branches
are of a whitish green colour, covered with a woolly hairiness, of
an overworn colour, whereupon do grow leaves set by couples one
against the other, like unto the common Woodbine, of a drying bitter
taste: the flowers grow by couples likewise, of a whitish colour.
The fruit succeedeth, growing like little cherries, each one on his
own footstalk, of a bright and shining blue colour; which being
bruised, do dye the hands of a reddish colour, and they are of a
sharp winy taste; and contain in them many small flat seeds. The
root is woody, dispersing itself far abroad.

4. This kind of upright Woodbine groweth up likewise to the height
of a man, and oftentimes more high, like to the last described, but
altogether greater. The berries hereof are very black, wherein
especially is the difference. The leaves of this are as large as Bay
leaves, sharp pointed, green above, and whitish underneath, but not
hairy, nor snipped about the edges: the flowers grow by couples, of
a whitish purple, or wholly purple: to these pairs of flowers there
commonly succeeds but one berry, larger than any of the former, of
the bigness of a little cherry, and of the same colour, having two
marks upon the top thereof, where the flowers stood.

Fig. 1842. The flowers of (3) and (4)
Fig. 1843. Dwarf Honeysuckle (5)

5. To the kinds of Woodbines this plant may likewise be referred,
whose picture with this description was sent unto Clusius long since
by that learned doctor in physic Thomas Penny (of our London college
of famous memory:) it riseth up with a stalk of a foot high;
whereupon are set by couples fair broad leaves one right against
another, ribbed with certain nerves like those of Plantain, sharp
pointed, and somewhat hollowed in the middle like Spoonwort: from
the bosom of which leaves come forth small flowers, not seen or
described by the author: after which cometh forth a cluster of red
berries, thrust hard together as those of Aaron or Priest's Pint.
The root is tough and very slender, creeping far abroad under the
upper crust of the earth, whereby it occupieth much ground.

The Place.

These plants are strangers in England: they grow in the woods and
mountains of Switzerland, Germany, Savoy, and other those parts
tending to the East, East North-East, and East and by South.

I have a plant of the first kind in my garden: the rest as yet I
have not seen, and therefore cannot write so liberally thereof as I
could wish.

The dwarf Honysuckle grows in the maritime parts of Norway and
Sweden, & the countries thereabout.

The Time.

They flower for the most part when the others do, that is to say in
May and June, and their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

Upright Woodbine or Honeysuckle is called Periclymenum stans, and
Periclymenum rectum, or upright Woodbine: of Dodonæus, Xylosteum: in
High Dutch, Honds Kirsen, that is to say, Canum Cerasa, or Dog
Cherries. The English names are expressed in their several titles.
It hath been called Chamæcerasus, but not truly.
The Temperature and Virtues.

Touching the temperature and virtues of these upright Woodbines, we
have no experience at all ourselves, neither have we learned
anything of others.

CHAP. 10. Of Senna.

Fig. 1844. Senna

The Description

Senna bringeth forth stalks a cubit high, set with divers branches:
the leaves are long, winged, consisting of many small leaves like
those of Liquorice, or of bastard Senna: the flowers come forth of
the bottom of the wings, of colour yellow, standing upon slender
footstalks; from which after the flowers be gone hang forked cods,
the same bowing inward like a half-moon, plain and flat, in which
are contained seeds like to the seeds or kernels of grapes, of a
blackish colour. The root is slender, long, and unprofitable, which
perisheth when the leaves are gathered for medicine, and the seeds
be ripe, and must be sown again the next year, even as we do corn.

There is another kind of Senna growing in Italy, like the other in
each respect, saving that it is greater, and hath not that force in
purging that the other hath.

The Place and time.

This is planted in Syria and Egypt, also in Italy, in Provençe in
France, in Languedoc. It hardly groweth in high and low Germany,
neither in England: it prospereth in hot regions, and cannot away
with cold; for that cause it is in Italy sown in May, and continueth
no longer than autumn: the best is brought from Alexandria and
Egypt. The Arabians were the first that found it out.

The Names.

The Persians call it Abalzemer, as Mesue his copy teacheth: the
apothecaries Sena, by which name it was known to Actuarius the
Grecian, and to the later Latins: it is called in English, Senna.

The Temperature.

Senna is of a mean temperature, neither hot nor cold, yet inclining
to heat, and dry almost in the third degree: it is of a purging
faculty, and that by the stool, in such sort as it is not much
troublesome to man's nature, having withal a certain binding quaity,
which it leaveth after the purging.

The Virtues.

A. It voideth forth phlegmatic and choleric humours, also gross and
melancholic, if it be helped with something tending to that end.

B. It is a singular purging medicine in many diseases, fit for all
ages and kinds.

C. It purgeth without violence or hurt, especially if it be tempered
with Anise seed or other like sweet smelling things added, or with
gentle purgers or lenitive medicines. It may be given in powder, but
commonly the infusion thereof is used.

D. The quantity of the powder is a dram weight, and in the infusion,
four, five, or more. It may be mixed in any liquor.

E. It is in the decoction or in the infusion tempered with cold
things in burning agues and other hot diseases: in cold and long
infirmities it is boiled with hot opening simples and such like; or
else it is steeped in wine, in which manner, as familiar to man's
nature, it draweth forth gently by the stool, almost without any
kind of pain, crude and raw humours.

F. Most of the Arabians commend the cods, but our physicians the
leaves rather; for unless the cods be full ripe they engender wind;
and cause gripings in the belly. For they are oftentimes gathered
before they be ripe, and otherwise easily fall away being shaken
down by the wind, by reason of their weak and slender stalks.

G. Some also think that Senna is hurtful to the stomach, and
weakeneth the same, for which cause they say that Ginger or some
sweet kind of spice is to be added, whereby the stomach may be
strengthened. Likewise Mesue noteth that it is slow in operation,
and therefore sal-gem is to be mixed with it. Moreover, Senna
purgeth not so speedily as stronger medicines do.

H. Notwithstanding it may be helped not only by sal-gem, but also by
other purging things mixed therewith, that is to say with simple
medicines, as Rhubarb, Agaric, and others; and with compounds, as
that which is called Catholicon, or the electuary Diaphanicon, or
that which is made of the juice of roses, or some other, according
as the condition or quality of the disease and of the sick man
requireth.

I. The leaves of Senna are a familiar purger to all people, but they
are windy, and do bind the body afterwards, very much disquieting
the stomach with rumbling and belching: for the avoiding of which
inconvenience there must be added cinnamon, ginger, aniseed, and
fennel seed, raisins of the sun, and such like that do break wind,
which will the better help his purging quality.

K. Senna doth better purge when it is infused or steeped, than when
it is boiled: for doubtless the more it is boiled the less it
purgeth, and the more windy it becometh.

L. Take Borage, Bugloss, Balm, Fumitory, of each three drams, Senna
of Alexandria very well prepared and pounded, two ounces, strew the
powder upon the herbs and distil them: the water that cometh thereof
reserve to your use to purge those that live delicately, being
minisetred in white wine, with sugar, in condited confections, and
such dainty ways, wherein delicate and fine people do greatly
delight: you may also (as was said before) add hereunto according to
the malady, divers purgers, as Agaric, Myrobalans, &c.

M. The powder of Senna after it is well prepared two ounces, of the
powder of the root of Mechoacan four drams, powder of Ginger, Anise
seeds, of each a little, a spoonful of Anise seeds, but a very
little Ginger, and a modicum or small quantity of sal-gem: this hath
been proved a very fit and familiar medicine for all ages and sexes.
The patient may take one spoonful or two thereof fasting, either in
pottage, some supping in drink, or white wine. This is right
profitable to draw both phlegm and melancholy from the breast and
other parts.

N. The leaves of Senna and Camomile are put in baths to wash the
head.

O. Senna opens the inward parts of the body which are stopped, and
is profitable against all griefs of the principal members of the
body.

P. Take Senna prepared according to art one ounce, ginger half a
quarter of an ounce, twelve cloves, fennel seed two drams, or
instead thereof cinnamon and tartar, of each half a dram, powder all
these; which done, take thereof in white wine one dram before
supper, which doth marvellously purge the head.

Q. Handle Senna in manner above specified, then take half an ounce
thereof, which done, add thereto sixty raisins of the sun with the
stones picked out, one spoonful of Anise seeds brayed, boil these in
a quart of ale till one half be wasted, and while it is boiling put
in your Senna: let it stand so till the morning, then strain it, and
put in a little ginger: then take the one half of this potion and
put thereunto two spoonfuls of syrup of roses: drink this together,
I mean the one half of the medicine at one time, and if the patient
canot abide the next day to receive the other half, then let it be
deferred until the third day after.

R. Senna and Fumitory (as Rasis affirmeth) do purge adust humours,
and are excellent good against scabs, itch, and the ill affection of
the body.

S. If Senna be infused in whey, and then boiled a little, it
becometh good physic against melancholy, cleanseth the brain and
purgeth it, as also the heart, liver, milt, and lungs, causeth a man
to look young, engendereth mirth, and taketh away sorrow: it
cleareth the sight, strengtheneth hearing, and is very good against
old fevers and diseases arising of melancholy.

CHAP. 11. Of Bastard Senna.


Fig. 1845. Bastard Senna (1)
Fig. 1846. Scorpion Senna (2)

The Description.

1. Colutea and Senna be so near the one unto the other in shape and
show, that the unskilful herbarists have deemed Colutea to be the
right Senna. This bastard Senna is a shrubby plant growing to the
form of a hedge bush or shrubby tree: his branches are straight,
brittle, and woody; which being carelesly broken off, and as
negligently pricked or stuck in the ground, will take root and
prosper at what time of the year soever it be done; but slipped or
cut, or planted in any curious sort whatsoever, among an hundred one
will scarcely grow: these boughs or branches are beset with leaves
like Sena or Securidaca, not much unlike Liquorice: among which come
forth fair broom-like yellow flowers, which turn into small cods
like the sound of a fish or a little bladder, which will make a
crack being broken between the fingers: wherein are contained many
black flat seeds of the bigness of tares, growing upon a small rib
or sinew within the cod: the root is hard, and of a woody substance.

2. Bastard Senna with Scorpion Cods is a small woody shrub or bush,
having leaves, branches, and flowers like unto the former bastard
Senna, but less in each respect: when his small yellow flowers are
fallen there succeed little long crooked cods like the long cods or
husks of Matthiolus his Scorpioides, whereof it took his name: the
root is like the root of the Box tree, or rather resembling the
roots of Dulcamara or Bitter-Sweet, growing naturally in the shadowy
woods of Valena in Narbonne; whereof I have a small plant in my
garden, which may be called Scorpion Senna.


Fig. 1847. Dwarf Bastard Senna (3)
Fig. 1848. Mountain Bastard Senna (4)

3. The low or dwarf Colutea of Clusius' description, hath a thick
woody root covered with a yellowish bark, with many fibres annexed
thereto, which bringeth forth yearly new shoots whereby it greatly
increaseth, of a cubit and a half high, smooth, and of a green
colour; whereon do grow leaves composed of six or seven leaves and
sometimes nine, set upon a middle rib like those of the common kind,
of a styptic taste, with some sharpness or biting: the flowers grow
upon slender footstalks, long and naked like those of the Pea, and
of a yellow colour, of little or no smell at all, and yet that
little nothing pleasant: after which come forth long cods, wherein
is contained small seed like those of the Strangle Tare.

4. This Mountain Bastard Senna hath stalks, leaves, and roots like
the last described. The flowers grow on the tops of the branches in
manner of a crown; whereupon some have called it Coronilla: in shape
like those of the Pea, and of a yellow colour: the cods as yet we
have not seen, and therefore not expressed in the figure.

Fig. 1849. Smallest Bastard Senna (5)

5. This small bastard Senna groweth like a small shrub creeping upon
the ground, half a cubit high, bringing forth many twiggy branches,
in manner of those of the Spanish Broom; whereupon do grow leaves
like those of Lentils or the Strangle Tare, with many small leaves
set upon a middle rib, somewhat fat or full of juice, of the colour
of the leaves of Rue or Herb-Grace, of an astringent and unpleasant
taste: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches, of a yellow
colour, in shape like those of the smallest Broom: after which come
little crooked cods like the claws or toes of a bird, wherein is
contained seed somewhat long, black, and of an unsavoury taste: the
root is long, hard, tough, and of a woody substance.

6. There is also found another sort hereof, not much differing from
the former, saving that this plant is greater in each respect,
wherein especially consisteth the difference.

The Place.

Colutea or bastard Senna groweth in divers gardens, and cometh up of
seed; it quickly cometh to perfection, insomuch that if a stick
thereof be broken off and thrust into the ground, it quickly taketh
root, yea although it be done in the middle of summer, or at any
other time, even as the sticks of willow and elder, as myself have
often proved; which bring forth flowers and fruit the next year
after.

The second with Scorpion cods groweth likewise in my garden: the
last doth grow in divers barren chalky grounds of Kent towards
Sittingbourne, Canterbury, and about Southfleet; I have not seen
them elsewhere: the rest are strangers in England.
The Time.

They flower from May till summer be well spent, in the mean season
the cods bring forth ripe seed.

The Names.

This shrub is called in Latin, as Gaza expoundeth it, Coloutea or
Colutea: in High Dutch, Welch Linsen: in French, Baguenaudier: they
are deceived that think it to be Senna, or any kind thereof,
although we have followed others in giving it to name Bastard Senna,
which name is very unproper to it: in Low Dutch it is called Sene
Boom: and we may use the same name Senna tree, in English.

This Colutea, or Bastard Senna, doth differ from that plant Colytea,
of which Theophrastus writeth in his third book. The fifth is the
Polygala valentina of Clusius.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. Theophrastus, neither any other hath made mention of the
temperature or faculties in working of these plants, more than that
they are good to fatten cattle, especially sheep.

CHAP. 12. Of Liquorice.


Fig. 1850. Hedgehog Liquorice (1)
Fig. 1851. Common Liquorice (2)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Liquorice hath many woody branches, rising up
to the height of two or three cubits, beset with leaves of an
overworn green colour, consisting of many small leaves set upon a
middle rib, like the leaves of Colutea, or the Mastic tree, somewhat
glutinous in handling: among which come small knops growing upon
short stems betwixt the leaves and the branches, clustering
together, and making a round form and shape: out of which grow small
blue flowers, of the colour of an English Hyacinth; after which
succeed round, rough, prickly heads, consisting of divers rough or
leafy husks closely and thick compact together; in which is
contained a flat seed: the root is straight, yellow within, and
brown without: of a sweet and pleasant taste.

2. The common and usual Liquorice hath stalks and leaves very like
the former, saving that his leaves are greener and greater, and the
flowers of a light shining blue colour: but the flowers of this are
succeeded by longish cods that grow not so thick clustering together
in round heads as the former, but spike fashion, or rather like the
wild Vetch called Onobrychus, or Galega. The cods are small and flat
like unto the Tare: the roots are of a brownish colour without, and
yellow within like Box, and sweeter in taste than the former.

The Place

These plants do grow in sundry places of Germany wild, and in France
and Spain, but they are planted in gardens in England, whereof I
have plenty in my garden: the poor people of the North parts of
England do manure it with great diligence, whereby they obtain great
plenty thereof, replanting the same once in three or four years.

The Time.

Liquorice flowereth in July, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

The first is called in Greek Glykyrriza: in Latin, Dulcis radix, or
sweet root: this Liquorice is not known either to the apothecaries
or to the vulgar people: we call it in English, Dioscorides his
Liquorice.

It is most evident that the other is Glycyrrhiza, or Liquorice: the
apothecaries call it by a corrupt word, Liquiritia: the Italians,
Regalitia: the Spaniards, Regeliza and Regalitia: in High Dutch,
Suszhotz, Suszwurtzel: in French, Rigolisse, Raigalisse, and
Reglisse: in Low Dutch, Callissehout, Suethout: in English, common
Liquorice: Pliny calleth it Scythica herba: it is named Scythice of
the country Scythia, where it groweth.
The Temperature.

The nature of Dioscorides his Liquorice, as Galen saith, is familiar
to the temperature of our bodies, and seeing it hath a certain
binding quality adjoined, the temperature thereof so much as is hot
and binding, is specially of a warm quality, coming nearest of all
to a mean temperature; besides, for that it is also sweet, it is
likewise meanly moist.

For as much as the root of the common Liquorice is sweet, it is also
temperately hot and moist; notwithstanding the bark thereof is
something bitter and hot, but this must be scraped away; the fresh
root when it is full of juice doth moisten more than the dry.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Liquorice is good against the rough harshness of the
throat and breast; it openeth the pipes of the lungs when they be
stuffed or stopped, and ripeneth the cough, and bringeth forth
phlegm.

B. The juice of Liquorice made according to art, and hardened into a
lump, which is called Succus liquiritiæ, serveth well for the
purposes aforesaid, being holden under the tongue, and these
suffered to melt.

C. Moreover, with the juice of Liquorice, Ginger, and other spices,
there is made a certain bread or cakes, called gingerbread, which is
very good against the cough, and all the infirmities of the lungs
and breast: which is cast into moulds, some of one fashion, and some
of another.

D. The juice of Liquorice is profitable against the heat of the
stomach, and of the mouth.

E. The same is drunk with wine of raisins against the infirmities of
the liver and chest, scabs or sores of the bladder, and diseases of
the kidneys.

F. Being melted under the tongue it quencheth thirst: it is good for
green wounds being laid thereupon, and for the stomach if it be
chewed.

G. The decoction of the fresh roots serveth for the same purposes.

H. But the dried root most finely powdered is a singular remedy for
a pin and a web in the eye, if it be strewed thereupon.

I. Dioscorides and Pliny also report, that Liquorice is good for the
stomach and ulcers of the mouth, being cast upon them.

K. It is good against hoarseness, difficulty of breathing,
inflammation of the lungs, the pleurisy, spitting of blood or 
matter, consumption or rottennes of the lungs, all infirmities and
ruggedness of the chest.

L. It takes away inflammations, mitigateth and tempereth the
sharpness and saltness of humours, concocteth raw humours, and
procureth easy spitting.

The decoction is good for the kidneys and bladder that are
exulcerated.

M. It cureth the strangury, and generally all infirmities that
proceed of sharp, salt, and biting humours.

N. These things concerning Liquorice hath also Theophrastus: viz.
that with this and with cheese made of mares' milk the Scythians
were reported to be able to live eleven or twelve days.

O. The Scythian root is good for shortness of breath, for a dry
cough, and generally for all infirmities of the chest.

P. Moreover, with honey it healeth ulcers, it also quencheth thirst
if it be held in the mouth: for which cause they say that the
Scythians do live eleven or twelve days with it and Hippace, which
is cheese made of mares' milk, as Hippocrates witnesseth.

Q. Pliny in his twenty-fifth book, chap. 8, hath thought otherwise
than truth, that Hippace is an herb so called.

CHAP. 13. Of Milk Trefoil or Shrub Trefoil.

The Kinds.

There be divers kinds or sorts of the shrubby Trefoil, the which
might very well have passed among the three-leaved Grasses, had it
not been for my promise in the proem of our first part, that in the
last book of our History the shrubby or woody plants should be set
forth, every one as near as might be in kindred and neighbourhood.

Fig. 1852. Kinds of Shrub Trefoil (1,2,4,5)

The Desccrption.

1. The first kind of Cytisus or shrubby Trefoil grows to the form of
a small shrub or woody bush two or three cubits high, branching into
sundry small boughs or arms, set full of leaves like the small
Trefoil, dark green, and not hairy, three growing always together:
among these come forth small yellow flowers like them of French
Broom, which do turn into long and flat cods, containing small seed
of a blackish colour.

2. The second kind of Cytisus is likewise a small shrub, in shape
after the manner of the former, but that the whole plant is
altogether smaller, and the leaves rounder, set together by couples,
and the small cods hairy at the ends, which sets forth the
difference. The leaves of this are almost round, and grow three
together close to the stalk: they are smooth, of a fresh green, and
the middlemost leaf of the three is the largest, and ends in a sharp
point: the flowers are of the bigness and colour of the Trifolium
corniculatum: it flowers in May.

3. The root of this third kind is single, from whence spring up many
smooth brittle stalks divided into many wings and branches, whereon
grow green leaves smaller than those of Meadow Trefoil: the flowers
are yellow, lesser than Broom flowers, otherwise very like, growing
about the tops of the twiggy branches, divided into spoky tufts:
which being faded, there follow thin long narrow cods, lesser than
those of the Broom, wherein is contained small black seed. The root
is long, deeply growing into the ground, and sometimes waxeth
crooked in the earth. [This also hath smooth green leaves, and
differs little (if anything at all) from the first described,
wherefore I thought it needless to give a figure. Our author called
it Cytisus siliquosus, Codded shrub Trefoil, because one of the
branches was fairly in the figure expressed with cods; I know no
other reason, for all the Cytisi are codded as well as this.]

4. The fourth kind of Cytisus hath a great number of small branches
and stalks like the former, but it is a lower plant, and more
woolly; whose stalks and branches grow not very high, but yet very
plentifully spread about the sides of the plant: the leaves are
greater than the former, but lesser than those of Meadow Trefoil:
the flowers grow close together, as though they were bound up or
compact into one head or spoky tuft somewhat greater than the
former: the cods are also greater, and more hairy: the root groweth
very deep into the ground, whereunto are adjoined a few fibres: it
falleth out to be more hairy or woolly in one place than in another,
and the more hairy and woolly that it is, the whiter it waxeth; for
the roughness bringeth it a certain whitish colour. The branches of
this oft-times lie along upon the ground: the leaves are smooth and
green above, and hoary underneath: the flowers yellow, which fading
sometimes become orange coloured: the cods are round, and seeds
brownish.

5. The fifth kind of Cytisus groweth to the height of a cubit or
more, having many slender twiggy branches like Broom, streaked and
very hard: whereupon grow leaves very like Fenugreek, yet all hoary,
three together: from the bosom of which, or between the leaves and
the stalks, come forth yellow flowers very like Broom, Spartum, or
Pea, but smaller: the cods be like unto Broom cods, of an ash
colour, but slenderer, rougher, and flatter; in the several cells or
divisions whereof are contained bright shining seeds like the black
seeds of Broom: all the whole plant is hoary like Rhamnus or
Halymus.


Fig. 1853. Winged Shrub Trefoil (6)
Fig. 1854. Horned Shrub Trefoil (7)

6. The sixth kind of Cytisus or bush Trefoil groweth to the height
of a tall man, with long stalks covered over with a blackish bark,
and a few boughs or branches, beset or garnished with leaves like
the common Trefoil, but smaller, growing also three together,
whereof the middlemost of the three leaves is twice as long as the
two side leaves; the upper side whereof is green, and the lower side
somewhat reddish and hairy: the flowers grow along the stalks almost
from the bottom to the top, of a golden yellow colour, fashioned
like the Broom flower, but greater than any of the rest of his kind,
and of a reasonable good savour: the seed hath the pulsy taste of
Cicer.

7. The seventh kind of Cytisus hath many tough and hairy branches
rising from a woody root, four or five cubits high, which are
divided into sundry smaller branches beset with leaves like the
Meadow Trefoils; among which come forth yellow flowers like Broom,
that turn into crooked flat cods like a sickle, wherein is contained
the seed tasting like Cicer or Legumen. The whole plant is hoary
like Rhamnus, and being broken or bruised smelleth like Rocket.


Fig. 1855. 8th Shrub Trefoil (8)
Fig. 1856. Bastard Shrub Trefoil (9)

8. This eighth kind of Cytisus, which Pena setteth forth, is
doubtless another kind of Cytisus resembling the former in leaves,
flowers, and cods, saving that the small leaves (which are always
three together) are a little snipped about the edges: the whole
plant is slenderer, softer, and greener, rather resembling an herb
than a shrub: the root is small and single.

9. This bastard or misbegotten shrub Trefoil, or bastard Cytisus,
groweth up like a shrub, but not of a woody substance, having tender
stalks smooth and plain: whereon do grow hairy leaves like the
other, divers set upon one footstalk, contrary to all the rest: the
flowers grow along the items like those of the Stock Gillyflowers,
of a yellow colour: the root is tough and woody.

The Place.

These plants were first brought into Italy and Greece from one of
the Isles of Cyclades, called Cyntho or Cynthusa. [Now called Delos
 Ed.] and since found in many places of France, as about
Montpellier, Veganium, and other places: they are strangers in
England, though they grow very plentifully in Scotland, as it is 
reported; whereof I have two sorts in my garden, that is to say,
Cytisus Maranthæ, or the horned Cytisus, and likewise one of the
smallest, that is to say, the third in number. The second groweth in
the garden of Mr. John Tradescant.

The Time.

These plants flower for the most part in May, June, and July, and
some after: the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

The Grecians and Latins do call this shrub Kyntusos, of Cynthusa an
island before mentioned, in which place they are in great estimation
for that they do so wonderfully feed cattle, and increase milk in
their dugs, nourish sheep and goats, which bring young ones good for
store and increase. One author doth call these plants in Latin
Fæcundum fonum, fertile or fruitful hay, for that the kinds hereof
cause milk to increase, maketh good blood and juice, augmenteth
strength, and mutiplieth the natural seed of generation; they may be
called in English Milk Trefoil, of the store of milk which they
increase.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Milk Trefoil do cool, as Dioscorides writeth; they
assuage swellings in the beginning, if they be stamped and laid unto
them with bread: the decoction thereof drunk provoketh urine: Galen
teacheth, that the leaves of Milk Trefoil have a digesting or
wasting quality mixed with a watery and temperate faculty, as have
those of the Mallow.

The Virtues.

A. Women, saith Columella, if they want milk must steep dry Milk
Trefoil in fair water, and when it is throughly soaked, they must
the next day mix a quart or thereabouts of the same pressed or
strained forth with a little wine, and so let it be given unto them
to drink, and by that means they themselves shall receive strength,
and their children comfort by abundance of milk.

B. Hippocrates reckoneth up Milk Trefoil among those things that
increase milk, in his book Of the Nature of Women, and of Women's
Diseases.

C. Also Aristomachus of Athens in Pliny, commandeth to give with
wine the dry plant, and the same likewise boiled in water, to nurses
to drink when their milk is gone.

D. Democritus and Aristomachus do promise that you shall want no
bees, if you have Milk Trefoil for them to feed on: for all writers
with one consent do conclude (as Galen saith) that bees do gather of
the flowers of Milk Trefoil very great store of honey.

E. Columella teacheth, that Milk Trefoil is notable good for hens,
bees, goats, kine, and all kind of cattle, which quickly grow fat by
eating thereof, and that it yieldeth very great store of milk.

F. The people of Btica and Valencia (where there is great store of
Cytisus) do use it very much for the silkworms to hang their web
upon after they have been well fed with the leaves of Mulberries.

G. Milk Trefoil is likewise a marvellous remedy against the
sciatica, and all other kinds of gouts.

CHAP. 14. Of Bastard Milk Trefoils.

Fig. 1857. Bastard Milk Trefoils (1-4)

The Description.

This riseth up with little stalks from the root, brittle, very many
in number, parted into wings and branches, about which grow many
leaves lesser than those of the Meadow Trefoil, of colour green: the
flowers about the tops of the twigs be orderly placed in manner like
ears, of colour yellow, lesser than those of broom, otherwise all
alike: in their places grow up slender cods long, narrow, and lesser
than the cods of Broom: rough also and hairy; in which do lie little
blackish seeds: the root is long, and groweth deep and oftentimes
creepeth aslope.

2. The second kind of bastard Milk Trefoil is like unto the former
in plentiful stalks and twigs, but that it is lower and more downy,
neither do the stalks thereof stand upright, but rather incline to
the one side: the leaves also are somewhat greater, but yet lesser
than those of the Meadow Trefoil, wholly white, and they never open
themselves out, but keep always folded with the middle rib standing
out: the flowers likewise be closelier joined together, and
compacted as it were into a little head, and be also something
greater: the cods in like manner are a little bigger and hairy, and
of a blackish purple or murrey: the root groweth deep in the ground,
being divided into a few sprigs; it oftentimes happeneth to grow in
one place more hairy or downy than in another: the more hairy and
downy it is, the more white and hoary it is; for the hairiness doth
also bring with it a certain whitish colour.

3. The third kind of bastard Milk Trefoil bringeth forth a company
of young shoots that are somewhat writhed and crooked, long leaves
of a fair green colour: the flowers are closed together, long,
white, or else galbineous, sweetly smelling, that is to say, having
the smell of honey: the shrub itself is always green both summer and
winter. This grows four foot or better high, with slender hoary
branches set with leaves three standing together upon a very short
stalk, and the middle leaf is as long again as the other two; they
are very white and hoary, and the yellow flowers grow out of the
bosoms of the leaves all alongst the

4. The fourth shrub is likewise one of the wild kind, though in face
and nature like the manured Cytisus It groweth up like a small shrub
or hedge bush to the height of two or three yards, on whose branches
do grow three rough or hairy leaves, set upon a slender footstalk,
of a grass green colour above, with a reddish hairiness below: the
flowers grow alongst the stalks from the middle to the top, of a
bright shining yellow colour: the root is likewise woody.

The Place.

These kinds of Milk Trefoils are found in Moravia, so called in our
age, which in times past was named Marcomannorum provincia, and in
the upper Pannonia, otherwise called Austria, near to highways, and
in the borders of fields; for they seem after a sort to joy in the
shade. They grow (according to Clusius) in sundry parts of Spain.

The Time.

They flower specially in June and July.

The Names.

It is evident enough that they are bastard kinds of Milk Trefoils,
and therefore they may be called and plainly termed Pseudocytisi, or
bastard Milk Trefoils, or Cytisi sylvestres, that is to say, wild
Milk Trefoils.

The Temperature and Virtues.

What temperature these shrubs are of, or what virtues they have we
know not, neither have we as yet found out by our own experience
anything, and therefore they may be referred to the other Milk
Trefoils.

CHAP. 15. Of the Venomous Tree Trefoil.


Fig. 1858. Montpellier Venomous Trefoil (1)
Fig. 1859. Spanish Venomous Trefoil (2)

The Description.

1. The Venomous Trefoil of Montpellier hath many tough and pliant
stalks, two or three cubits high, divided into sundry small twiggy
branches, beset with leaves three together, placed from joint to
joint by spaces, somewhat hoary, very like unto the leaves of
Cytisus, or Rue: among which come forth many small mossy white
flowers, tuft fashion, in small bundles like nosegays, and very like
the flowers of the Olive or Oak tree, which turn into small roundish
bladders, as it were made of parchment: wherein is contained black
seed like wild Lotus, but in taste like the wild Tare: the whole
plant is of an unsavoury smell; the root is thick, and of a woody
substance.

2. The Spanish Venomous Trefoil hath a woody stalk, rough and hoary,
divided into other small branches, whereon do grow leaves like the
precedent: the flowers grow on the tops of the branches, whereon do
grow leaves like those of the Pea, and of a yellow, or rather
greenish colour, wherein it differeth from the precedent.

The Place.

These venomous Trefoils grow in Narbonne, on the barren and stony
craggy mountains, at Frontignan, and about the sea coasts, and are
strangers in England.

The Time.

They flourish from May to the end of June.
The Names.

Dorycnium is that poisonous or venomous plant wherewith in times
past they used to poison their arrow heads, or rather weapons,
thereby to do the greater hurt unto those whom they did assail or
pursue, whereupon it took his name: great controversy hath been
among herbarists, what manner of plant Dorycnium should be; some
saying one thing, and some another: which controversies and sundry
opinions are very well consuted by the true censure of Rondeletius,
who hath for a definitive sentence set down the plant described for
the true Dorycnium, and none other, which may be called in English,
Venomous Tree Trefoil. These plants do not sufficiently answer to
the description of Dioscorides, neither can any one say certainly,
that they are poisonous.

The Temperature.

Dorycnium is very cold, without moistning.

The Virtues.

A. Venomous Trefoil hath not one good quality that I can read of,
but it is a pestilent venomous plant, as hath been said in the
description

CHAP. 16. Of the Shrub Trefoil called also Makebate.

Fig. 1860. Makebate Shrub Trefoil.

The Description.

This shrubby plant called Polemonium, hath many woody twigs, growing
unto the height of four or five cubits, having small twiggy
branches, of a dark green colour, garnished with small leaves of a
deep green colour, always three joined together upon little
footstalks, like the Cytisus bush, or the Field Trefoil, but
smaller: the flowers be yellow and round, divided into five or fix
parts, not much unlike the yellow Jasmine, which hath caused many to
call it yellow Jasmine, even unto this day: when the flowers be
faded, there succeed small round berries as big as a Pea, of a black
purplish colour when they be ripe, which being broken will dye or
colour the fingers like Elderberries: within these berries are
contained a small flat seed, like unto Lentils: the root is long and
small, creeping hither and thither under the earth, putting forth
new springs or shoots in sundry places, whereby it wonderfully
increaseth.

The Place.

It groweth plentifully in the country of Montpellier at New Castle
upon the dry hills, and hot banks of the Olive fields, and in the
stony fields and wood of Grammont: it grows in my garden, and in
other herbarists' gardens in England.

The Time.

It flowers in summer: the seed is ripe in autumn; the shrub itself
is always green, and hath a lasting root.

The Names.

Most do call it Cytisus, but we had rather name it Trifolium
fruticans: for it doth not agree with Cytisus or Milk Trefoil, as in
the chapter before it is plain enough by his description, unless it
be Cytisus Marcelli, or Marcellus his Milk Trefoil, with which
peradventure it might be thought to have soame likeness, if the
flowers which are yellow were white or blue.

There be divers also that take this Trefoil to be Polemonium,
forasmuch as the leaves hereof seem to be somewhat like those of
common Rue, but Polemonium hath not the leaf of common Rue,
otherwise called Herb-Grace, but of the other, that is to say, of
St. John's Rue: it is called in English, Shrubby Trefoil, or
Makebate.

The Temperature.

Polemonium is of temperature dry in the second degree, with some
acrimony or sharpness.

The Virtues.

A. This shrubby plant hath so many singular and excellent virtues
contained in it, that some have called it by the name Chiliodunamis
that is, having an hundred (sic) properties.

B. It is very effectual against the stinging of scorpions, and (as
some write) if a man hold it in his hand, he cannot be hurt with the
biting of any venomous beast.

C. Being taken in vinegar it is very good for those that are
splenetic, and whose spleen or milt is affected with oppilations or
stoppings.

D. If the root be taken in wine it helpeth against the bloody flux,
it provoketh urine being drunk, with water, scoureth away gravel,
and easeth the pain and ache called the sciatica.

CHAP. 17. Of Broom, and Broomrape.


Fig. 1861. Broom (1)
Fig. 1862. Broomrape, or Orobanche (2)

The Description.

1. Broom is a bush or shrubby plant, it hath stalks or rather woody
branches: from which do spring slender twigs, cornered, green,
tough, and that be easily bowed, many times divided into small
branches: about which do grow little leaves of an obscure green
colour, and brave yellow flowers; and at the length flat cods, which
being ripe are black, as be those of the common Vetch, in which do
lie flat seeds, hard, something brownish, and lesser than lentils:
the root is hard and woody, sending forth divers times another plant
of the colour of an Oaken leaf, in shape like unto the bastard
Orchis, called Bird's-Nest, having a root like a Turnip or Rape,
whereupon it is called Rapum Genistæ, or Broomrape.

2 This is a certain bulbed plant growing unto the roots of broom,
big below, and smaller above, covered with blackish scales, and of a
yelowish pulp within: from which doth rise a stalk a span long,
having whitish flowers about the top, like almost to those of Dead
Nettle: after which grow forth long, thick, and round husks, in
which are contained very many seeds, and good for nothing: the whole
plant is of the colour of the oaken leaf.


Fig. 1863. Long-Flowered Broomrape
Fig. 1864. Great-Flowered Broomrape

Fig. 1865. Branched Broomrape

Of this Orobanche or Broomrape there are some varieties observed and
set forth by Lobel and Clusius; the first of these varieties hath
longer and smaller flowers than the ordinary. The second hath larger
flowers, and those of a blueish colour, and is sometimes found among
corn. The third is parted towards the top into sundry branches; the
flowers of this are either blue, purplish, or else white, and it
willingly grows among hemp.


Fig. 1866. Spanish Broom (3)
Fig. 1867. English Dwarf Broom (5)

3. The Spanish Broom hath likewise woody stems, from whence grow up
slender pliant twigs, which be bare and naked without leaves, or at
the least having but few small leaves, set here and there far
distant one from another, with yellow flowers not much unlike the
flowers of common Broom, but greater, which, turn into small long
cods, wherein is contained brown and flat seed: the root is tough
and woody.

4. Small-Leaved or thin-Leaved Broom hath many tough pliant shoots
rising out of the ground, which grow into hard and tough stalks,
which are divided into divers twiggy branches whereon do grow very
small thin leaves, of a whitish colour; whereupon some have called
it Genista alba, white Broom: the flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, in shape like those of the common Broom, but of a white
colour, wherein it specially differeth from the other Brooms.

5. English Dwarf Broom hath many twiggy branches, very green, tough,
somewhat streaked or cornered, leaning toward the ground: whereon do
grow leaves set without order, sometimes two together, and often
three or four growing fast together, like unto the common Broom,
green on the upper side, hoary underneath, and of a bitter taste:
among which leaves come forth yellow flowers like those of common
Broom, but lesser, of little or no smell at all: after which appear
small cods somewhat hairy, wherin is contained small seed: the root
is tough and woody.

Bauhine judges these two last described to be only varieties of the
common Broom; to whose opinion I do much incline, yet I have let our
author's description stand, together with the figure of this latter,
which seemingly expresses the greatest difference.

Fig. 1868. Hungarian Dwarf Broom (6)

6. The Dwarf Broom of Hungary hath stalks and yellow flowers like
those of the last described: the leaves hereof are different, they
are longer, and more in number: the whole plant is altogether
greater, wherein especially consisteth the difference.

The Place.

The common Broom groweth almost everywhere in dry pastures and low
woods.

The Broomrape is not to be found but where Broom doth grow: it
groweth in a Broom field at the foot of Shooter's Hill next to
London; upon Hampstead Heath, and in divers other places.

Spanish Broom groweth in divers kingdoms of Spain and Italy; we have
it in our London gardens.

The White Broom groweth likewise in Spain and other hot regions; it
is a stranger in England; of this Titus Calphurnius makes mention in
his second Eclogue of his Bucolics, writing thus:

Cernis ut, ecce pater, quas tradidit Ornite vaccæ
Molle sub hirsuta latus explicuere genista.
See father, how the kine stretch out their tender side
Under the hairy broom, that grows in fields so wide.

The Time.

Broom flowereth in the end of April or May, and then the young buds
of the flowers are to be gathered, and laid in pickle or salt, which
afterwards being washed or boiled, are used for salads, as capers
be, and be eaten with no little delight: the cods and seeds be ripe
in August; the Rape appeareth and is seen especially in the month of
June.

The Spanish Broom doth flower sooner, and is longer in flowering.

The Names.

This shrub is called in Latin, Genista, or as some would have it
Genesta: in Italian, Genestra: in Spanish likewise Genestra, or
Giestra: in High Dutch, Pfrimmen: in Low Dutch, Brem: in French,
Genest: in English, Broom. The Spanish Broom by most writers is
judged to be the Spartium of Dioscorides.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The twigs, flowers, and seeds of Broom are hot and dry in the
second degree: they are also of a thin essence, and are of force to
cleanse and open, and especially the seed, which is dryer and not so
full of superfluous moisture

B. The decoction of the twigs and tops of Broom doth cleanse and
open the liver, milt, and kidneys.

C. It driveth away by the stool watery humours, and therefore it is
wholesome for them that have the dropsy, especially being made with
wine; but better for the other infirmities with water.

D. The seed also is commended for the same purposes.

B. There is also made of the ashes of the stalks and branches dried
and burnt, a lye with thin white wine, as Rhenish wine, which is
highly commended of divers for the green sickness and dropsy, and
this doth mightily expel and drive forth thin and watery humours
together with the urine, and that by the bladder; but withal it doth
by reason of his sharp quality many times hurt and fret the
entrails.

F. Mesue saith, that there is in the flowers and branches a cutting
moisture, but full of excrements, and therefore it causeth vomit:
and that the plant doth in all his parts trouble, cut, attenuate,
and violently purgeth by vomit and stool, phlegm and raw humours out
of the joints.

G. But these things are not written of Broom, but of Spartum, which
purgeth by vomit, after the manner of Hellebore, as both Dioscorides
and Pliny do testify.

H. Mesue also addeth, that Broom doth break the stone of the kidneys
and bladder, and suffereth not the matter whereof the stone is made 
to lie long, or to become a stone.

I. The young buds or little flowers preserved in pickle, and eaten
as a salad, stir up an appetite to meat and open the stoppings of
the liver and milt.

L. The same being fully blown, stamped and mixed with swine's
grease, do ease the pain of the gout.

M. And Mesue writeth, that this tempered with honey of Roses, or
with an egg, doth consume away the King's evil.

N. The Rape of the Broom or Broomrape, being boiled in wine, is
commended against the pains of the kidneys and bladder, provoketh
urine, breaketh the stone, and expelleth it.

O. The juice pressed forth of Broomrape healeth green wounds, and
cleanseth old and filthy ulcers: the later physicians do affirm that
it is also good for old venomous and malicious ulcers.

P. That worthy prince of famous memory Henry 8, King of England, was
wont to drink the distilled water of Broom flowers against surfeits
and diseases thereof arising.

Q. Sir Thomas Fitzherbert Knight, was wont to cure the black
jaundice with this drink only.

R. Take as many handfuls (as you think good) of the dried leaves of
Broom gathered and brayed to powder in the month of May, then take
unto each handful of the dried leaves, one spoonful and a half of
the seed of Broom brayed into powder: mingle these together, and let
the sick drink thereof each day a quantity, first and last, until he
find some ease. The medicine must be continued and so long used,
until it be quite extinguished: for it is a disease not very
suddenly cured, but must by little and little be dealt withal.

S. Orobanch or Broomrape sliced and put into oil olive, to infuse or
macerate in the same, as ye do Roses for oil of roses, scoureth and
putteth away all spots, lentils, freckles, and pustules from the
face, or any part of the body, being anointed therewith.

T. Dioscorides writeth, that Orobanch may be eaten either raw or
boiled, in manner as we use to eat the sprigs or young shoots of
Asparagus.

V. The flowers and seeds of Spanish Broom are good to be drunk with
Mead or honeyed water in the quantity of a dram, to cause one to
vomit with great force and violence, even as white Hellebore, or
neesing powder.

X. If it be taken alone, it looseneth the belly, driveth forth great
quantity of watery and filthy humours.

CHAP. 18. Of Base Broom or Greenweed.

Fig. 1869. Kinds of Greenweed (1-4)
The Description.

1. This base kind of Broom called Greenweed or Dyers' weed, hath
many tough branches proceeding from a woody root: whereon do grow
great store of leaves, of a deep green colour, somewhat long like
those of Flax: the flowers grow at the top of the branches not much
unlike the leaves of Broom, but smaller; of an exceeding fair yellow
colour, which turn into small flat cods, wherein is contained a
little flat seed.

2. Carolus Clusius setteth forth another kind of Broom, which
Dodonæus calleth Genista tinctoria, being another sort of dyers'
weed: it groweth like the Spanish Broom: upon whose branches do grow
long and small leaves like Flax, green on the upper side, and of an
hoary shining colour on the other. The flowers grow at the top of
the stalks, spike fashion, in form and colour like the former; the
roots are thick and woody.

3. Carolus Clusius setteth forth two kinds of Broom. The first is a
low and base plant, creeping and lying flat upon the ground, whose
long branches are nothing else, but as it were stalks consisting of
leaves thick in the midst, and thin about the edges, and as it were
divided with small nicks; at which place it beginneth to continue
the same leaf to the end, and so from leaf to leaf, until it have
increased a great sort, all which do as it were make one stalk; and
hath none other leaves, saving that in some of the nicks or
divisions there cometh forth a small leaf like a little ear. At the
end of those flat and leafed stalks come forth the flowers, much
like the flowers of the common Greenweed, but lesser, and of a
yellow colour, which turn into small cods. The roots are very long,
tough, and woody, full of fibres, closing at the top of the root,
from whence they proceed as from one body.

4. This kind of Greenweed called of some Chamæspartium hath a thick
woody root; from which rise up divers long leaves, consisting as it
were of many pieces set together like a pair of beads (as may better
be perceived by the figure, than expressed by words) green on the
upper side, and whitish underneath, very tough, and as it were of a
rushy substance: among which rise up very small naked rushy stalks;
on the top whereof groweth an ear or spike of a chaffy matter,
having here and there in the said ear divers yellow flowers like
Broom, but very small or little.


Fig. 1870. Hare's-Foot Greenweed (5)
Fig. 1871. Small Hare's-Foot Greenweed (6)

5. The fifth Greenweed hath a woody tough root, with certain strings
annexed thereto: from which rise up divers long, flat leaves, tough,
& very hard, consisting as it were of many little leaves, set one at
the end of another, making of many one entire leaf, of a green
colour: amongst which come forth divers naked hard stalks, very
small and stiff, on the tops whereof stand spiky ears of yellow
flowers, like those of Broom, in shape like that great three-leaved
grass, called Lagopus, or like the Foxtail Grass: after which come
flat cods, wherein is enclosed small seed like to Tares both in
taste and form.

6. This differeth not from the precedent in stalks, roots and
leaves: the flowers consist of a flocky soft matter, not unlike to
the grassy tuft of Foxtail, resembling the flower of Lagopus, or
Hare's-foot, but having small yellow flowers lesser than the former,
wherein it chiefly differeth from the other of his kind.

The Place.

The first being our common Dyer's Weed, groweth in most fertile
pastures and fields almost everywhere. The rest are strangers in
England.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of July to the end of August.

The Names.

The first of these Greenweeds is named of most herbarists Flos
tinctorius, but more rightly, Genista tinctoria, of this Pliny hath
made mention. The Greenweeds, saith he, do grow to dye cloths with,
in his 18th book 6th chapter. It is called in High Dutch, Ferblumen,
and Ackerbrem: in Italian, Cerretta, and Cosaria, as Matthiolus
writeth in his chapter of Lysimachia, or Loosestrife: in English,
Dyers' Greenweed, Base Broom, and Woodwaxen.

The rest we refer to their several titles.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. These plants are like unto common Broom in bitterness, and
therefore are hot and dry in the second degree: they are likewise
thought to be in virtues equal; notwithstanding their use is not so
well known, and therefore not used at all where the other maybe had:
we shall not need to speak of that use that dyers make thereof,
being a matter impertinent to our history.

CHAP. 19. Of Spanish Base Brooms.


Fig. 1872. Leafless Spanish Broom (1)
Fig. 1873. White Leafless Spanish Broom (2)

The Description.

1. This grows to the height of a cubit, and is covered with a
crested and rough bark; and divided into many longish branches
crested & green, which at their first springing up have some leaves
upon them, which fall away as soon as the plant comes to flower:
from the sides of the branches come forth long footstalks whereon
hang some small yellow flowers, which are succeeded by short round
yellowish-red cods which commonly contain but one seed, seldom two,
and these hard and black, and like a little Kidney, which when it is
ripe will rattle in the cod being shaken.

2. This naked broom groweth up to the height of a man: the stalk is
rough, and void of leaves, very green and pliant, which divideth
itself into divers twiggy branches, green, and tough, like rushes:
the flowers grow all along the stalks like those of broom, but of a
white colour, wherein it differeth from all the rest of his kind.

The Place.

These grow in the provinces of Spain, and are in one place higher
and more bushy, and in another lower.

The Time.

The first flowers in May, and the second in February.

The Names.

These base Spanish brooms may be referred to the true, which is
called in Greek Sparton: the Latins use the same name, calling it
sometimes Spartum, and Spartium: in Spanish, Retama: in English,
Spanish Broom, and Bastard Spanish Broom.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Both the seeds and juice of the branches of these base Brooms,
wherewith they in Spain and other hot regions do tie their vines, do
mightily draw, as Galen writeth.

B. Dioscorides saith, that the seeds and flowers being drunk in the
quantity of a dram, with mead or honeyed water, doth cause one to
vomit strongly, as the Hellebore or neezing powder doth, but yet
without jeopardy or danger of life: the seed purgeth by stool.

C. The juice which is drawn from out of the branches steeped in
water, being first bruised, is a remedy for those that are tormented
with the sciatica, and for those that be troubled with the squincy,
if a draught thereof be drunk in the morning; some use to steep the
branches in sea water, and to give the same in a clyster, which
purgeth forth bloody and slimy excrements.

CHAP. 20. Of Furze, Gorse, Whin, or Prickly Broom.


Fig. 1874. Great Furze (1)
Fig. 1875. Small Furze (2)

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of prickly Broom, called in our English tongue
by sundry names, according to the speech of the country people where
they do grow: in some places, Furze; in others, Whins, Gorse, and of
some, Prickly Broom.

The Description.

1. The Furze bush is a plant altogether a thorn, fully armed with
most sharp prickles, without any leaves at all except in the spring,
and those very few and little, and quickly falling away: it is a
bushy shrub, often rising up with many woody branches to the height
of four or five cubits, or higher, according to the nature and soil
where they grow: the greatest and highest that I did ever see do
grow about Exeter in the West parts of England; where the great
stalks are dearly bought for the better sort of people, and the
small thorny sprays for the poorer sort. From these thorny branches
grow little flowers like those of Broom, and of a yellow colour,
which in hot regions under the extreme heat of the sun are of a very
perfect red colour: in the colder countries of the East, as Danzig,
Brunswick, and Poland, there is not any branch hereof growing,
except some few plants and seeds which myself have sent to Elbing
otherwise called Meluin, where they are most curiously kept in their
fairest gardens, as also our common Broom, the which I have sent
thither likewise, being first desired by divers earnest letters: the
cods follow the flowers, which the graver hath omitted, as a German
who had never seen the plant itself, but framed the figure by
hearsay: the root is strong, tough, and woody,

We have in our barren grounds of the North parts of England another
sort of Furze, bringing forth the like prickly thorns that the
others have: the only difference consisteth in the colour of the
flowers; for the others bring forth yellow flowers, and those of
this plant are as white as snow.

2. To this may be joined another kind of Furze which bringeth forth
certain branches that be some cubit high, stiff, and set round about
at the first with small winged Lentil-like leaves and little
harmless prickles, which after they have been a year old, and the
leaves gone, be armed only with most hard sharp prickles, crooking
or bending their points downwards. The flowers hereof are of a pale
yellow colour, lesser than those of Broom, yet of the same form: the
cods are small, in which do lie little round reddish seeds: the root
is tough and woody.

Of this Clusius reckons up three varieties: the first growing some
cubit high, with deep yellow flowers: the second grows higher, and
hath paler coloured flowers: the third groweth to the height of the
first, the flowers also are yellow, the branches more prickly, and
the leaves hairy; and the figure I give you is of this third
variety.


Fig. 876. Small Round-Codded Furze (3)
Fig. 1877. Needle Furze (4)

3. This seldom exceeds a foot in height, and it is on every side
armed with sharp prickles, which grow not confusedly, as in the
common sort, but keep a certain order, and still grow forth by
couples: they are of a lighter green than those of the common Furze:
on the tops of each of the branches grow two or three yellow flowers
like those of the former; which are succeeded by little round rough
hairy cods of the bigness of Tares. This flowers in March, and
groweth in the way between Bordeaux and Bayonne in France, and upon
the Pyrennean mountains. Clusius makes it his Scorpius 2, or second
sort of Furze: Lobel calls it Genista spartium spinosum alterum.

4. This small kind of Furze (growing upon Hampstead Heath near
London, and in divers other barren grounds, where in manner nothing
else will grow) hath many weak and flexible branches of a woody
substance: whereon do grow little leaves like those of Thyme among
which are set in number infinite most sharp prickles, hurting like
needles, whereof it took his name. The flowers grow on the tops of
the branches like those of Broom, and of a pale yellow colour. The
root is tough and woody.


Fig. 1878. Dwarf Furze (5)
Fig. 1879. Scorpion Furze. (6)

5. This plant (saith Clusius) is wholly new and elegant, some span
high, divided into many branches, some spread upon the ground,
others standing upright, having plentiful store of green prickles:
the flowers in shape are like those of Broom, but less, and of a
blueish purple colour, standing in rough hairy whitish cups, two or
three flowers commonly growing near together: sometimes whilst it
flowers it sendeth forth little leaves, but not very often, and they
are few, and like those of the second described, and quickly fall
away, so that the whole plant seems nothing but prickles, or like a
hedgehog when she folds up herself: the root is woody, and large for
the proportion of the plant. It grows in the kingdom of Valencia in
Spain, where the Spaniards call it Erizo, that is, the hedgehog; and
thence Clusius also termed it Erinacea. It flowereth in April.

6. The smallest of all the Furzes is that of the ancients called
Nepa, or Scorpion Furze, as the word Nepa seemeth to import: it is a
stranger in England: it hath been touched of the ancients in name
only: which fault they have been all and every of them to be
complained of, being so brief that nothing can be gathered from
their description: and therefore I refer what might hereof be said
to a further consideration. This hath a thick woody black root some
half foot long, from whence arise many slender branches some foot
high, which are set with many stiff and sharp prickles, growing
somewhat after the manner of the wild prickly Sperage: the young
plants have little leaves like those of Tragacanth; the old ones
none: the flowers are small, and come forth at the bottom of the
prickles, and they are succeeded by broad cods wherein the seed is
contained. It grows in divers places of France and Spain, and is
thought to be the Scorpius of Theophrastus, which Gaza translates
Nepa.

The Place.

The common sort hereof are very well known to grow in pastures and
fields in most places of England. The rest are likewise well known
to those that curiously observe the difference.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of May to the end of September.

The Names.

Furze is commonly called Genista spinosa: in High Dutch,
Gaspeldoren: in English, Furze, Furzen bushes, Whin, Gorse, and
Thorn-Broom.

This thorny Broom is taken for Theophrastus his Scorpius, which
Galen nameth Nepa: the name Scorpius in Pliny is polysemon, that is
to say, signifying many things, and common to certain plants: for
besides this Scorpius of which he hath made mention, lib. 25, cap.
5, setting down Theophrastus his words, where he maketh Aconitum
thelyphonon to be Scorpius, lib. 23. cap. 10, and likewise other
plants under the same title, but unproperly.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. There is nothing written in Theophrastus concerning the faculties
of Scorpius spinosus, or Furze: Pliny seemeth to attribute unto it
the same virtues that Scorpioides hath: notwithstanding the later
writers do agree that it is hot and dry of complexion: the seeds are
used in medicines against the stone, and staying of the lask.

CHAP. 21. Of Cammock Furze, Rest-Harrow, or Petty Whin.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Rest-Harrow, which some have inserted among
the smooth Brooms; others, among those with prickles, whereof some
have purple flowers and likewise full of prickles; others, white
flowers, and sharp thorns: some also purple flowers, others white,
and also yellow, and every of them void of prickles.


Fig. 1880. Rest-Harrow (1)
Fig. 1881. Purple Rest-Harrow (3)

The Description.

1. Cammock or ground Furze riseth up with stalks a cubit high, and
often higher, set with divers jointed branches, tough, pliable, and
full of hard sharp thorns: among which do grow leaves in form like
those of St. John's Wort, or rather of the Lentil, of a deep green
colour: from the bosom of which thorns and leaves come forth the
flowers, like those of Peas, of a purple colour: after which do come
the cods, in which do lie flat seed: the root is long, and runneth
far abroad, very tough, and hard to be torn in pieces with the
plough, insomuch that the oxen can hardly pass forward, but are
constrained to stand still, whereupon it was called Rest-plough, or
Rest-Harrow.

2. We have in our London pastures, and likewise in other places, one
of the Rest-Harrows, not differing from the precedent in stalks,
leaves, or prickles: the only difference is, that this plant
bringeth forth white flowers, and the others not so; whence we may
call it Anonis flore albo, Cammock with white flowers.

3. Rest-Harrow without thorns hath a tough hoary rough stalk,
divided into other rough branches, whereon are set without order,
long leaves sharp pointed, slightly cut about the edges, of an hoary
colour, and somewhat hairy: from the bosom whereof cometh forth
purple Pea-like flowers of a reasonable good smell: the root is very
tough, long, and woody.

Fig. 1882. Yellow Rest-Harrow (4)

4. The yellow-flowered Cammock is a stranger in these parts, it is
only found in the cold Eastern countries, for aught that I can
learn; it differs not from the last described, saving that the
flowers hereof are of a dark yellow colour, wherein it differeth
from all the other of his kind.

The Place.

Those grow in arable grounds in fertile pastures, and in the borders
of fields, in a fat, fruitful, and long lasting soil: it is sooner
found than desired of husbandmen, because the tough and woody roots
are cumbersome unto them, for that they stay the plough, and make
the oxen stand.

The Time.

They send forth new shoots in May: they be full grown in autumn, and
then those that of nature are prickly be fullest of sharp thorns:
they flower in July and August.

The Names.

Cammock is called in Greek and likewise in Latin Anonis, and Ononis:
of herbarists commonly Aresta bovis,["stop-oxen"] and Remora
aratri,["plough delayer"] because it maketh the oxen whilst they be
in ploughing to rest or stand still: it is also called Acutella, of
the stiff and sharp thorns which prick those that pass by: in
French, Areste buf, and Bouverande.

Crateuas nameth it Ægipyrus: in High Dutch, Stalkraut: in Low Dutch,
Prangwortele: in Italian, Bonaga: in Spanish, Gattilhos: in French,
Arreste beuf, Beuf & Bouverande: in English, Cammock, Rest-Harrow,
Petty Whin, and ground Furze.

The Temperature.

The root of Cammock is hot in the third degree, as Galen saith: it
cutteth also and maketh thin.

The Virtues.

A. The bark of the root drunk with Wine provoketh urine, breaketh
the stone, and driveth it forth.

B. The root boiled in water and vinegar allayeth the pain of the
teeth, if the mouth be often washed therewith hot.

C. Pliny reporteth, that being boiled in Oxymel (or the syrup made
with honey and vinegar) till the one half be wasted, it is given to
those that have the falling sickness. Matatthiolus reporteth, that
he knew a man cured of a rupture, by taking of the powder of this
root for many months together

D. The tender sprigs or crops of this shrub before the thorns come
forth, are preserved in pickle, and be very pleasant sauce to be
eaten with meat as salad, as a Dioscorides teacheth.

CHAP. 22. Of Gooseberry, or Feaberry Bush.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of the Gooseberries; some greater, others
less: some round, others long, and some of a red colour: the figure
of one shall serve for the rest.

I will not much insist upon diversities of fruits, because my kind
friend Mr. John Parkinson hath sufficiently in his late work
discoursed upon that subject; only because I judge many will be
desirous to know their names, and where to get them, I will briefly
name the chief varieties our kingdom affords; and such as are
desirous of them may find them with Mr John living in Old Street.

The sorts of Gooseberries are these: the long green, the great
yellowish, the blue, the great round red, the long red, and the
prickly Gooseberry.

Fig. 1883. Gooseberries

The Description.

The Gooseberry bush is a shrub of three or four cubits high, set
thick with most sharp prickles: it is likewise full of branches,
slender, woody, and prickly: whereon do grow round leaves cut with
deep gashes into divers parts like those of the Vine, of a very
green colour: the flowers be very small, of a whitish green, with
some little purple dashed here and there: the fruit is round,
growing scatteringly upon the branches, green at the first, but
waxing a little yellow through maturity, full of a winy juice
somewhat sweet in taste when they be ripe; in which is contained
hard seed of a whitish colour: the root is woody, and not without
strings annexed thereto.

There is another whose fruit is almost as big as a small cherry, and
very round in form: as also another of the like bigness, of an inch
in length, in taste and substance agreeing with the common sort.

We have also in our London gardens another sort altogether without
prickles: whose fruit is very small, lesser by much than the common
kind, but of a perfect red colour, wherein it differeth from the
rest of his kind.

The Place.

These plants do grow in our London gardens and elsewhere in great
abundance.

The Time.

The leaves come forth in the beginning of April or sooner: the fruit
is ripe in June and July.

The Names.

This shrub had no name among the old writers, who as we deem knew it
not, or else esteemed it not: the later writers call it in Latin
Crossularia: and oftentimes of the berries, Uva Crispa, Uva spina,
Uva spinella, and Uva Crispina: in High Dutch, Kruselbeer: in Low
Dutch, Stekelbessen: in Spanish, Uva Crispa, or Espina: in Italian,
Uva spina: in French, Groiselles: in English, Gooseberry, Gooseberry
bush, and Feaberry bush in Cheshire, my native country.

The Temperature.

The berries of this bush before they be ripe are cold and dry, and
that in the later end of the second degree, and also binding.
The Virtues.

A. The fruit is used in divers sauces for meat, as those that are
skilful in cookery can better tell than myself.

B. They are used in broths instead of Verjuice, which maketh the
broth not only pleasant to the taste, but is greatly profitable to
such as are troubled with a hot burning ague.

C. They are diversly eaten, but howsoever they be eaten they always
engender raw and cold blood: they nourish nothing or very little:
they also stay the belly, and stanch bleedings.

D. They stop the menses, or monthly sickeness, except they happen to
be taken into a cold stomach, then do they not help, but rather clog
or trouble the same by some manner of flux.

E. The ripe berries, as they are sweeter, so do they also little or
nothing bind, and are something hot, and yield a little more
nourishment than those that be not ripe, and the same not crude or
raw; but these are seldom eaten or used as sauce.

F. The juice of the green Gooseberries cooleth all inflammations,
erysipelas, and Saint Anthony's fire.

G. They provoke appetite and cool the vehement heat of the stomach
and liver.

H. The young and tender leaves eaten raw in a salad, provoke urine,
and drive forth the stone and gravel.

CHAP. 23. Of Barberries.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Barberries, some greater, others lesser,
and some without stones.


The Description.

The Barberry plant is an high shrub or bush, having many young
straight shoots and branches, very full of white and prickly thorns;
the rind whereof is smooth and thin, the wood itself yellow: the
leaves are long, very green, slightly nicked about the edges, and of
a sour taste: the flowers be yellow, standing in clusters upon long
stems: in their places come up long berries, slender, red when they
be ripe, with a little hard kernel or stone within; of a sour and
sharp taste: the root is yellow, disperseth itself far abroad, and
is of a woody substance.

We have in our London gardens another sort, whose fruit is like in
form and substance, but one berry is as big as three of the common
kind, wherein consisteth the difference.

We have likewise another without any stone, the fruit is like the
rest of the Barberries, both in substance and taste.

The Place.

The Barberry bush groweth of itself in untoiled places and desert
grounds, in woods, and the borders of fields, especially about a
gentleman's house called Mr. Monke, dwelling in a village called
Iver, two miles from Colebrooke, where most of the hedges are
nothing else but Barberry bushes.

They are planted in gardens in most places of England.

The Time.

The leaves spring forth in April: the flowers and fruit in
September.

The Names.

Galen calleth this thorn in Greek, Oxyakantha, who maketh it to
differ from Oxyakanthos, in his book Of the Faculties of Simple
Medicines: but more plainly in his book Of The Faculties of
Nourishments; where he reckoneth up the tender springs of Barberries
among the tender shoots that are to be eaten, such as Oxyacanthus or
the Hawthorn bringeth not forth, wherein he plainly made a
difference, Oxyacantha the Barberry bush, and Oxyacanthos the
Hawthorn tree.

Dioscorides hath not made mention of this thorn; for that which he
calleth Oxyacantha in the feminine gender, is Galen's Oxyacanthus in
the masculine gender.

Avicenna seemeth to contain both these shrubs under the name of
Amyrberis, but we know they are neither of affinity or
neighbourhood, although they be both prickly.

The shrub itself is called in shops Barbaries, of the corrupted name
Amyrberis, of the later writers Crespinus: in Italian, Crespino: in
Spanish, Espino de maiuelas: in High Dutch, Paisselbeer: in Low
Dutch, Saureboom: in French, Espine vinette and thereupon by a Latin
name, Spinivinera, Spina acida, and Oxyacantha galeni. In English, a
Barberry bush, or Piprige Tree, according to Dr Turner.

The Temperature.

The leaves and berries of this thorn are cold and dry in the second
degree: and as Galen also affirmeth, they are of thin parts, and
have a certain cutting quality.
The Virtues.

A. The leaves are used of divers to season meat with, and instead of
a salad, as be those of Sorrel.

B. The decoction thereof is good against hot burnings and choleric
agues: it allayeth the heat of the blood, and tempereth the overmuch
heat of the liver.

C. The fruit or berries are good for the same things, and be also
profitable for hot lasks, and for the bloody flux, and they stay all
manner of superfluous bleedings.

D. The green leaves of the Barberry bush stamped, and made into
sawce, as that made of Sorrel, called green sauce, doth cool hot
stomachs, and those that are vexed with hot burning agues, and
procureth appetite.

E. The conserve made of the fruit and sugar performeth all those
things before remembered, but with better force and success.

F. The roots of the tree steeped for certain days together in strong
lye, made with ashes of the ash tree, and the hair often moistned
therewith, maketh it yellow.

G. The bark of the roots is also used in medicines for the jaundice,
and that with good success.

CHAP. 24. Of the Whitethorn, or Hawthorn Tree.

The Kinds.

There be two sorts of the Whitethorn Trees described of the later
writers, one very common in a most parts of England: there is
another very rare, and not found in Europe, except in some few rare
gardens of Germany; which differeth not from our common Hawthorn,
saving that the fruit here of is as yellow as Saffron: we have in
the west of England one growing at a place called Glastonbury, which
bringeth forth his flowers about Christmas, by the report of divers
of good credit, who have seen the same; but myself have not seen it;
and therefore leave it to be better examined.



Fig. 1885. Hawthorn (1)
Fig. 1886. Cumberland Hawthorn (2)

The Description.

1. The Whitethorn is a great shrub growing oftentimes to the height
of the Pear tree; the trunk or body is great: the boughs and
branches hard and woody, set full of long sharp thorns: the leaves
be broad, cut with deep gashes into divers sections, smooth, and of
a glistering green colour: the flowers grow upon spoky roundels, of
a pleasant sweet smell, sometimes white, and often dashed over with
a light wash of purple; which hath moved from to think some
difference in the plants: after which come the fruit, being round
berries, green at the first, and red when they be ripe; wherein is
found a soft sweet pulp, and certain whitish seed: the root groweth
deep in the ground, of a hard woody substance.

2. The second and third have been touched in the first title,
notwithstanding I have thought it not unfit to insert in this place
a plant participating with the Hawthorn in flowers and fruit, and
with the Service Tree in leaves, and not unlike in fruit also.

Theophrastus hath set forth this tree under the name of Aria, which
groweth unto the form of a small tree, delighting to grow in our
shadowy woods of Cumberland and Westmorland, and many other places
of the North country, where it is to be found in great quantity: but
seldom in Spain, Italy, or any hot region. This tree is garnished
with many large branches beset with leaves like the Pear tree, or
rather like the Alder leaf, of a dark green colour above, and of a
white colour underneath: among these leaves come forth tufts of
white flowers, very like unto the Hawthorn flowers, but bigger:
after which succeed small red berries, like the berries of the
Hawthorn, and in taste like the Neapolitan Medlar: the temperature
and faculties whereof are not yet known.

The Place.

The Hawthorn groweth in woods and in hedges near unto highways
almost everywhere. The second is a stranger in England. The last
groweth at Glastonbury Abbey, as it is credibly reported unto me.
The Aria groweth upon Hampstead Heath, and in many places of the
West of England.

The Time.

The first and second flower in May; whereupon many do call the tree
itself the May bush, as a chief token of the coming in of May: the
leaves come forth a little sooner: the fruit is ripe in the
beginning of September, and is a food for birds in winter.

The Names.

Dioscorides describeth this shrub, and nameth it Oxyakantha, in the
feminine gender: and Galen in his book Of The Faculties Of Simple
Medicines, Oxyakanthos, in the masculine gender: Oxyacanthus, saith
he, is a tree, and is like to the wild Pear tree in form, and the
virtues not unlike, &c. Of Oxyacantha, Dioscorides writeth thus: It
is a tree like to the wild Pear tree, very full of thorns, &c.
Serape calleth it Amyrberis and some, saith Dioscorides, would have
it called Pyrina, but the name Pyrina seemeth to belong to the
yellow Hawthorn: it is called in High Dutch, Haogdoren; in Low
Dutch, Hagedoren: in Italian, Bagaia: in Spanish, Pirlitero: in
French, Aub-espine: in English, Whitethorn, Hawthorn tree; and of
some Londoners, May bush. Thus our author, but this is not the
Oxyacantha of the Greeks, but that which is called Pyracantha, as 
shall be showed hereafter.

The second is thought to be the Aria of Theophrastus, and so Lobel
and Tabernamontanus call it. Some, as Bellonius, Gesner, and
Clusius, refer it to the Sorbus, and that not unfitly: in some
places of this kingdom they call it a White Bean tree.

The Temperature.

The fruit of the Hawthorn tree is very astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The haws or berries of the Hawthorn tree, as Dioscorides writeth,
do both stay the lask, the menses, and all other fluxes of blood:
some authors write, that the stones beaten to powder, and given to
drink are good against the stone.

CHAP. 25. Of Goat's Thorn.

Fig. 1887. Goat's-Thorn (1)

The Description.

1. The first Tragacantha or Goat's-Thorn hath many branchy boughs
and twigs, slender and pliant, so spread abroad upon every side,
that one plant doth sometimes occupy a great space or room in
compass: the leaves are small, and in shape like Lentil leaves,
whitish, and somewhat mossy or hairy, set in rows one opposite
against another: the flower is like the blossom of the Lentil, but
much lesser, and of a whitish colour, and sometimes marked with
purple lines or streaks: the seed is enclosed in small cods or
husks, almost like unto the wild Lotus or horned Trefoil: the whole
plant on every side is set full of sharp prickly thorns, hard,
white, and strong: the roots run under the ground like Liquorice
roots, yellow within, and black without, tough, limber, and hard to
break; which being wounded in sundry places with some iron tool, and
laid in the sun at the highest and hottest time of summer, issueth
forth a certain liquor which being hardened by the sun, is that gum
which is called in shops Tragacantha: and of some, though
barbarously Dragagant.


Fig. 1888. Small Goat's-Thorn (2)
Fig. 1889. A better figure of Small Goat's-Thorn.

2. The second kind of Tragacantha is a low and thick shrub, having
many shoots growing from one turf: of a white or grayish colour,
about a cubit high, stiff and woody: the leaves are like the former,
and guarded with most stiff pricks not very safely to be touched:
among the thorny leaves come forth many flowers in small tufts like
Genistella, but that they are white: the cods are many, straight and
thorny like Genistella, wherein are many small white and three-
cornered seeds as big as mustard seed. This differs from the former
in that it is smaller, and loseth the leaves every winter, when as
the former keeps on the leaves until new ones come in the spring.
The middle rib of the winged leaves ends in a prick, which by the
falling of the leaves becometh a long and naked thorn. I have given
you a more accurate figure hereof out of Clusius, wherein the
leaves, flowers, cods, and seeds are all expressed apart.

Fig. 1890. Burnet Goat's-Thorn (3)

3. The Grecians have called this plant Nouroda, because it is good
for the sinews: it should seem it took the name Poterion, of
Potrix,["drunkard"] because it loveth a watery or fenny soil: it
hath small branches, and leaves of Tragacantha, growing naturally in
the tract of Piedmont in Italy: it spreadeth abroad like a shrub:
the bark or rind is blackish, and dry without great moisture, very
much writhed or wrinkled in and out as that of Nepa or Corruda: the
sharp pricks stand not in order as Tragacantha, but confusedly, and
are finer and three times lesser than those of Tragacantha, growing
much after the manner of Astragalus: but the particular leaves are
green above, and white below, shaped somewhat like Burnet: the seed
is small and red, like unto Sumach, but lesser.

The Place.

Petrus Bellonius in his first book Of Singularities reports, that
there is great plenty hereof growing in Candy upon the tops of the
mountains. Theophrastus saith that it was thought to grow nowhere
but in Candy; but now it is certain that it is found in Achaia,
Peloponessus, and in Asia: it doth also grow in Arcadia, which is
thought not to be inferior to that of Candy. It is thought by Lobel
to grow in Languedoc in France, whereof Theophrastus hath written in
his ninth book; that the liquor or gum issueth out of itself, and
that it is not needful to have the root broken or cut. The best is
that, saith Dioscorides, which is through-shining, thin, smooth,
unmixed, and sweet of smell and taste.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the summer months: I have sown the seed
of Poterion in April, which I received from Ioachimus Camerarius of
Nuremberg, that grew in my garden two years together, and after
perished by some mischance.

The Names.

Goat's-Thorn is called in Greek Tragakantha: Of most herbarists
likewise Tragacantha: we may call it in Latin Spina hirci: in
French, Barbe Renard: and in English for want of a better name,
Goat's-Thorn: the liquor or gum that issueth forth of the roots
beareth the name also of Tragacantha: it is called in shops Gummi
Tragacanthæ; and in a barbarous manner Gummi Tragacanthi: in
English, Gum Dragagant.

The Temperature.

This plant in each part thereof is of a drying faculty without
biting. It doth consolidate or glue together sinews that be cut: but
the roots have that faculty especially, which are boiled in wine,
and the decoction given unto those that have any grief or hurt in
the sinews.

Gum Dragagant hath an emplastic quality, by reason whereof it
dulleth or allayeth the sharpness of humours, and doth also somthing
dry.

The Virtues.

A. The gum is singular good to be licked in with honey against the
cough, roughness of the throat, hoarseness, and all sharp and thin
rheums or distillations: being laid under the tongue it taketh away
the roughness thereof.

B. Being drunk with cuit or the decoction of Liquorice it taketh
away and allayeth the heat of the urine: it is also used in
medicines for the eyes.

C. The greatest part of those artificial beads, sweet chains,
bracelets, and such like pretty sweet things of pleasure are made
hard and fit to be worn by mixing the gum hereof with other sweets,
being first steeped in Rose water till it be soft.

CHAP. 26. Of the Egyptian Thorn.


Fig. 1891.Egyptian Thorn (1)
Fig. 1892. Thorny Trefoil (2)

The Description.

1. Dioscorides maketh mention of Acacia, whereof the first is the
true and right Acacia, which is a shrub or hedge tree, but not
growing right or straight up as other small trees do: his branches
are woody, beset with many hard and long thorns; about which grow
the leaves, compact of many small leaves clustering about one side,
as in the Lentil: the flowers are whitish, the husks or cods be
plain and flat, yea very broad like unto Lupines, especially on that
side where the seed grows, which is contained sometimes in one part,
and sometimes in two parts of the husk, growing together in a narrow
neck: the seed is smooth and glistering. There is a black juice
taken out of these husks, if they be dried in the shadow when they
be ripe; but if when they are not ripe, then it is somewhat red:
some do wring out a juice out of the leaves and fruit: there floweth
also a gum out of this tree, which is the gum of Arabia, called gum
arabic.

2. Dioscorides having described Spina acacia, setteth down a second
kind thereof, calling it Acacia altera, which hath the three leaves
of Rue or Cytisus, and cods like those of Genistella, but somewhat
more blunt at the end, and thick at the back like a razor, and still
groweth forward narrower and narrower, until it come to have a sharp
edge: in these cods are contained three or four flat seeds like
Genistella, which before they wax ripe are yellow, but afterwards
black: the whole plant groweth to the height of Genista spinosa, or
Gorse, both in shape, height, and resemblance, and not to the height
of a tree, as Matthiolus would persuade us, but full of sharp thorns
like the former.

The Place.

The true Acacia groweth in Egypt, Palestine, Lombardy, and Syria, as
Dioscorides writeth: among the shrubs and trees that remain always
green, Acacia is noted for one by Petrus Belloninius, in his first
book Of Singularities, chap. 44.

The other Acacia groweth in Cappadocia and Pontus, as Dioscorides
writeth: it is also found in Corsica, and on divers mountains of
Italy, and likewise upon all the coast of Liguria and Lombardy, and
upon the Narbonne coast of the Mediterranean sea.

The Time.

These flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.

The tree Acacia is named of the Græcians Akakia, yea even in our
time, and likewise of the Latins Acacia: it is also called Ægyptia
spina: this strange thorn hath no English name that I can learn, and
therefore it may keep still the Latin name Acacia, yet I have named
it the Egyptian Thorn: the juice is called also Acacia after the
name of the plant: the apothecaries of Germany do use instead
hereof, the juice that is pressed forth of sloes or snags, which
they therefore call Acacia Germanica: Matthiolus pictureth for
Acacia the tree which the later herbarists do call Arbor Iudæ, to
which he hath untruly added thorns, that he might belie Acacia, and
yet he hath not made it agree with Dioscorides his descriprion.

They call this; Eteros Akakia, in Latin Acacia altera, or the other
Acacia, and Pontica Acacia, or Pontic Acacia.

The Nature.

The juice of Acacia, as Galen saith, consisteth not of one only
substance, but is of substance both cold and earthy, to which also
is coupled a certain watery essence, and it likewise hath thin and
hot parts dispersed in itself: therefore it is dry in the third
degree, and cold in the first if it be not washed; and in the
second, if it be washed: for by washing it loseth his sharp and
biting quality and the hot parts.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Acacia stoppeth the lask, the inordinate course of
women's terms, and man's involuntary issue called Gonorrha, if it
be drunk in red wine.

B. It healeth the blastings and inflammations of the eyes, and
maketh the skin and palms of the hands smooth after the healing of
the serpigo: it healeth the blisters and extreme heat in the mouth,
and maketh the hairs black that are washed therewith.

C. It is good, saith Dioscorides, against St. Anthony's fire, the
shingles, chimetla, pterygia, and whitlows.

D. The gum doth bind and somewhat cool: it hath also joined unto it
an emplastic quality, by which it dulleth or allayeth the sharpness
of the medicines wherewith it is mixed. Being applied with the white
and yolk of an egg, it suffereth not blisters to rise in burned or
scalded parts. Dioscorides.

The juice of the other, saith Dioscorides, doth also bind, but it is
not so effectual nor so good in eye medicines.

CHAP. 27. Of Box Thorn, and the juice thereof called Lycium.


Fig. 1893. Box Thorn (1)
Fig. 1894. Spanish Box Thorn (2)

The Description.

1. Box Thorn is a rare plant, in shape not unlike the Box tree,
whereof it hath been reckoned for a wild kind, having many great
branches set full of round and thick leaves, very like that of the
common Box tree: amongst which grow forth most sharp pricking
thorns: the flowers grow among the leaves, which yield forth small
black berries of a bitter taste, as big as a peppercorn: the juice
whereof is somewhat oily, and of a reddish colour; which bitter
juice being set on fire, doth burn with a marvellous cracking and
sparkling; the ashes thereof are of a red colour: it hath many woody
roots growing aslope.

2. The other kind of Pyracantha or Lycium, groweth like unto the
common Privet, having such like leaves, but somewhat narrower: the
tops of the slender sprigs are furnished with prickles: the root is
tough, and of a woody substance.

The Place.

They grow in Cappadocia and Lycia, and in many other countries: it
prospereth in rough places, it hath likewise been found in
Languedoc, and Provençe in France: Begonius writeth that he found it
in Palestine.

Matthiolus pictureth for Box Thorn, a plant with Box leaves, with
very many boughs, and certain thorns standing among them: but the
notable herbarist Anguillar and others, hold opinion, that it is not
the right; with whom we also do agree.

There is drawn out of the leaves and branches of box Thorn, or as
Pliny saith, out of the boughs and roots being throughly boiled, a
juice, which is named Lycium.

Dioscorides saith, that the leaves and branches must be brayed, and
the infusion made many days in the decoction thereof, after which
the faeces or woody stuff must be cast away, and that which
remaineth boiled again till it become as thick as honey: Pliny
saith, that the roots and branches are very bitter, and for three
days together they must be boiled in a copper vessel, and the wood
and sticks often taken out till the decoction be boiled to the
thickness of honey.

The Time.

They flower in February and March, and their fruit is ripe in
September.
The Names.

It is named in Latin Buxea spina: and in English, Box Thorn: of
some, Asses' Box Tree, and Prickly Box: it is also named Lycium, of
the juice which is boiled out of it: the juice is properly called
lykion, and retaineth in Latin the same name Lycium: it is termed in
English Thorn Box. But it seemeth to me, that the original name
Lycium is fitter, being a strange thing, and known to very few: the
apothecaries know it not, who instead thereof do use amiss the juice
of the fruit of Woodbine, and that not without great error, as we
have already written.

Dioscorides teacheth to make a chylisma of Sumach which is good for
those things that Lycium is, and is used when Lycium is not to be
had, and is to be put in all medicines instead thereof.

The Temperature.

Lycium, or the juice of Box Thorn, is as Galen teacheth, of a drying
quality, and compounded of divers kinds of substances, one of thin
parts digesting and hot; another earthy and cold, by which it
enjoyeth his binding faculty: it is hot in a mean, and therefore it
is used for several purposes.

The Virtues.

A. Lycium cleareth the sight, saith Dioscorides, healeth the scurvy
festered sores of the eyelids, the itch, and old fluxes, or
distillations of humours; it is a remedy for the running of the
ears; for ulcers in the gums, and almonds of the throat, and against
the chaps or gallings of the lips and fundament.

CHAP. 28. Of Ram or Hart's Thorn.

The Kinds.

After the opinion of Dioscorides there be three sorts of Rhamnus,
one with long, flat & soft leaves: the other with white leaves, and
the third with round leaves, which are somewhat blackish.
Theophrastus and Pliny affirm that there are but two, the one white,
and the other black, both which do bear thorns: but by the labour
and industry of the new and late writers there are found sundry
sorts more, all which and every one of them are plants of a woody
substance, having also many straight twiggy and pliant branches, set
with most sharp pricking thorns.

Fig. 1895. Kinds of Ram or Hart's Thorn (1-3)
The Description.

1. This is a shrub growing in the hedges, and bringing forth
straight branches and hard thorns, like to those of the Hawthorn,
with little leaves, long, something fat and soft: and this hath that
notable learned man Clusius described more diligently in these
words: the Ram is a shrub fit to make hedges of, with straight
branches, parting itself into many twigs, white, and set with stiff
and strong thorns, having leaves, which for the most part grow by
fours or fives at the root of every thorn, long, something fat, like
to those of the Olive tree, somewhat white, but tender and full of
juice; which in autumn do sometimes fall off, leaving new growing in
their places: the flowers in autumn are something long, whitish,
divided at the brims into five parts: in their places is left a
seed, in show as in Gelsemine: notwithstanding it was never my
chance to see the fruit: the root is thick and diversly parted.

I observed another (saith the same author) almost like to the
former, but lower, and divided into more branches, with lesser
leaves, more thick and salt of taste, and whiter also than the
former: the flowers are like, in all things but their colour, those
of the former, which in this are purple.

2. This hath more flexible stalks and branches, and these also set
with thorns: the leaves are narrow, and not so thick or fleshy as
those of the former, yet remain always green like as they do: the
flowers are small and mossy, of a greenish colour, growing thick
about the branches, and they are succeeded by a round fruit,
yellowish when it is ripe, and remaining on the shrub all the
winter: The whole shrub looks as if it were sprinkled over with
dust.

3. To these may be added another growing with many branches to the
height of the Sloe tree or Blackthorn, and these are covered with a
blackish bark, and armed with long prickles: the leaves, as in the
first, grow forth of certain knots many together, long, narrow,
fleshy, green, and continuing all the year: their taste is
astringent, somewhat like that of Rhubarb: the flowers show
themselves at the beginning of the spring, of a greenish colour,
growing thick together, and near the setting on of the leaves; in
summer it carries a black fruit almost like a Sloe, round, and harsh
of taste.

The Place.

The first of these grows in sundry places of Spain, Portugal, and
Provençe: the other variety thereof Clusius saith he found but only
in one place, and that was near the city Orihuela, called by the
ancients Orcellis, by the river Segura, upon the borders of the
kingdom of Valencia: the second grows in many places of Flanders and
Holland, and in some valleys by rivers sides. The third grows in the
untilled places of the kingdom of Granada and Murcia.

The Time.

This Ram is evergreen together with his leaves: the fruit or berries
remain on the shrub, yea even in winter.

The Names.

The Grecians call this Ramnos: the Latins also Rhamnus; and of
divers it is also named Spina alba, or Whitethorn, Spina cervalis,
or Hart's-thorn, as we find written among the bastard words.
Marcellus nameth it Spina salutaris and Herba salutaris, which hath,
saith he, as it were a grape. It is called in Italian Marruca and
Rhamno: in Spanish, Scambrones: in English, Ram, or Hart's-Thorn.

The Temperature.

The Ram, saith Galen, doth dry and digest in the second degree, it
cooleth in the later end of the first degree, and in the beginning
of the second.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves, saith Dioscorides, are laid poultice-wise upon hot
choleric inflammations, and Saint Anthony's fire, but we must use
them whilst they be yet but tender, as Galen addeth.

B. The leaves and buds or young shoots of the first are eaten as
salads with oil, vinegar, and salt, at Salamanca and other places of
Castile, for they have a certain acrimony and acidity which are
grateful to the taste. A decoction of the fruit of the third is good
to foment relaxed and weak or paralytic members, and to ease the
pain of the gout, as the inhabitants of Granada told Clusius.

CHAP. 29. Of Christ's Thorn.

Fig. 1896. Christ's Thorn

The Description.

Christ's Thorn or Ram of Libya, is a very tough and hard shrubby
bush, growing up sometimes unto the height of a little tree, having
very long and sharp prickly branches; but the thorns that grow about
the leaves are lesser, and not so prickly as the former. The leaves
are small, broad, and almost round, somewhat sharp pointed; first of
dark green colour, and then somewhat reddish. The flowers grow in
clusters at the top of the stalks, of a yellow colour: the husks
wherein the seeds be contained, are flat and broad, very like unto
small bucklers, as hard as wood, wherein are contained three or four
thin and flat seeds, like the seed of Line or Flax.

The Place.

This Thorn groweth in Libya; it is better esteemed of in the country
of Cyrene than is their Lotus tree, as Pliny affirmeth. Of this
shrub Diphilus Siphnius in Athenæus in his fourteenth book maketh
mention, saying, that he did very often eat of the same in
Alexandria that beautiful city.

Petrus Bellonius who travelled over the Holly Land, saith, that this
shrubby thorn Paliurus was the thorn wherewith they crowned our
Saviour Christ: his reason for the proof hereof is this, that in
Judæa there was not any thorn so common, so pliant, or so fit for to
make a crown or garland of, nor any so full of cruel sharp prickles.
It groweth throughout the whole country in such abundance, that it
is their common fuel to burn; yea so common with them there, as our
Gorse, Brakes, and Broom is here with us. Josephus in his first book
of Antiquities, and 11th chap. saith, that this Thorn hath the most
sharp prickles of any other; and therefore that Christ might be the
more tormented, the Jews rather took this than any other. Of which I
have a small tree growing in my garden, that I have brought forth by
sowing of the seed.

The Time.

The leaves fall away and continue not always green, as do those of
the Rams: it buddeth forth in the spring, as Pliny testifieth.
The Names.

This Thorny shrub is called in Greek, Latin and Italian Paliurus:
for want of an English name, it may be termed Ram of Libya, or
Christ's Thorn: Pliny reporteth, that the seed is called Zura.

The Temperature.

The leaves and root of Christ's Thorn do evidently bind and cut.

The Virtues.

A. By virtue of this cutting quality the seed doth wear away the
stone, and cause tough and slimy humours to remove out of the chest
and lungs, as Galen saith.

B. The decoction of the leaves and root of Christ's Thistle, as
Dioscorides writeth, stoppeth the belly, provoketh urine, and is a
remedy against poisons, and the bitings of serpents.

C. The root doth waste and consume away phymata and demata if it be
stamped and applied.

D. The seed is good for the cough, and weareth away the stone in the
bladder.

CHAP. 30. Of Buckthorn, or Laxative Ram.


Fig. 1897. Buckthorn (1)
Fig. 1898. Middle Buckthorn (2)

The Description.

1. Buckthorn groweth in manner of a shrub or hedge tree; his trunk
or body is often as big as a man's thigh; his wood or timber is
yellow within, and his bark is of the colour of a Chestnut, almost
like the bark of a Cherry tree. The branches are beset with leaves
that are somewhat round, and finely snipped about the edges like the
leaves of the Crab or Wilding tree: among which come forth thorns
which are hard and prickly: the flowers are white and small, which
being faded there succeed little round berries, green at the first,
but afterwards black, whereof that excellent green colour is made,
which the painters and limners do call sap green; but these berries
before they be ripe do make a fair yellow colour, being steeped in
vinegar.

2. Besides the common kind, Clusius mentions two other: the first of
which hath branches some two cubits long, subdivided into divers
others, covered with a smooth bark like that of the former, which,
the upper rind being taken off, is of a yellowish green colour, and
bitterish taste: the branches have some few prickles upon them, and
commonly end in them: the leaves are almost like those of the common
kind; but smaller, narrower, and somewhat resembling those of the
Blackthorn, having somewhat a drying taste: the flower consists of
four leaves of a yellowish green colour: the root is woody as in
other shrubs: Clusius found this growing in the mountainous places
of Austria, and calls it Spina infectoria pumila.

Fig. 1899. Dwarf Buckthorn (3)

3. This other hath branches four cubits long, and of the thickness
of one's little finger, or lesser, covered with a black and
shrivelled bark: and towards the top divided into little boughs,
which are covered with a thin & smoother bark, and commonly end in a
sharp thorn: the leaves much resemble those of the Sloe tree yet are
they shorter and lesser, green also, and snipped about the edges;
first of an astringent, and afterwards of somewhat a bitterish
taste; the flowers which grow amongst the leaves are of an herby
colour, and consist of four leaves: the fruit is not much unlike
that of the former; but distinguished with two, & sometimes with
three crests or dents, first green, and then black when it is ripe:
the root is thick, woody and hard. Clusius found this on the hill
above the baths of Baden, he calls it Spina infectoria pumila 2.
This Matthiolus and others call Lycium italicum.

The Place.

Buckthorn groweth near the borders of fields, in hedges, woods, and
in other untoiled places: it delighteth to grow in rivers and in
water ditches: it groweth in Kent in sundry places, as at Farningham
upon the cony burrows belonging sometime to Mr. Sibil, as also upon
cony burrows in Southfleet, especially in a small and narrow lane
leading from the house of Mr. William Swan unto Longfield downs,
also in the hedge upon the right hand at Dartford town's end towards
London, and in many places more upon the chalky banks and hedges.

The Time.

It flowereth in May, the berries be ripe in the fall of the leaf.

The Names.

The later herbarists call it in Latin Rhamnus solutivus, because it
is set with thorns, like as the Ram, and beareth purging berries.
Matthiolus nameth it Spina infectoria; Valerius Corsius, Spina
cervi, and divers call it Burgispina. It is termed in High Dutch,
Creukbeer weghdorn: in Italian, Spino Merlo, Spino Zerlino, Spino
Cervino: in English, Laxative Ram, Way-Thorn, and Buckthorn: in Low
Dutch they call the fruit or berries Rhijnbessen, that is, as though
you should say in Latin; Bacca Rhenane ["Rhine berries"]: in
English, Rhineberries: in French, Nerprun.

The Temperature.

The berries of this Thorn, as they be in taste bitter and binding,
so be they also hot and dry in the second degree.
The Virtues.

A. The same do purge and void by the stool thick phlegm, and also
choleric humours: they are given being beaten into powder from one
dram to a dram and a half: divers do number the berries, who give to
strong bodies from fifteen to twenty or more; but it is better to
break them and boil them in fat flesh broth without salt, and to
give the broth to drink: for so they purge with lesser trouble and
fewer gripings.

B. There is pressed forth of the ripe berries a juice, which being
boiled with a little alum is used of painters for a deep green,
which they do call sap green.

C. The berries which be as yet unripe, being dried and infused or
steeped in water, do make a fair yellow colour; but if they be ripe
they make a green.

CHAP. 31. Of the Holm, Holly, or Hulver Tree.

Fig. 1900. Holly

The Description.

The Holly is a shrubby plant, notwithstanding it oftentimes grows to
a tree of a reasonable bigness: the boughs whereof are tough and
flexible, covered with a smooth and green bark. The substance of the
wood is hard and sound, and blackish or yellowish within, which doth
also sink in the water, as doth the Indian wood which is callcd
Guaiacum: the leaves are of a beautiful green colour, smooth and
glib, like almost the bay leaves, but lesser, and cornered in the
edges with sharp prickles, which notwithstanding they want or have
few when the tree is old: the flowers be white, and sweet of smell:
the berries are round, of the bigness of a little Pea, or not much
greater, of colour red, of taste unpleasant, with a white stone in
the midst, which do not easily fall away, but hang on the boughs a
long time: the root is woody.

There is made of the smooth bark of this tree or shrub, birdlime,
which the birders and country men do use to take birds with: they
pull off the bark, and make a ditch in the ground, specially in
moist, boggy, or soggy earth, whereinto they put this bark, covering
the ditch with boughs of trees, letting it remain there till it be
rotten and putrefied, which will be done in the space of twelve days
or thereabout: which done, they take it forth, and beat in mortars
until it be come to the thickness and clamminess of lime: lastly,
that they clear it from pieces of bark and other filthiness, they do
wash it very often: after which they add unto it a little oil of
nuts, and after that do put it up in earthen vessels.

The Place.

The Holly tree groweth plentifully in all countries. It groweth
green both winter and summer: the berries are ripe in September, and
they do hang upon the tree a long time after.

The Names.

This tree or shrub is called in Latin Agrifolium: in Italian,
Agrifoglio, and Aguifoglio: in Spanish, Azebo: in High Dutch,
Walddistel, and of divers Steepalmen; in Low Dutch, Huist; in
French, Hous and Housson: in English, Holly, Hulver, and Holm.

The Temperature.

The berries of Holly are hot and dry, and of thin parts, and waste
away wind.

The Virtues.

A. They are good against the colic: for ten or twelve being inwardly
taken bring away by the stool thick phlegmatic humours, as we have
learned of them who oftentimes made trial thereof,

B. The birdlime which is made of the bark hereof is no less hurtful
than that of Mistletoe, for it is marvellous clammy, it glueth up
all the entrails, it shutteth and draweth together the guts and
passages of the excrements, and by this means it bringeth
destruction to man, not by any quality, but by his glueing
substance.

C. Holly beaten to powder and drunk is an experimented medicine
against all the fluxes of the belly, as the dysentery and such like.

CHAP. 32. Of the Oak.


Fig. 1901. Oak with acorns (1)
Fig. 1902. Oak with galls (2)

The Description.

1. The common Oak groweth to a great tree; the trunk or body whereof
is covered over with a thick rough bark full of chops or rifts: the
arms or boughs are likewise great, dispersing themselves far abroad:
the leaves are bluntly indented about the edges, smooth, and of a
shining green colour, whereon is often found a most sweet dew and
somewhat clammy, and also a fungous excrescence, which we call Oak
Apples. The fruit is long, covered with a brown hard and tough
pilling, set in a rough scaly cup or husk: there is often found upon
the body of the tree, and also upon the branches, a certain kind of
long white moss hanging down from the same: and sometimes another
woody plant, which we cal Mistletoe, being either an excrescence or
outgrowing from the tree itself, or of the dung (as it is reported)
of a bird that hath eaten a certain berry. Besides these there are
about the roots of old Oaks within the earth certain other
excrescences, which Bauhine and others have called Uva
quercinæ,["Oak grapes"] because they commonly grow in clusters
together, after the manner of grapes and about their bigness, being
sometimes round, & otherwhiles cornered, of a woody substance,
hollow within; and sometimes of a purple, otherwhiles of a whitish
colour on the outside: their taste is astringent, and use singular
in all dysenteries and fluxes of blood, as Encelius affirms, Cap.
51. de Lapid. & Gen.

Fig. 1903. Dwarf Oak (3)

3. Carolus Clusius reporteth that tbe found this base or low Oak not
far from Lisbon, of the height of a cubit, which notwithstanding did
also bear an acorn like that of our Oak tree, saving that the cup is
smoother, and the acorn much bitterer, wherein it differeth from the
rest of his kind.

There is a wild Oak which riseth up oftentimes to a marvellous
height, and reacheth very far with his arms and boughs, the body
whereof is now and then of a mighty thickness, in compass two or
three fathoms: it sendeth forth great spreading arms, divided into a
multitude of boughs. The leaves are smooth, something, hard, broad,
long, gashed in the edges, green on the upper side: the acorns are
long, but shorter than those of the tamer Oak; every one fastened in
his own cup, which is rough without: they are covered with a thin
rind or shell: the substance or kernel within is divided into two
parts, as are beans, peas, and almonds: the bark of the young Oaks
is smooth, glib, and good to thicken skins and hides with, but that
of the old Oaks is rugged, thick, hard, and full of chops: the inner
substance or heart of the wood is something yellow, hard and sound,
and the older the harder: the white and outward part next to the
bark doth easily rot, being subject to the worm, especially if the
tree be not felled in due time: some of the roots grow deep into the
earth, and other some far abroad, by which it stiffly standeth.

The Place.

The Oak doth scarcely refuse any ground; for it groweth in a dry and
barren soil, yet doth it prosper better in a fruitful ground: it
groweth upon hills and mountains, and likewise in valleys: it cometh
up everywhere in all parts of England, but is not so common in other
of the South and hot regions.

The time.

The Oak doth cast his leaves for the most part about the end of
autumn: some keep their leaves on, but dry, all winter long, until
they be thrust off by the new spring.

The Names

The Oak is called in Latin, Quercus: of some, Placida, as Gaza
translateth it. It may be called Sativa, Urbana, or Culta, some
also, Emeros mudion and Robur. We may name it in English, the tamer
Oak tree: in French, Chesne: in Dutch, Eyeken boom.

The fruit is named in Latin, Glans: in High Dutch, Eichel: in Low
Dutch, Eekel: in Spanish, Bellotus: in Italian, Chiande: in English,
acorn and mast.

The cup wherein the acorn standeth is named in Greek Omphakis, as
Paulus Ægineta in his third book, 42nd chapter testifieth, saying,
Omphacis is the hollow thing out of which the acorn groweth: in
Latin, calix glandis: in shops, Cupula glandis: in English, the
acorn cup.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The leaves, bark, acorn cups, and the acorns themselves, do
mightily bind and dry in the third degree, being somewhat cold
withal.

B. The best of them, saith Galen, is the thin skin which is under
the bark of the tree, and that next, which lieth nearest to the
pulp, or inner substance of the acorn; all these stay the whites,
the reds, spitting of blood and lasks: the decoction of these is
given, or the powder of them dried, for the purposes aforesaid.

C. Acorns if they be eaten are hardly concocted, they yield no
nourishment to man's body, but that which is gross, raw, and cold.

D. Swine are fatted herewith, and by feeding hereon have their flesh
hard and sound.

E. The acorns provoke urine, and are good against all venom and
poison, but they are not of such a stopping and binding faculty as
the leaves and barke.

F. The Oak apples are good against all fluxes of blood and lasks, in
what manner soever they be taken, but the best way is to boil them
in red wine, and being so prepared, they are good also against the
excessive moisture and swelling of the jaws and almonds or kernels
of the throat.

G. The decoction of Oak apples stayeth women's diseases, and causeth
the mother that is fallen down to return again to the natural place,
if they do sit over the said decoction being very hot.

H. The same steeped in strong white wine vinegar, with a little
powder of brimstone, and the root of Ireos mingled together, and set
in the sun by the space of a month, maketh the hair black, consumeth
proud and superfluous flesh, taketh away sun-burning, freckles,
spots, the morphew, with all deformities of the face, being washed
therewith.

I. The Oak Apples being broken in sunder about the time of their
withering, do foreshew the sequel of the year, as the expert Kentish
husbandmen have observed by the living things found in them: as if
they find an ant, they foretell plenty of grain to ensue: if a white
worm like a gentle or maggot, then they prognosticate murrain of
beats and cattle; if a spider, then (say they) we shall have a
pestilence or some such like sickness to follow amongst men: these
things the learned also have observed and noted; for Matthiolus
writing upon Dioscorides saith, that before they have an hole
through them, they contain in them either a fly, a spider, or a
worm: if a fly, then war insueth, if a creeping worm, then scarcity
of victuals, if a running spider, then followeth great sickness or
mortality.

CHAP. 33. Of the Scarlet Oak.

The Kinds.

Although Theophrastus hath made mention but of one of these Holm or
Holly Oaks only, yet hath the later age set down two kinds thereof;
one bearing the scarlet grain, and the other only the acorn, which
thing is not contrary to Dioscorides his opinion, for he entreateth
of that which beareth the acorn, in his first book, among the Oaks;
and the other he describeth in his fourth book, under the title
Coccus Baphice.

Fig. 1904. Scarlet Oak.

The Description.

The Oak which beareth the scarlet grain is a small tree, in manner
of a hedge tree, of a mean bigness, having many fair branches or
boughs spread abroad: whereon are set leaves, green above, white
underneath, snipped about the edges, and at every corner one sharp
prickle, in manner of the smoother Holly: among which cometh
sometimes, but not often, small acorns, standing in little cups or
husks, armed with pricks as sharp as thorns, and of a bitter taste.
Besides the acorns, there is found cleaving unto the woody branches,
a certain kind of berries, or rather an excrescence, of the
substance of the Oak Apple, and of the bigness of a pea, at the
first white, and of the colour of ashes when they be ripe, in which
are engendered little maggots, which seem to be without life until
they feel the heat of the sun, and then they creep, and seek to fly
away. But the people of the country (which make a gain of them) do
watch the time of their flying, even as we do bees, which they then
take and put into a linen bag, wherein they shake and bolt them up
and down until they be dead, which they make up into great lumps
oftentimes, and likewise sell them to dyers apart, even as they were
taken forth of the bag, whereof is made the most perfect scarlet.

The Place.

This Oak groweth in Languedoc, and in the countries thereabout, and
also in Spain: but it beareth not the scarlet grain in all places,
but in those especially, which lie towards the Midland Sea and which
be subject to the scorching heat of the sun, as Carolus Clusius
witnesseth; & not there always, for when the tree waxeth old it
grows to be barren. Then do the people cut and lop it down; that
after the young shoots have attained to two or three years growth,
it may become fruitful again.

Petrus Bellonius in his books Of Singularities showeth, that Coccus
baphicus or the Scarlet Grain doth grow in the Holy Land, and near
to the lake which is called the Sea of Tiberias, and that upon
little trees, whereby the inhabitants get great store of wealth, who
separate the husks from the pulp or maggots, and sell this being
made up into balls or lumps, much dearer than the empty shells or
husks.

Of this grain also Pausanias hath made mention in his tenth book,
and showeth, that the tree which bringeth forth this grain is not
great, and also groweth in Phocis, which is a country in Macedonia
near to the Boetians, not far from the mountain Parnassus.

Theophrastus writeth, that the Scarlet Oak, is a great tree, and
riseth up to the height of the common Oak: amongst which writers
there are some contrariety. Petrus Bellonius reporteth it is a
little tree, and Theophrastus a great one, which may chance
according to the soil and climate; for that upon the stony mountains
cannot grow to that greatness as those in the fertile grounds.

The Time.

The little grains or berries which grow about the boughs begin to
appear especially in the spring, when the Southwest winds do blow:
the flowers fall and are ripe in June, together with the maggots
growing in them, which receiving life by the heat of the sun, do
forthwith fly away (in manner of a moth or butterfly) unless by the
care and diligence of the keepers, they be killed by much and often
shaking them together, as aforesaid.

The tree or shrub hath his leaves always green: the acorns be very
late before they be ripe, seldom before new come up in their place.

The Names.

The Scarlet Oak is called in Latin Ilex: the later writers, Ilex
cocciger, or coccifera; in Spanish, Coscoia: for want of a fit
English name, we have thought good to call it by the name of Scarlet
Oak, or Scarlet Holm Oak: for Ilex is named of some in English,
Holm, which signifieth Holly or Hulver. But this Ilex, as well as
those that follow, might be called Holm Oak, Hulver Oak, or Holly
Oak, for difference from the shrub or hedge tree Agrifolium, which
is simply called Holm, Holly, and Hulver.

The grain or berry that serveth to dye with is properly called in
Latin, Coccus infectoria, or Coccum infectorium: ["Dyers' scarlet"]
Pliny also nameth it Cusculium: or as most men do read it,
Quisquilium: the same author saith, that it is likewise named
Scolecion, or maggot berry.

The Arabians and the apothecaries do know it by the name of Chesmes,
Chermes, and Kermes: They are deceived who think that Chesmes doth
differ from Infectorium Coccum: it is called in Italian, Grano de
tinctori: in Spanish, Grana de tintoreros: in High Dutch,
Scharlachbeer: in French, Vermillon, and Graine d'escarlate: in
English, after the Dutch, Scarlet Berry, or Scarlet Grain, and after
the apothecaries' word, Coccus Baphicus: the maggot within is that
which is named Cochineal, as most do deem.

Theophrastus saith the acorn or fruit hereof is called of divers
Acylum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. This grain is astringent and somewhat bitter, and also dry
without sharpness and biting, therefore, saith Galen, it is good for
great wounds and sinews that be hurt, if it be laid thereon; some
temper it with Vinegar; others with Oxymel or syrup of vinegar.

B. It is commended and given by the later physicians to stay the
menses: it is also counted among those simples which be cordials,
and good to strengthen the heart. Of this grain that noble and
famous confection Alkermes, made by the Arabians, hath taken his
name, which many do highly commend against the infirmities of the
heart: notwithstanding it was chiefly devised in the beginning for
purging of melancholy; which thing is plainly perceived by the great
quantity of lapis lazuli added thereto: and therefore seeing that
this stone hath in it a venomous quality, and likewise a property to
purge melancholy, it canot of itself be good for the heart, but the
other things be good, which be therefore added, that they might
defend the heart from the hurts of this stone, and correct the
malice thereof.

C. This composition is commended against the trembling and shaking
of the heart, and for swoonings and melancholy passions, and sorrow
proceeding of no evident cause: it is reported to recreate the mind,
and to make a man merry and joyful.

D. It is therefore good against melancholy diseases, vain
imaginations, sighings, grief and sorrow without manifest cause, for
that it purgeth away melancholy humours: after this manner it may be
comfortable for the heart, and delightful to the mind, in taking
away the material cause of sorrow: neither can it otherwise
strengthen a weak and feeble heart, unless this stone called Lapis
Cyaneus be quite left out.

E. Therefore he that is purposed to use this composition against
beatings and throbbings of the heart, and swoonings, and that not as
a purging medicine, shall do well and wisely by leaving out the
stone Cyaneus; for this being taken in a little weight or small
quantity, cannot purge at at all, but may in the mean season trouble
and torment the stomach, and withal through his sharp and venomous
quality (if it be oftentimes taken) be very offensive to the guts
and entrails, and by this means bring more harm than good.

F. Moreover, it is not necessary, no nor expedient, that the bristle
dyed with cochineal, called Chesmes, as the apothecaries term it,
should be added to this composition: for this bristle is not dyed
without Auripigmentum, called also Orpiment, and other pernicious
things joined therewith, whose poisonsome qualities are added to the
juices together with the colour, if either the bristle or dyed silk
be boiled in them.

G. The berries of the Cochineal must be taken by themselves, which
alone are sufficient to dye the juices, and to impart unto them
their virtue: neither is it likewise needful to boil the raw silk
together with the grains, as most physicians think: this may be left
out, for it maketh nothing at all for the strengthening of the
heart.

CHAP. 34. Of the Great Scarlet Oak.


Fig. 1905. Great Scarlet Oak.
Fig. 1906. The Flowers of the Great Scarlet Oak.

The Description.

The great Scarlet Oak, or the Great Holm Oak, growth many times to
the full height of a tree, sometimes as big as the Pear tree, with
boughs far spreading like the Acorn or common Mast trees: the timber
is firm and sound: the leaves are set with prickles round about the
edges, like those of the former Scarlet Oak: the leaves when the
tree waxeth old have on them no prickles at all, but are somewhat
bluntly cut or indented about the edges, green on the upper side,
and grey underneath: the acorn standeth in a prickly cup like our
common Oak acorn, which when it is ripe becometh of a brown colour,
with a white kernel within of taste not unpleasant. There is found
upon the branches of this tree a certain kind of long hairy moss of
the colour of ashes, not unlike to that of English Oak. This tree is
evergreen, and at the tops of the branches about the end of May,
here in England, carries divers catkins of mossy yellow flowers,
which fall away, and are not succeeded by the acorns, for they grow
out upon other stalks. Clusius in the year 1581 observed two trees;
the one in a garden above the Bridge, and the other in the Private
Garden at Whitehall, having lesser leaves than the former. The
latter of these is yet standing, and every year bears small acorns, 
which I could never observe to come to any maturity.

The Place.

In divers places there are great woods of these trees, hills also
and valleys are beautified therewith: they grow plentifully in many
countries of Spain, and in Languedoc and Provençe in great plenty.
It is likewise found in Italy. It beareth an acorn greater, and of a
larger size than doth the tame Oak; in some countries lesser and
shorter: they are strangers in England, notwithstanding there is
here and there a tree thereof, that hath been procured from beyond
the seas: one groweth in her Majesty's Privy Garden at Whitehall,
near to the gate that leadeth into the street, and in some other
places here and there one.

The Time.

It is green at all times of the year: it is late before the acorns
be ripe. Clusius reporteth, that he saw the flowers growing in
clusters of a yellow colour in May.

The Names.

This Oak is named in in Latin, Ilex: in Spanish, Enzina: in Italian,
Elize: in French, Chesneverd: in English, Barren Scarlet Oak, or
Holm Oak, and also of same, French or Spanish Oak.

The Spaniards call the fruit or acorn Bellota, or Abillota.
Theophrastus seemeth to call this tree not Prinos, but Smilax: for
he maketh mention but of one Ilex only, and that is of Scarlet Oak;
and he showeth that the Arcadians do not call the other Ilex, but
Smilax: for the name Smilax is of many significations: there is
Smilax among the Pulses, which is also called Dolichus, and
Phaseolus; and Smilax aspera, and Lævis, amongst the Bindweeds:
likewise Smilax is taken of Dioscorides to be Taxus, the Yew tree.
Of Smilax, Theophrastus writeth thus in his third book: the
inhabitants of Arcadia do call a certain tree Smilax, being like
unto the Scarlet Oak: the leaves thereof be not set with such sharp
prickles, but tenderer and softer.

Of this Smilax Pliny also writeth, in his Sixteenth book, chap. 6,
there be of Ilex, saith he, two kinds, Ex iis in Italia folio non
multum ab oleis distant,["Of these there is one in Ialy with a leaf
not unlike the Olive"] called of certain Grecians Smilaces, in the
provinces Aquifolia: in which words, instead of Olive trees may
perchance be more truly placed Suberis, or the Cork tree; for this
kind of Ilex or Smilax is not reported of any of the old writers to
have the leaf of the Olive tree: but Suber in Greek, called Phellos,
or the Cork tree, hath a little leaf.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. The leaves of this Oak have force to cool and repel, or keep
back, as have the leaves of the Acorns or Mast trees: being stamped
or beaten, and applied, they are good for soft swellings, and
strengthen weak members.

B. The bark of the root boiled in water until it be dissolved, and
laid on all night, maketh the hair black, being first scoured with
Cimolia, as Dioscorides saith.

C. Clusius reportedth, that the acorn is esteemed of, eaten, and
brought into the market to be sold, in the city of Salamanca in
Spain, and in many other places of that country; and of this acorn
Pliny also hath peradventure written, lib. 16. cap. 5, in these
words: Moreover, at this day in Spain the acorn is served for a
second course.

CHAP. 35. Of the Great Holm Oak.

Fig. 1907. Holm Oak with Large Acorns (1)

The Description.

Among the wild Oaks this is not the least, for his comely
proportion, although profitable for timber, to make coals, carts,
wainscot, houses, or ships of: the fruit is not fit for any man or
beast to eat, neither any property known for the use of physic or
surgery: it groweth up to the height of a fair tree, the trunk or
body is great, and very fair to took upon: the wood or timber soft
and spongy, scarce good to be burned: from which shooteth forth very
comely branches dispersing themselves far abroad; whereon are set
for the most part by couples very fair leaves, green above, and of
an overworn russet colour underneath, cut or snipped about the edges
very deep: the acorn groweth fast unto the boughs, without any
footstalk at all, being very like unto our common acorn, set in a
rough and prickly cup like an hedgehog or the Chestnut husk, of a
harsh taste, and hollow within: this tree beareth or bringeth forth
oft-times a certain smooth kind of gall not altogether unprofitable.
This Oak likewise bringeth forth another kind of excresence, which
the graver hath omitted in the figure, Gaza nameth it Penis. This
Penis or prick is hollow, mossy, hanging down half a yard long, like
a long rag of linen cloth.


Fig. 1908. Holm Oak with Small Acorns (2)
Fig. 1909. A Branch of the Lesser Holm Oak with Flowers (2)

2. The second is altogether like the first, saving that this beareth
smaller acorns, and the whole tree is altogether less, wherein
consisteth the difference.

Both this & the former carry flowers clustering upon long stalks,
like as in the common Oak; but the fruit doth not succeed them, but
grow forth in other places.

The Place.

This Oak groweth in untoiled places, it is seldom times found, and
that but in woods only: it is for the most part unknown in Italy, as
Pliny reporteth.

The Time.

They bring forth their fruit or acorns in the fall of the leaf.

The Names.

This Oak is called in Greek Ægilops: Latin, Cerrus: yet doth Pliny
make mention both of, Ægilops, and also of Cerrus: Ægilops is
likewise one of the diseases of corn, called in Latin, Festuca: in
English, Wild Oats, and far differing from the tree Ægilops.

That which hangeth from the boughs, Pliny, lib. 16. cap. 8, calleth
Panus only: that acorn tree named Ægilops bringeth forth Panos
arentes, withered pricks, covered with white mossy jags hanging
down, not only in the bark Ægilops, but also from the boughs, half a
yard in bigness, bearing a sweet smell, as we have said, among
ointments.

The Temperature and Virtues.

We find nothing written of the faculties of this tree among the old
writers, neither of our own experience.

CHAP. 36. Of the Cork Oak.

Fig. 1910. Broad-Leaved and Narrow-Leaved Cork Oak (1 & 2)

The Description.

1. The Cork tree is of a middle bigness like unto Ilex, or the
barren scarlet Oak, but with a thicker body, and fewer boughs: the
leaves be for the most part greater, broader, rounder, and more 
nicked in the edges: the bark of the tree is thick, very rugged, and
full of chinks or crannies that cleaveth and divideth itself into
pieces, which unless they be taken away in due time do give place to
another bark growing underneath, which when the old is removed is
marvellous red, as though it were painted with some colour: the
acorn standeth in a cup, which is great, bristled, rough, and full
of prickles: this acorn is also astringent or binding, more
unpleasant than the Holm acorn, greater in one place, and less in
another.

2. The Cork tree with narrow leaves groweth likewise to the height
and bigness of a great tree; the trunk or body whereof is covered
with a rough and scabbed bark of an overworn blackish colour, which
likewise cleaveth and casteth his coat when the inner bark groweth
somewhat thick: the branches are long, tough, and flexible, easy to
be bowed any way, like those of the Osier; whereupon do grow leaves
like those of the precedent, but longer, and little or nothing
indented about the edges: the fruit groweth in small cups as the
acorns do: they are lesser than those of the other kind, as is the
rest of the tree, wherein is the chiefest difference. This varies in
the leaf, (as you may see in the figure) which in some is snipped
about the edge, in other some not at all.

The Place.

It groweth in the country of Aquitania, near to the mountains called
Pyrenaei: it also groweth plentifully in the kingdoms of Spain,
differing somewhat from that of Aquitania, as Clusius declareth: it
is likewise found in Italy, and that in the territory of Pisa, with
a longer leaf, and sharper pointed; and about Rome with a broader,
and cut in the edges like a saw, and rougher, as Matthiolus
testifieth.

The Time.

The leaves of the first are always green in Spain and Italy, about
the Pyrenæan mountains they fall away in winter.

The Names.

This tree is called in Latin Suber: in French, Liege: in Italian,
Sugaro: the same names do also belong to the bark: the Spaniards
call the tree Alcornoque: and the bark, Corcha de Alcornoque: the
Englishmen, Cork tree: whereupon the Low-Country men and also
Englishmen do call it Cork and yet it is called in Low Dutch also
Vlothout.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. This bark doth manifestly dry, with a binding faculty.
	B. Being beaten to powder and taken in water it stancheth
bleeding in any part of the body. The Cork which is taken out of
wine vessels, saith Paulus, being burnt, maketh ashes which do
mightily dry, and are mixed in compositions used against the bloody
flux.

C. Cork is also profitable for manythings: it is used (saith Pliny)
about the anchors of ships, fishers' nets, and to stop vessels with;
and in winter for women's shoes, which use remains with us even to
this day: fishermen hang this bark upon the wings of their nets for
fear of sinking: and shoe-makers put it in shoes and pantofles for
warmness' sake.

CHAP. 37. Of the Gall Tree.

The Kinds.

Of trees that bring forth galls there be divers sorts, as may appear
by the divers forms and sorts of galls set forth in this present
chapter which may serve for their several distinctions, whereof some
bring for the acorns likewise, and some nothing but galls: the
figures of some few of the trees shall give you sufficient knowledge
of the rest: for all the acorn or mast trees bring forth galls, but
those trees whose figures we have set forth do bear those galls fit
for medicine, and to thicken skins with.

Dioscorides and Galen make but two sorts of galls; the one little,
yellow, full of holes, and more spongy in the inner part, both of
them round, having the form of a little ball, and the other smooth
and even on the outside: since, the later writers have found more,
some having certain little knobs sticking forth, like in form to the
gall, which doth also cleave and grow without stalk to the leaf.
There is also found a certain excrescence of a light green colour,
spongy and watery, in the middle whereof now and then is found a
little fly or worm: which soft ball in hot countries doth oftentimes
become hard, like the little smooth gall, as Theophrastus saith.


Fig. 1911. The Great Gall tree (1)
Fig. 1912. Another Great Gall tree (2)

The Description.

1. The Gall tree grows up to a sufficient height, having a very fair
trunk or body, whereon are placed long twiggy branches bringing
forth very fair leaves, broad, and nicked in the edges like the
teeth of a saw: among which come forth acorns, although the figure
express not the same, like those of the Oak, and likewise a woody
excrescence, which we name the gall, having certain small eminences
or bunches on the outside, growing for the most part upon the
slender branches without stalks, and sometimes they grow at the ends
thereof; which by the heat of the sun are harder, greater, and more
solid in one country than another, according to the soil and
climate.

2. This grows to the height of a tall man, having leaves deeply
divided on the edges like the Oak, and they are green above, but
hairy and hoary below; it carries a great gall of the bigness of a
little apple, and that in great plenty, & without any order. This
groweth in divers parts of Old Castile in Spain, and in all the
mountainous woods about Vienna in Austria.

Fig. 1913. The Little Gall Tree (3)

3. The lesser gall tree differeth not from the former, saving that
it is altogether lesser: the fruit and gall is likewise lesser,
wherein especially consisteth the difference.

The Place.

The galls are found in Italy, Spain, and Bohemia, and most of the
hot regions.

The Time.

The gall, saith Pliny, appeareth or cometh forth when the sun cometh
out of the sign Gemini, and that generally in one night.

The Names.

The gall tree is called Quercus, Robur, and Gallæ arbor: the
apothecaries and Italians keep the name Galla for the fruit: in High
Dutch, Galopffel: in Low Dutch, Galnoten: in Spanish, Agatha Galha,
and Bugalha: in French, Noix de Galle: in English, Gauls, and Galls.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The gall called Omphacitis, as Galen writeth, is dry in the third
degree, and cold in the second: it is a very harsh medicine, it
fasteneth and draweth together faint and slack parts, as the
overgrowings in the flesh: it repelleth and keepeth back rheums and
such like fluxes, and doth effectually dry up the same, especially
when they have a descent into the gums, almonds of the throat, and
other places of the mouth.

B. The other gall doth dry and also bind; but so much lesser, by how
much the harsh or choking quality is diminished: being boiled,
beaten, and also applied in manner of a plaster is laid with good
success upon the inflammations of the fundament, and falling down
thereof: it is boiled in water if there be need of a little
astriction; and in wine, especially in austere wine, if more need
require.

C. Galls are very profitable against the dysentery and the cliac
passion, being drunk in wine, or the powder thereof strewed upon
meats.

D. Galls are used in dying and colouring of sundry things, and in
making of ink.

E. Last of all, burnt galls do receive a further faculty, namely to
stanch blood, and are of thin parts, and of a greater virtue to dry
than be those that are not burnt: they must be laid upon hot burning
coals until they come to be thorough white, and then they are to be
quenched in vinegar and wine.

F. Moreover, galls are good for those that are troubled with the
bloody flux and common lasks, being taken in wine or water, and also
applied or used in meats: finally, these are to be used as oft as
need requireth to dry and bind.

G. Oak Apples are much of the nature of galls, yet are they far
inferior to them, and of lesser force.

CHAP. 38. Of Mistletoe .


Fig. 1914. Mistletoe (1)
Fig. 1915. Indian Mistletoe (2)

The Description.

1. Visca or Mistletoe hath many slender branches spread overthwart
one another, and wrapped and interlaced one within another: the bark
whereof is of a light green or Popinjay colour: the leaves of this
branching excrescence be of a brown green colour: the flowers be
small and yellow: which being past, there appear small clusters of
white translucent berries, which are so clear that a man may see
through them, and are full of clammy or viscous moisture, whereof
the best bird-lime is rnade, far exceeding that which is made of
Holm or Holly bark: and within this berry is a small black kernel or
seed: this excresence hath not any root, neither doth increase
himself of his seed, as some have supposed; but it rather cometh of
a certain moisture and substance gathered together upon the boughs
and joints of the trees, through the bark whereof this vaporous
moisture proceeding, bringeth forth the Mistletoe . Many have
diversly spoken hereof: some of the learned have set down that it
comes of the dung of the bird called a thrush, who having fed of the
seeds thereof, as eating his own bane, hath voided and left his dung
upon the tree, whereof was engendered this berry, a most fit matter
to make lime of to entrap and catch birds withal.

2. Indian Mistletoe groweth likewise upon the branches of trees,
running alongst the same in manner of Polypody: the strings of the
roots are like those of Couch Grass; from which rise up divers
stalks smooth and even, set with joints and knees at certain
distances: toward the top comes forth one leaf ribbed like the
Plantain leaf, whereon are marked certain round eyes such as are in
the haft of a knife; from the bosom whereof cometh forth a chaffy
branch, set with small leaves which continue green winter and
summer.

Fig. 1916. Peruvian Mistletoe (3)

3. There is found also another plant growing upon the boughs or
branches of trees, in manner as our Mistletoe doth, and may very
well be reckoned as a kind thereof: the plant cleaveth unto the
branches, being set thereto as it were with the pillings of the sea
onion, of the breadth of a man's hand toward the bottom; and
somewhat hollow: the tops whereof are very small and rushy, hollow
likewise, and of a purple colour: among which comes forth a branch
like that of Hastula regia, or the King's Spear, resembling the bush
of Oats, covered with a white silk, such as is to be found in
Asclepias, of a salt and nitrous taste, and very unpleasant.

The Place.

The first kind of Mistletoe groweth upon Oaks and divers other trees
almost everywhere; as for the other two they are strangers in
England.

The Time.

Mistletoe is always green as well in winter as in summer: the
berries are ripe in autumn; they remain all winter through, and are
a food for divers birds, as thrushes, blackbirds, and ring-doves.

The Names.

Mistletoe is called in Latin, Viscum: in High Dutch, Mistell: in Low
Dutch, Marentacken: in Italian, Vischio: in Spanish, Liga: in the
Portugal language, Visgo: in English, Missel, and Mistletoe.

The glue which is made of the berries of Missel is likewise called
Viscum and Ixia: in English, bird-lime. Ixia is also called
Chamæleon albus, by reason of the glue which is oftentimes found
about the root thereof. This word is also ascribed to Chamæleon
niger, as we read among the bastard names. Ixia is likewise reckoned
up by Dioscorides, lib. 6, and by Paulus Ægineta, lib. 5, among the
poisons: but what this poisonsome and venomous Ixia is, it is hard
and doubtful to declare: many would have it to be Chamæleon niger:
others, the glue or clammy substance which is made of the berries of
Mistletoe; who do truly think that Ixia differeth from Chamæleon
niger: for Paulus Ægineta, lib. 5. cap. 30, in reckoning up of
simple poisons hath first made mention of Chamæleon niger, then a
little after of Ixia: and whilst he doth particularly discourse of
every one he entreateth of Chamæleon niger, cap. 32, and of Ixia
(which he also nameth Ulophonon) cap. 47,. and telleth of the
dangerous and far differing accidents of them both. And Dioscorides
himself, lib. 6. where he setteth down his judgement of simple
poisons, entreateth first of Chamæleon niger, and then a little
after of Ixia. These things declare that Chamæleon niger doth differ
from Ixia, which is reckoned among the poisons. Moreover, it can
nowhere be read that Chamæleon niger beareth Birdlime, or hath so
glutinous and clammy a substance as that it ought to be called Ixia:
therefore Ixia, as it is one of the poisons, is the glue that is
made of the berries of Mistletoe, which because it is sharp and
biting, inflameth and setteth the tongue on fire, and with his slimy
and clammy substance doth so draw together, shut, and glue up the
guts, as that there is no passage for the excrements, which things
are mentioned among the mischiefs that Ixia bringeth.

Thus saith our author, but I can by no means approve of or yield to
this opinion here delivered out of Dodonæus by our author; which is,
that the bird-lime made of the berries of Mistletoe is poison; or
that Ixia set forth by Dioscorides and Nicander for a poison is
meant of this: for this is manifestly treated of in Dioscorides,
lib. 3. cap. 103, by the name of Ixos: when as the other is
mentioned, lib. 6. cap. 21, by the name of Ixias: also daily
experience shows this plant to have no malign nor poisonous, but
rather a contrary faculty, being frequently used in medicines
against the epilepsy. Such as would see more concerning Ixia or
Ixias, let them have recourse to the first chapter of the first part
of Fabius Columna, De Stirpibus minimis cognitis & rarioribus, where
they shall find it largely treated of.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The leaves and berries of Mistletoe are hot and dry, and of
subtle parts: the bird-lime is hot and biting, and consists of an
airy and watery substance, with some earthy quality. for according
to the judgement of Galen, his acrimony overcometh his bitterness;
for if it be used in outward applications it draweth humours from
the deepest or most secret parts of the body, spreading and
dispersing them abroad, and digesting them.

B. It ripeneth swellings in the groin, hard swellings behind the
ears, and other impostumes, being tempered with resin and a little
quantity of wax.

C. With frankincense it mollifieth old ulcers and malicious
impostumes, being boiled with unslaked lime, or with Gagate lapide,
or Asio, and applied, it wasteth away the hardnes of the spleen.

D. With orpiment or Sandaraca it taketh away foul ill favoured
nails, being mixed with unslaked lime and wine lees it receiveth
greater force.

E. It hath been most credibly reported unto me, that a few of the
berries of Mistletoe bruised and strained into oil, and drunken,
hath presently and forthwith rid a grievous and sore stitch.

CHAP. 39. Of the Cedar Tree.

The Kinds.

There be two Cedars, one great bearing cones, the other small
bearing berries like those of Juniper.

Fig. 1917. Cedar of Lebanon

The Description.

The great Cedar is a very big and high tree, not only exceeding all
other resinous trees, and those which bear fruit like unto it, but
in his tallness and largeness far surmounting all other trees: the
body or trunk thereof is commonly of a mighty bigness, insomuch as
four men are not able to fathom it, as Theophrastus writeth: the
bark of the lower part, which proceedeth out of the earth, to the
first young branches or shoots, is rough and harsh; the rest which
is among the boughs is smooth and glib: the boughs grow forth almost
from the bottom, and not far from the ground, even to the very top,
waxing by degrees lesser and shorter till as they grow higher, the
tree bearing the form or shape of a pyramid or sharp pointed
steeple: these compass the body round about in manner of a circle,
and are so orderly placed by degrees, as that, a man may climb up by
them to the very top as by a ladder: the leaves be small and round
like those of the Pine tree, but shorter, and not so sharp pointed; 
all the cones or clogs are far shorter and thicker than those of the
Fir tree, compact of soft, not hard scales, which hang not
downwards, but stand upright upon the boughs, whereunto also they
are so strongly fastened, as they can hardly be plucked off without
breaking of some part of the branches, as Bellonius writeth: the
timber is extreme hard, and rotteth not, nor waxeth old: there is no
worms nor rottenness can hurt or take the hard matter or heart of
this wood, which is very odoriferous, and somewhat red: Solomon King
of the Jews did therefore build God's Temple in Jerusalem of Cedar
wood: the Gentiles were wont to make their devils or images of this
kind of wood, that they might last the longer.

The Place.

The Cedar trees grow upon the snowy mountains, as in Syria upon
Mount Libanus, on which there remain some even to this day, saith
Bellonius, planted as is thought by Solomon himself: they are
likewise found on the mountains Taurus and Amanus, in cold and stony
places: the merchants of the factory at Tripolis told me, that the
Cedar tree groweth upon the declining of the mountain Libanus, near
unto the Hermitage by the city Tripoli in Syria: they that dwell in
Syria use to make boats thereof for want of the Pine tree.

The Time

The Cedar tree remaineth always green, as other trees which bear
such manner of fruit: the timber of the Cedar tree, and the images
and other works made thereof, seem to sweat and send forth moisture
in moist and rainy weather, as do likewise all that have an oily
juice, as Theophrastus witnesseth.

The Names.

This huge and mighty tree is called in Greek Kedros, in Latin
likewise Cedrus: in English, Cedar, and Cedar tree. Pliny, lib. 24.
cap. 5, nameth it Cedrelate, as though he should say, Cedrus abies,
or Cedrina abies, Cedar Fir; both that it may differ from the little
Cedar, and also because it is very like to the Fir tree.

The resin hath no proper name, but it may be surnamed Cedrina, or
Cedar resin.

The pitch which is drawn out of this is properly called Kidroa: yet
Pliny writeth, that also the liquor of the Torch Pine is named
Cedrium. The best, saith Dioscorides, is fat, through shining, and
of a strong smell; which being poured out in drops uniteth itself
together, and doth not remain severed.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Cedar is of temperature hot and dry, with such an exquisite
tenuity and subtilty of parts, that it seemeth to be hot and dry in
the fourth degree, especially the pitch or resin thereof.

B. There issueth out of this tree a resin like unto that which
issueth out of the Fir tree, very sweet in smell, of a clammy or
cleaving substance, the which if you chew in your teeth it will
hardly be gotten forth again, it cleaveth so fast: at the first it
is liquid and white, but being dried in the sun it waxeth hard: if
it be boiled in the fire an excellent pitch is made thereof, called
Cedar Pitch.

C. The Egyptians were wont to coffin and embalm their dead in Cedar,
and with Cedar pitch, although they used also other means, as
Herodotus recordeth.

D. The condited or embalmed body they call in shops Mumia, but very
unfitly; for Mumia among the Arabians is that which the Grecians
call Pissasphalton, as appeareth by Avicenna, cap. 474. and out of
Serapio, cap. 393.

E. He that interpreted and translated Serapio was the cause of this
error, who translated and interpreted Mumia according to his own
fancy, and not after the sense and meaning of his author Serapio,
saying that this Mumia is a compsition made of Aloes and Myrrh
mingled together with the moisture of man's body.

F. The gum of Cedar is good to be put in medicines for the eyes, for
being anointed therewith it cleareth the sight, and cleanseth them
from the haw and from stripes.

G. Cedar infused in vinegar and put into the ears killeth the worms
therein, and being mingled with the decoction of Hyssop, appeaseth
the sounding, ringing, and hissing of the ears.

H. If it be washed or infused in vinegar, and applied unto the
teeth, it easeth the toothache.

I. If it be put into the hollowness of the teeth it breaketh them,
and appeaseth the extreme griefe thereof.

K. It prevaileth against anginas, and the inflammation of the
tonsils, if a gargarism be made thereof.

L. It is good to kill nits and lice and such like vermin: it cureth
the biting of the serpent Cerastes, being laid on with salt.

M. It is a remedy against the poison of the sea hare, if it be drunk
with sweet wine.

N. It is good also for lepers: being put up underneath it killeth
all manner of worms, and draweth forth the birth, as Dioscorides
writeth.

CHAP. 40. Of the Pitch Tree.


Fig. 1918. The Pitch Tree (1)
Fig. 1919. The Dwarf Pitch Tree (2)

The Description.

1. Picea, the tree that droppeth pitch, called Pitch Tree, groweth
up to be a tall, fair, and big tree, remaining always green like the
Pine tree: the timber of it is more red than that of the Pine or
Fir: it is set full of boughs not only about the top, but much
lower, and also beneath the middle part of the body, which many
times hang down, bending toward the ground: the leaves be narrow,
not like those of the Pine tree, but shorter and narrower, and sharp
pointed like them, yet are they blacker, and withal cover the young
and tender twigs in manner of a circle, like those of the Fir tree;
but being many, and thick set, grow forth on all sides, and not only
one right against another, as in the Yew tree: the fruit is scaly,
and like unto the Pine apple, but smaller: the bark of the tree is
somewhat black; tough and flexible, not brittle, as is the bark of
the Fir tree: under which next to the wood is gathered a resin,
which many times issueth forth, and is like to that of the Larch
tree.

2. Of this sort (saith Clusius) there is found another that never
grows high, but remaineth dwarfish, and it carries certain little
nugaments or catkins of the bigness of a small nut, composed of
scales lying one upon another, but ending in a prickly leaf, which
in time opening show certain empty cavities or cells: from the tops
of these sometimes grow forth branches set with many short and
pricking little leaves: all the shrub hath shorter and paler
coloured leaves than the former: I observed neither fruit nor flower
on this, neither know I whether it carry any. Dalechampius seems to
have known this and to have called it Pinus tubulus or tibulus.
The Place.

The Pitch Tree groweth in Greece, Italy, France, Germany, and all
the cold regions even unto Russia.

The Time.

The fruit of the Pitch Tree is ripe in the end of September.

The Names.

 The Grecians call this cone tree Pitys: the Latins, Picea, and not
Pinus; for Pinus, or the Pine tree, is the Grecians Peyke: as shall
be declared: that is named in Latin Picea, Scribonius Largus
testifieth, in his 201st Composition, writing after this manner;
Resinæ Petuinæ, id est, ex Picea arbore, which signifies in English,
of the resin of the tree Pitys, that is to say, of the Pitch Tree.
With him doth Pliny agree, lib. 16. cap. 10. where he translating
Theophrastus his words concerning Peuce and Pitys, doth translate
Pitys, Picea, although for Peuce he hath written Larix, as shall be
declared. Pliny writeth thus; Larix ustis radicibus non repullulat:
and the Larch tree doth not spring up again when the roots are
burnt: the Pitch Tree springeth up again, as it happened in Lesbos,
when the wood Pyrthæus was set on fire. Moreover, the worms
Pityocampæ are scarce found in any tree but only in the Pitch Tree,
as Bellonius testifieth: so that they are not rashly called
Pityocampæ, or the worms of the Pitch Tree, although most
translators name them Pinorum erucæ, or the the worms of the Pine
trees: and therefore Pitys is surnamed by Theophrastus,
Phleriopoios, because worms and maggots are bred in it. But
forsomuch as the name Pitys is common both to the tame Pine, and
also to the Pitch Tree, divers of the late writers do for this cause
suppose, that the Pitch Tree is named by Theophrastus, Pitys agria,
or the wild Pine tree. This Picea is named in High Dutch, Schwartz
Tannebaum, and Rot Tannebaum, and oftentimes also Jorenholtz; which
name notwithstanding doth also agree with other plants: in English,
Pitch Tree: in Low Dutch, Peck boom.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The leaves, bark, and fruit of the Pitch Tree, are all of one
nature, virtue, and operation, and of the same faculty with the Pine
trees.

CHAP. 41. Of the Pine Tree.

The Kinds.

The Pine Tree is of two sorts, according to Theophrastus; the one
emeros, that is to say, tame, or of a the garden; the other agria,
or wild: he saith that the Macedonians do add a third, which
akarpos, or barren, or without fruit, that unto us is unknown: the
later writers have found more as shall be declared.

Fig. 1920. The Pine Tree

The Description.

The Pine tree groweth high, and great in the trunk or body, which
below is naked, but above it is clad with a multitude of boughs,
which divide themselves into divers branches, whereon are set small
leaves, very straight, narrow, somewhat hard and sharp pointed: the
wood or timber is hard, heavy, about the heart or middle full of an
oleous liquor, & of a reddish colour: the fruit or clogs are hard,
great, and consist of many sound woody scales, under which are
included certain knobs, without shape, covered with a wooden shell,
like small nuts, wherein are white kernels, long, very sweet, and
covered with a thin skin or membrane, that easily is rubbed off with
the fingers; which kernel is used in medicine.

The Place.

This tree groweth of itself in many places of Italy, and especially
in the territory of Ravenna, and in Languedoc, about Marseilles, in
Spain, & in other regions, as in the East countries: it is also
cherished in the gardens of pleasure, as well in the Low Countries
as England.

The Time.

The Pine tree groweth green both winter and summer: the fruit it
commonly two years before it be ripe: wherefore it is not to be
found without ripe fruit, and also others as yet very small, and not
come to ripeness.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Pinus, and Pinus sativa, urbana, or rather
mansueta: in English, tame and garden pine: of the Macedonians and
other Grecians, Peuke emeros, but the Arcadians name it Pitus, for
that which the Macedonians call Peuke emeros the Arcadians name
Pitus, as Theophrastus saith, and so doth the tame Pine in Arcadia,
and about Elia change her name: and by this alteration of them it
happens that the fruit or nuts of the Pine tree found in the cones
or apples, be named in Greek by Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus, and
others pitnides, as though they should term it pityos fructus, or
the fruit of the Pine tree.

There is also another Pitus, in Latin Picea, or the Pitch Tree,
which differeth much from the Pine tree: but Pytis of Arcadia
differeth nothing from the Pine tree, as we have said.

The fruit or apples of these be called in Greek konoi, and in Latin
coni, notwithstanding conos is a common name to all the fruits of
these kind of trees: they also be named in Latin, nuces pinea: by
Mnesitheus in Greek osrakides: by Diocles Carystius, pituina karpa,
which be notwithstanding the fruit or clogs of the tree that
Theophrastus nameth Peuke, or the wild Pine tree, as Athenæus saith.
It is thought that the whole fruit is called by Galen in his 4th
Commentary upon Hipocrates' Books of Diet in sharp diseases,
Strobilos: yet in his 2nd book Of the Faculties of Nourishments he
doth not call Conos or the apple by the name of Strobilos, but the
nuts contained in it. And in like manner in his seventh book Of The
Faculties of Simple Medicines; the Pine Apple fruit, saith he, which
they call Coccalus, and Strobilus, as we have said before, that
these are named in Greek pitnides. This apple is called in High
Dutch, Zyrbel: in Low Dutch, Pijn appel:in English, Pine apple,
Clog, and Cone.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The kernels of these nuts do concoct and moderately heat, being
in a mean between cold and hot: it maketh the rough parts smooth; it
is a remedy against an old cough, and long infirmities of the chest, 
being taken by itself or with honey, or else with some other licking
thing.

B. It cureth the phthisic, and those that pine and consume away
through the rottenness of their lungs: it recovereth strength; it
nourisheth and is restorative to the body. It yieldeth a thick and
good juice, and nourisheth much, yet is it not altogether easy of
digestion, and therefore it is mixed with preserves, or boiled with
sugar.

C. The same is good for the stone in the kidneys, and against
frettings of the bladder, and scalding of the urine, for it allayeth
the sharpness, mitigateth pain, and gently provoketh urine:
moreover, it increaseth milk and seed, and therefore it also
provoketh fleshly lust.

D. The whole Cone or Apple being boiled with fresh Horehound, saith
Galen, and afterwards boiled again with a little honey till the
decoction be come to the thickness of honey, maketh an excellent
medicine for the cleansing of the chest and lungs.

E. The like thing hath Dioscorides; the whole cones, saith he, which
are newly gathered from the trees, broken and boiled in sweet wine
are good for an old cough, and consumption of the lungs, if a good
draught of that liquor be drunk every day.

F. The scales of the Pine apple, with the bark of the tree, do stop
the lask and the bloody flux, they provoke urine; and the decoction
of the same hath the like property.

CHAP. 42. Of the Wild Pine Tree.


Fig. 1921. Wild Pine (1)
Fig. 1922. Low Wild Pine (2)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Wild Pine tree groweth very great, but not so
high as the former, being the tame or manured Pine tree; the bark
thereof is glib: the branches are spread abroad, beset with long
sharp pointed leaves: the fruit is somewhat like the tame Pine tree,
with some resin therein, and sweet of smell, which doth easily open
itself, and quickly falleth from the tree.

2. The second kind of Wild Pine tree groweth not so high as the
former, neither is the stem growing straight up, but yet it bringeth
forth many branches, long, slender, and so easy to be bent or bowed,
that hereof they make hoops for wine hogsheads and tuns: the fruit
of this pine is greater than the fruit of any of the other wild
Pines.


Fig. 1923. Mountain Wild Pine (3)
Fig. 1924. Smaller Wild Pine (4)

3. The third kind of wild Pine tree groweth straight upright, and
waxeth great and high, yet not so high as the other wild kinds: the
branches do grow like the Pitch Tree: the fruit is long and big,
almost like the fruit of the said Pitch Tree; wherein are contained
small triangled nuts, like the nuts of the Pine Apple Tree, but
smaller, & more brittle; in which is contained a kernel of a good
taste, like the kernel of the tame Pine apple: the wood is
beautiful, and sweet of smell, good to make tables and other works.

4. There is another wild Pine of the mountain, not differing from
the precedent but in stature, growing for the most part like a hedge
tree, wherein is the difference.

Fig. 1925. Kinds of Wild Pine (5-8)

5. This kind of Pine, called the Sea Pine tree, groweth not above
the height of two men, having leaves like the tame Pine tree, but
shorter: the fruit is of the same form, but longer, somewhat
fashioned like a Turnip: this tree yieldeth very much resin. Bauhine
judges this all one with the third.

6. The sixth kind of wild Pine being one of the Sea Pines, groweth
like an hedge tree or shrub, seldom exceeding the height of a man;
with little leaves, like those of the Larch tree, but always
continuing with a very little cone, and fine small kernel.

7. The bastard wild Pine tree groweth up to a mean height; the trunk
or body, as also the branches & leaves are like unto those of the
manured Pine tree: the only difference is, that some years it
resembleth the Pine itself; and the other years as a wild hedge
tree, varying often, as nature listeth to play and sport herself
amongst her delights, with other plants of less moment: the timber
is soft, and not fit for building, but is of the substance of our
Birch tree: the fruit is like those of the other wild Pines, whereof
this is a kind.

8. This Dwarf Austrian Pine exceeds not the height of a man, but
immediately from the root is divided and spread abroad into tough,
bending, pretty thick branches, covered over with a rough bark: the
leaves, as in the former, come two out of one hose, thicker,
shorter, blunter pointed, and more green than the former: the cones
or clogs are but small, yet round, and compact, and hang not
downwards, but stand upright: the root is tough and woody like other
plants of this kind: It grows on the Austrian and Styrian Alps.
Clusius sets it forth by the name of Pinaster 4. austriacus.

Fig. 1926. Dwarf Sea Pine (9)

9. This other Dwarf Pine is of the same height with the former, with
such tough and bending branches, which are neither so thick nor clad
with so rough a bark, nor so much spread. The leaves also are
smaller, and not unlike those of the Larix tree, but not so soft,
nor falling every year as they do. The cones are little and slender,
the kernel small, blackish, and winged as the rest. Clusius found
this only in some few places of the kingdom of Murcia in Spain,
wherefore he calls it Pinaster 3. hispanicus. Dodonæus calls it
Pinus maritima minor.

The Place.

These wild Pines do grow upon the cold mountains of Livonia,
Polonia, Noruegia, and Russia, especially upon the island called
Holland within the sound, beyond Denmark, and in the woods by Narva,
upon the Liefeland shore, and all the tract of the way, being a
thousand versts (each verst containing three quarters of an English
mile) from Narva unto Moscovia, where I have seen them grow in
infinite numbers.

The time.

The fruit of these Pine trees is ripe in the end of September: out
of all there issueth forth a white and sweet smelling resin: they
are also changed into teda, and out of these is boiled through the
force of the fire, a black pitch: the Pitch Tree and the Larch tree
be also sometimes changed into teda; yet very seldom, for teda is a
proper and peculiar infirmity of the wild Pine tree. A tree is said
to be changed into teda, when not only the heart of it, but also the
rest of the substance is turned into fatness.

The Names.

All these are called in Greek peukoi agrioi, in Latin Sylvestres
Pini: of Pliny, Pinastri: Pinaster, saith he in his 16th Book, 10th
chapter, is nothing else but Pinus sylvestris, or the wild Pine
tree, of a lesser height, and full of boughs from the middle, as the
tame Pine tree in the top, (most of the copies have falsely) of a
marvellous height: they are far deceived who think that the Pine
tree is called in Greek Pitys, besides the tame Pine which
notwithstanding is so called not of all men, but only of the
Arcadians (as we have said before) Pitys, all men do name the wild
Peuke; and therefore Teda, or the Torch Pine, hereof is said to be
in Latin not Picea, but Pinea, that is, not the Pitch Tree, but the
Pine tree, as Ovid doth plainly testify in his Heroical Epistles;

Ut vidi, ut perii, nec notis ignibus arsi
Ardet ut ad magnos Pinea Teda deos
["I saw you, and I was undone; nor did I kindle with ordinary fires,
but like the pine-torch kindled before the mighty gods." Ovid,
Heroides, 12:33-4]

Also in Fastorum 4.

Illic accendit geminas pro lampade Pinus
Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque Teda datur
["There she (the goddess) kindled two pine trees to serve her as a
light; hence to this day a torch is given out at the rites of Ceres
" Ovid, Fasti, 4:493-4]

The same doth Virgil also signify in the seventh of his Æneid.

Ipse inter medias, flagrantem servida Pinum
Sustinet 
["Amid them the queen holds her blazing pine-torch on high " Virgil,
Æneid, 7:397-8]

Where instead of flagrantem pinum, Servius admonisheth us to
understand teda pinea. Catullus also consenteth with them in the
marriage song of Julia and Mallius.

 Manu
Pineam quate tedam.
["Let your hand hold up the pine torch", Catullus, Carmina 61:14-15]

And Prudentius in Hymno Cerei Paschalis.

Seu Pinus piceam fert alimoniam;
["Pitch or pine feeds them (the torches)" Prudentuis, Hymn for the
lighting of the Easter Candle, l. 19]

Moreover, the herb Peucedanos, or Horestrange, so named of the
likeness of Peuke, is called also in Latin Pinastellum, of Pinus the
Pine tree: all which things do evidently declare that Peuke is
called in Latin not Picea, but Pinus.

The first of these wild kinds may be Idæa theophrasti, or
Theophrastus his Pine tree, growing on Mount Ida, if the apple which
is shorter were longer: for he nameth two kinds of wild Pines, the
one of Mount Ida, and the other the Sea Pine with the round fruit:
but we hold the contrary, for the fruit or apple of the Wild
Mountain Pine is shorter, and that of the Sea Pine longer. This may
more truly be Macedonum mas, or the Macedonians' male Pine, for they
make two sorts of wild Pines, the male and the female, and the male
more writhed and harder to be wrought upon, and the female more
easy; but the wood of this is more writhed, and not so much in
request for works, as the other, and therefore it seemeth to be the
male. This wild Pine tree is called in High Dutch Hartzbaum, and
Wilder Hartzbaum: in Gallia Celtica, Elvo Alevo and in Spanish, Pino
Carax.

The second wild Pine tree is named commonly of the Italians
Tridentinis, and Ananiensibus, Cembro, and Cirmolo, it seemeth to
differ nothing at all from the Macedonians' wild female Pine, for
the wood is easy to be wrought on, and serveth for divers and sundry
works.

The third they call Mugo: this may be named not without cause
Chamæpeuke, that is to say, Humilis pinus, or Dwarf Pine: yet doth
it differ from Chamæpeuce, the herb called in English, Ground Pine.

The fourth wild Pine is named in Latin, Maritima, and Marina Pinus,
Sea Pine.

That which the Latins call Teda, is named in High Dutch, Kynholtz:
it may be termed in English, Torch-pine.

Pliny is deceived, in that he supposeth the Torch Pine to tbe a tree
by itself, and maketh it the sixth kind of Cone tree; as likewise he
erreth in taking Larix, the Larch tree, for Peuke, the Pine Tree.
And as Dioscorides maketh so little difference as scarce any,
between Peuke and Pitys and supposeth them to be both of one kind,
so likewise he setteth down faculties common to them both.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The bark of them both, saith he, doth bind; being beaten and
applied it cureth merry-galls, and also shallow ulcers and burnings,
if it be laid on with litharge and fine frankincense.

B. With the cerot of Myrtles it healeth ulcers in tender bodies:
being beaten with copperas it stayeth tetters, and creeping ulcers:
it draweth away the birth and after birth, if it be taken under in a
fume: being drunk it stoppeth the belly, and provoketh urine.

C. Galen hath almost the same things, but he saith, that the bark of
the Pine tree is more temperate than that of the Pitch Tree; the
leaves stamped take away hot swellings and sores that come thereof.

D. Being stamped and boiled in vinegar, they assuage the pain of the
teeth, if they be washed with this decoction hot: the same be also
good for those that have bad livers, being drunk with water or mead.

E. Of the same operation is likewise the bark of the pine nuts; but
Galen affirmeth that the cone or apple, although it seem to be like
these is notwithstanding of lesser force, insomuch as it cannot 
effectually perform any of the aforesaid virtues, but hath in it a
certain biting quality, which hurteth.

F. The Torch Pine cut into small pieces and boiled in vinegar, is a
remedy likewise against the tooth-ache if the teeth be washed with
the decoction.

G. Of this there is made a profitable spather or slice to be used in
making of compound plasters and pessaries that ease pain.

H. Of the smoke of this is made a black which serveth to make ink
of, and for eating sores in the corners of eyes, and against the
falling away of the hair of the eyelids and for watering and bleary
eyes, as Dioscorides teacheth.

Of Resins.

The Kinds.

1. Out of the Pine trees, especially of the wild kinds, there
issueth forth a liquid, whitish, and sweet smelling resin, and that
many times by itself; but more plentifully either out of the cut and
broken boughs or forth of the body when the tree cometh to be a
Torch Pine.

2. There issueth also forth of the cracks and chinks of the bark; or 
out of the cut boughs, a certain dry resin, and that forth of the
Pine Tree or Fir Tree.

3. There is likewise found a certain congealed resin upon the cones
or apples.

It is called in Latin, Resina: in High Dutch, Hartz: in Low Dutch,
Herst: in Italian, Ragia: in Spanish, Resina: in English, Resin or
Rosin.

The first is named in Latin, Liquida Resina: in shops Resina Pini or
resin of the Pine tree, and common resin. It happeneth oftentimes
through the negligent and careless gathering thereof, that certain
small pieces of wood, and little stones be found mixed with it: this
kind of resin Galen surnameth confused, which being melted and
cleansed from the dross becometh hard and brittle.

The like happeneth also to another liquid resin, which after it is
melted, boiled, and cooled again, is hard and brittle, and may
likewise be beaten, ground, and searced; and this resin is named in
in Latin, Fricta, and many times Colophonia, which name is used
among the apothecaries, and may stand for an English name; for Galen
in his third book Of Medicines According to their Kinds saith, that
it is called Fricta, and of some Colophonia: because in times past,
as Dioscorides writeth it was fetched from Colophon, this being
yellow or black in comparison of the rest, is white when it is
beaten: Pliny in his 14th book, 20th chapter.

The second resin is that of the Pitch Tree without fatness; and that
soon waxeth dry: that which in Asia is made of the Pitch Tree being
very white, is called Spagas, as Pliny testifieth.

The third is unknown in shops. Yet there is to be sold a certain dry
resin, but the same is compounded of the resins of the Pine tree, of
the cones or clogs, and of the Fir tree mixed all together, which 
they call Garipot: this is used in perfumes instead of frankincense,
from which not withstanding it far differeth.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. All the resins are hot and dry, but not all after one manner: for
there is a difference among them: they which be sharper and more
biting, are hotter, as that which cometh of the cones, being of
resins the hottest, because it is also the sharpest: the resin of
the Pitch Tree is not so much biting, and therefore not so hot: the
resin of the Fir tree is in a mean between them both; the liquid
resin of the Pine is moister, coming near to the quality and faculty
of the Larch resin.

B. The resins which are burnt or dried, as Disoscorides testifieth,
are profitable in plasters, and compositions that ease
wearisomeness; for they do not only supple or mollify, but also by
reason of the thinness of their parts and dryness, they digest:
therefore they both mollify and waste away swellings, and through
the same faculty they cure wearisomeness, being used in compound
medicines for that purpose.

C. The liquid resins are very fitly mixed in ointments, commended
for the healing up of green wounds, for they both bring to
suppuration, and do also glue and unite them together.

D. Moreover, there is gathered out from the resins as from
frankincense, a congealed smoke, called in Latin Fuligo and in
English, Black, which serveth for medicines that beautify the
eyelids, and cure the fretting sores of the corners of the eyes, and
also watering eyes, for it drieth without biting.

E. There is made hereof, saith Dioscorides, writing ink, but in our
age not that which we write withal, but the same which serveth for
printers to print their books with, that is to say, of this black, 
or congealed smoke, and other things added.

Of Pitch and Tar.

The manner of drawing forth of pitch.

Out of the fattest wood of the Pine tree changed into the Torch
Pine, is drawn pitch by force of fire. A place must be paved with
stone, or some other hard matter, a little higher in the middle,
about which there must also be made gutters, into which the liquor
shall fall; then out from them other gutters are to be drawn; by
which it may be received; being received, it is put into barrels.
The place being thus prepared, the cloven wood of the Torch Pine
must be set upright; then must it be covered with a great number of
Fir and Pitch boughs, and on every part all about with much stone
and earth: and great heed must be taken, lest there be any cleft or
chink remaining, only a hole left in the top of the furnace, through
which the fire may be put in, and the flame and smoke may pass out:
when the fire burneth the pitch runneth forth, first the thin, and
then the thicker.

This liquor is called in Latin, pix: in English, pitch, and the
moisture, even the same that first runneth is named of Pliny in his
16th book, 11th chapter, cedria: There is boiled in Europe, saith
he, from the Torch Pine a liquid pitch used about ships, and serving
for many other purposes; the wood being cloven is burned with fire,
and set round about the furnaces on every side, after the manner of
making charcoal: the first liquor runneth through the gutter like
water: (this in Syria is called cedrium, which is of so great
virtue, as in Egypt the bodies of dead men are preserved, being all
covered over with it) the liquor following being now thicker, is
made pitch. But Dioscorides writeth, that cedria is gathered of the
great Cedar tree, and nameth the liquor drawn out of the Torch tree
by force of fire, is that which the Latins call pix liquida, the
Italians, pece liquida: in High Dutch, weich bach: in Low Dutch,
teer: in French, poix foudire: in Spanish, pex liquida: certain
apothecaries, kitran: and we in English, Tar.

And of this when it is boiled is made a harder pitch: this is named
in Latin, arida, or sicca pix: of divers, iterata pix, or pitch
iterated: because it is boiled the second time. A certain kind
hereof being made clammy or gluing is named in shops, pix navalis,
or ship pitch: in High Dutch, bach: in Low Dutch, steenpeck: in
Italian, pece secca: in French, poix seche: in Spanish, pez seca: in
English, stone pitch.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. Pitch is hot and dry, tar is hotter, and for pitch more drying,
as Galen writeth. Tar is good against inflammations of the almonds
of the throat, and the uvula, and likewise the squincy, being
outwardly applied.

B. It is a remedy for mattering ears with oil of roses: it healeth
the bitings of serpents, if it be beaten with salt and applied.

C. With an equal portion of wax it taketh away foul ill-favoured
nails, it wasteth away swellings of the kernels, and hard swellings
of the mother and fundament.

D. With barley meal and a boy's urine it consumeth the King's evil:
it stayeth eating ulcers, if it be laid unto them with brimstone,
and the bark of the pitch Tree, or with bran.

E. If it be mixed with fine frankincense, and a cerot made thereof,
it healeth chops of the fundament and feet.

F. Stone pitch doth mollify and soften hard swellings: it ripens and
maketh matter, and wasteth away hard swellings and inflammations of
kernels: it filleth up hollow ulcers, and is fitly mixed with wound
medicines.

G. What virtue tar hath when it is inwardly taken we may read in
Dioscorides and Galen, but we set down nothing thereof; for that no
man in our age will easily vouchsafe the taking.

H. There is also made of pitch a congealed smoke or black, which
serveth for the same purposes as that of the resins doth.

CHAP. 43. Of the Fir or Deal Tree.


Fig. 1927. The Fir Tree (1)
Fig. 1928. The Male Fir Tree (2)

Fig. 1929. A Branch of the Fir Tree, showing Leaves and Catkins

The Description.

1. The Fir tree groweth very high and great, having his leaves
evergreen; his trunk or body smooth, even and straight, without
joints or knots, until it hath gotten branches; which are many and
very fair, beset with leaves, not much unlike the leaves of the Yew
tree, but smaller: among which come forth flowers upon the taller
trees, growing at the bottoms of the leaves like little catkins, as
you may see them expressed in a branch apart by themselves: the
fruit is like unto the Pine apple, but smaller and narrower, hanging
down as the Pine apple: the timber hereof excelleth all other timber
for the masting of ships, posts, rails, deal boards, and sundry
other purposes.

2. There is another kind of Fir tree, which is likewise a very high
and tall tree, and higher than the Pine: the body of it is straight
without knots below, waxing smaller and smaller even to the very
top: about which it sendeth forth boughs, four together out of one
and the selfsame part of the body, placed one against another, in
manner of a cross, growing forth of the four sides of the body, and
observing the same order even to the very top: out of these boughs
grow others also, but by two and two, one placed right against
another, out of the sides, which bend downwards when the other bear
upwards: the leaves compass the boughs round about, and the branches
thereof: they be long, round, and blunt pointed, narrower, and much
whiter than those of the Pitch Tree, that is to say, of a light
green, and in a manner of a white colour: the cones or clogs be
long, and longer than any others of the cone trees, they consist of
a multitude of soft scales, they hang down from the end of the
twigs, and do not easily fall down; but remain on the tree a very
long time: the kernels in these are small, not greater than the
kernels of the Cherry stone, with a thin skin growing on the one
side, very like almost to the wings of Bees, or great Flies: the
timber or substance of the wood is white, and clad with many coats,
like the head of an Onion.

The Place.

The Fir trees grow upon high mountains, in many woods of Germany and
Bohemia, in which it continueth always green; it is found also on
hills in Italy, France, & other countries; it cometh down oftentimes
into the valleys: they are found likewise in Prussia, Pomerania,
Livland, Russia, & especially in Norway, where I have seen the
goodliest trees in the world of this kind, growing upon the rocky
and craggy mountains, almost without any earth about them, or any
other thing, saving a little moss about the roots, which thrust
themselves here and there into the chinks and crannies of the rocks,
and therefore are easily cast down with any extreme gale of wind. I
have seen these trees growing in Cheshire, Staffordshire, and
Lancashire, where they grew in great plenty, as is reported, before
Noah's flood: but then being overturned and overwhelmed have lain
since in the mosses and watery moorish grounds very fresh and sound
until this day, & so full of a resinous substance, that they burn
like a torch or link, and the inhabitants of those countries do call
it Fir-wood, and Firewood unto this day: out of this tree issueth
the resin called thus, in English, frankincense: but from the young
Fir trees proceedeth an excellent clear and liquid resin, in taste
like to the peelings or outward rind of the pomecitron.

The Time.

The time of the Fir tree agreeth with the Pine trees.

The Names.

The tree is called in Latin Abies: it is called in High Dutch, Weisz
Thannen, and Weisz Thannen baum: in Low Dutch, Witte Dennen boom, or
Abel-boom, and Mast-boom: in Italian, Abete: in Spanish, Abeto: in
English, Fir tree, Mast tree, and Deal tree. The first is called in
French, du Sap, or Sapin: the other is Suiffe.

The liquid resin which is taken forth of the bark of the young Fir
trees, is called in Latin, lachryma abietis, and lachryma abiegna:
in the shops of Germany, as also of England, terabithina Veneta, or
Venice Turpentine: in Italian, lagrimo: divers do think that
Dioscorides calleth it oleasa resina, or oil resin; but oil resin is
the same that pix liquida, or tar is.

Arida abietum resina, or dry resin of the Fir trees, is rightly
called in Latin, abiegna resina: it hath a sweet smell, and is
oftentimes used among other perfumes instead of frankincense.

The Temperature.

The bark, fruit, and gums of the Fir tree, are of the nature of the
Pitch Tree and his gums.

The Virtues.

A. The liquid resin of the Fir tree called turpentine, looseth the
belly, driveth forth hot choleric humours, cleanseth and mundifieth
the kidneys, provoketh urine, and driveth forth the stone and
gravel.

B. The same taken with sugar and the powder of Nutmegs, cureth the
strangury, stayeth the Gonorrhoea or the involuntary issue of man's
nature, called the running of the reins, and the white flux in
women.

C. It is very profitable for all green and fresh wounds, especially
the wounds of the head: for it healeth and cleanseth mightily,
especially if it be washed in Plantain water, and afterward Rose
water, the yolk of an egg put thereto, with the powders of olibanum
and mastic finely searced, adding thereto a little saffron.

CHAP. 44. Of the Larch Tree.


Fig. 1930. A Larch Branch
Fig. 1931. The Larch tree with its Fungus

The Description.

The Larch is a tree of no small height, with a body growing straight
up: the bark whereof in the nether part beneath the boughs is thick,
rugged, and full of chinks; which being cut in sunder is red within,
and in the other part above smooth, slippery, something white
without: it bringeth forth many boughs divided into other lesser
branches, which be tough and pliable. The leaves are small, and cut
into many jags, growing in clusters thick together like tassels,
which fall away at the approch of winter: the flowers or rather the
first shows of the cones or fruit be round, and grow out of the
tenderest boughs, being at the length of a brave red purple colour:
the cones be small, and like almost in bigness to those of the
Cypress tree, but longer, and made up of a multitude of thin scales
like leaves: under which lie small seeds, having a thin film growing
on them very like to the wings of bees and wasps: the substance of
the wood is very hard, of colour, especially that in the midst,
somewhat red, and very profitable for works of long continuance.

It is not true that the wood of the Larch tree tree cannot be set on
fire, as Vitruvius reporteth of the castle made of Larch wood, which
Cæsar besieged, for it burneth in chimneys, and is turned into
coals, which are very profitable for smiths, as Matthiolus writeth.

There is also gathered of the Larch tree a liquid resin, very like
in colour and substance to the whiter honey, as that of Athens or of
Spain, which notwithstanding issueth not forth of itself, but
runneth out of the stock of the tree, when it hath been bored even
to the heart with a great and long auger and wimble.

Galen writeth, that there be after a sort two kinds hereof, in his
4th book Of Medicines, According to the Kinds, one like unto
turpentine, the other more sharper than this, hotter, more liquid,
of a stronger smell, and in taste bitterer and hotter: but the
latter is thought not to be the resin of the Larch, but of the Fir
tree, which Galen because it is after a sort like in substance,
might have taken for that of the Larch tree.

There groweth also upon the Larch tree a kind of Mushroom or
excrescence, not such as is upon other trees, but whiter, softer,
more loose and spongy than any other of the Mushrooms and good for
medicine, which beareth the name of Agaricus, or Agaric: I find that
Pliny supposeth all the Mastic tree, and those that bear galls, do
bring forth this Agaricum: wherein he was somewhat deceived, and
especially in that he took Glandifera for Conifera, that is, those
trees which bear mast or acorns, for the Pine apple trees: but among
all the trees that bear Agaricus, the Larch is the chief, and
bringeth most plenty of Agaric.

The Place.

The Larch tree groweth not in Greece, or in Macedonia, but chiefly
upon the Alps of Italy, not far from Trent, hard by the rivers
Benacus and Padus; and also in other places of the same mountains:
it is likewise found on hills in Moravia, which in times past was
called the country of the Marcomans: Fuchsius writeth, that it
groweth also in Silesia: others, in Lusatia, in the borders of
Poland: it also groweth plentifully in the woods of Gallia
Cesalpina.

Pliny hath said somewhat hereof, contradicting the writings of
others, in his 16th book, 8th chapter, where he saith, that
specially the acorn trees of France do bear Agaric, and not only the
acorn trees, but the cone trees also; among which, saith he, the
Larch tree is the chief that bringeth forth Agaric, and that not
only in Gallia, which now is called France, but rather in Lombardy
and Piemont in Italy, where there be whole woods of Larch trees,
although they be found in some small quantity in other countries.

The best Agaric is that which is whitest, very loose and spongy,
which may easily be broken, and is light, and in the first taste
sweet, hard, and well compact: that which is heavy, blackish, and
containing in it little threads as it were of sinews, is counted
pernicious and deadly.

The Time.

Of all the cone trees only the Larch tree is found to be without
leaves in the winter: in the spring grow fresh leaves out of the
same knobs, from which the former did fall. The cones are to be
gathered before winter, so soon as the leaves are gone: but after
the scales are loosed and opened, the seeds drop away: the resin
must be gathered in the summer months.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek and Latin Larix, in Italian and
Spanish, Larice: in High Dutch, Lerchenbaum: in Low Dutch
Lorkenboom: in French, Melese: in English, Larch tree, and of some
Larix tree.

The liquid resin is named by the Latins resina larigna, or resina
laricea, Larch resin: the Italians, larga: the apothecaries,
terebinthina, or turpentine, and it is sold and also mixed in
medicines instead thereof: neither is that a thing newly done; for
Galen likewise in his time reporteth, that the druggers sold the
Larch resin instead of turpentine: and this may be done without
error; for Galen himself in one place useth Larch resin for
turpentine; and in another, turpentine for Larch resin, in his book
Of Medicines According To The Kinds.

The Agaric is called in Greek, Agarikon and Agarikos, in Latin also,
Agaricum and Agaricus, and so likewise in shops: the Italians,
Spaniards, and othe nations do imitate the Greek word; and in
English we call it Agaric.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The leaves, bark, fruit and kernel, are of temperature like unto
the Pine, but not so strong.

B. The Larch resin is of a moister temperature than all the rest of
the resins, and is withal without sharpness or biting, much like to
the right turpentine, and is fitly mixed with medicines which
perfectly cure ulcers and green wounds.

C. All resins, saith Galen, that have this kind of moisture and
clamminess joined with them, do as it were bind together and unite
dry medicines, and because they have no evident biting quality, they
do moisten the ulcers nothing at all: therefore divers have very
well mixed with such compound medicines either turpentine resin, or
Larch resin: thus far Galen. Moreover, Larch resin performeth all
such things that the turpentine resin doth, unto which, as we have
said, it is much like in temperature, which thing likewise Galen
himself affirmeth.

D. Agaric is hot in the first degree and dry in the second,
according to the old writers. It cutteth, maketh thin, cleanseth,
taketh away obstructions or stoppings of the entrails, and purgeth
also by stool.

E. Agaric cureth the yellow jaundice proceeding of obstructions, and
is a sure remedy for cold shakings, which are caused of thick and
cold humours.

F. The same being inwardly taken and outwardly applied, is good for
those that are bit of venomous beasts which hurt with their cold
poison.

G. It provoketh urine, and bringeth down the menses: it maketh the
body well coloured, driveth forth worms, cureth agues, especially
quotidians and wandering fevers, and others that are of long
continuance, if it be mixed with fit things that serve for the
disease: and these things it performeth by drawing forth and purging
away gross, cold, and phlegmatic humours, which cause the diseases.

H. From a dram weight, or a dram and a half, to two, it is given at
once in substance or in powder: the weight of it in an infusion or
decoction is from two drams to five.

I. But it purgeth slowly, and doth somewhat trouble the stomach; end
therefore it is appointed that Ginger should be mixed with it, or
wild Carrot seed, or Lovage seed, or sal-gem, in Latin, Sal
fossilis.

K. Galen, as Mesue reporteth, gave it with wine wherein Ginger was
infused: some use to give it with Oxymel, otherwise called syrup of
vinegar, which is the safest way of all.

L. Agaric is good against the pains and swimming in the head, or the
falling evil, being taken with syrup of vinegar.

M. It is good against the shortness of breath, called asthma, the
inveterate cough of the lungs, the phthisic, consumption, and those
that spit blood: it comforteth the weak and feeble stomach, causeth
good digestion, and is good against worms.

CHAP. 45. Of the Cypress Tree.

Fig. 1932. Cypress

The Description.

The tame or manured Cypress tree hath a long thick and straight
body; whereupon many slender branches do grow, which do not spread
abroad like the branches of other trees, but grow up alongst the
body, yet not touching the top: they grow after the fashion of a
steeple, broad below, and narrow toward the top: the substance of
the wood is hard, sound, well compact, sweet of smell, and somewhat
yellow, almost like the yellow Sanders, but not altogether so
yellow, neither doth it rot nor wax old, nor cleaveth or choppeth
itself. The leaves are long, round like those of Tamarisk, but
fuller of substance. The fruit or nuts do hang upon the boughs,
being in manner like to those of the Larch tree, but yet thicker and
more closely compact: which being ripe do of themselves part in
sunder, and then falleth the seed, which is shaken out with the
wind: the same is small, flat, very thin, of a swart ill favoured
colour, which is pleasant to ants or pismires, and serveth them for
food.

Of this divers make two kinds, the female and the male; the female
barren, and the male fruitful. Theophrastus reporteth, that divers
affirm the male to come of the female. The Cypress yields forth a
certain liquid resin, like in substance to that of the Larch tree,
but in taste marvellous sharp and biting.

The wild Cypress, as Theophrastus writeth, is an high tree, and
always green, so like to the other Cypress, as it seemeth to be the
same both in boughs, body, leaves, and fruit, rather than a certain
wild Cypress: the matter or substance of the wood is sound, of a
sweet smell, like that of the Cedar tree, which rotteth not: there
is nothing so crisped as the root, and therefore they use to make
precious and costly works thereof.

I know no difference between the wild and tame Cypress of our author
but in the handsomeness of their growth, which is helped somewhat by
art.

The Place.

The tame and manured Cypress groweth in hot countries, as in Candy,
Lycia, Rhodes, and also in the territory of Cyrene: it is reported
to be likewise found on the hills belonging to Mount Ida, and on the
hills called Leuci, that is to say white, the tops whereof be always
covered with snow.

Bellonius denieth it to be found upon the tops of these hills, but
in the bottoms on the rough parts and ridges of the hills: it
groweth likewise in divers places of England where it hath been
planted, as at Sion a place near London, sometime a house of nuns:
it groweth also at Greenwich, and at other places, and likewise at
Hampstead in the garden of Mr. Wade, one of the clerks of her
Majesty's Privy Council.

The wild kind of Cypress tree groweth hard by Ammon's Temple, and in
other parts of the country of Cyrene upon the tops of mountains, and
in extreme cold countries: Bellonius affirmeth, that there is found
a certain wild Cypress also in Candy, which is not so high as other
Cypress trees, nor groweth sharp toward the top, but is lower, and
hath his boughs spread flat, round about in compass: he saith the
body thereof is also thick: but whether this be Thya, of which
Theophrastus and Pliny make mention, we leave it to consideration.

The Time.

The tame Cypress tree is always green; the fruit may be gathered
thrice a year, in January, May, and September, and therefore it is
surnamed Trifera.

The wild Cypress tree is late, and very long before it buddeth.

The Names.

The tame Cypress is called in Latin, Cupressus: in shops, Cypressus:
in Italian, Cypresso: in French and Spanish, Cipres; in High Dutch,
Cipressenbaum: in Low Dutch, Cypresse boom: in English, Cypress, and
Cypress tree.

The fruit is named in Latin, Pilulæ Cupressi, Nuces Cupressi, and
Galbuli: in shops, Nuces Cypressi: in English, Cypress nuts or
clogs. This tree in times past was dedicated to Pluto, and was said
to be deadly; whereupon it is thought that the shadow thereof is
unfortunate.

The wild Cypress tree is called in Greek, Thya or Thyeion, and
Thyon: from this doth differ Thyeia, being a name not of a plant,
but of a mortar in which dry things are beaten: Thya, as Pliny
writeth, lib. 13. cap. 16, was well known to Homer: he showeth that
this is burned among the sweet smells, which Circe was much
delighted withal, whom he would have to be taken for a goddess, to
their blame that call sweetand odoriferous smells, even all of them,
by that name; because he doth especially make mention withal in one
verse, of Cedrus and Thya: the copies have falsely Larix, or Larch
tree, in which it is manifest that he spake only of trees: the verse
is extant in the fifth book of Odysseus, where he mentioneth, that
Mercury by Jupiter's commandment went to Calypso's den, and that he
did smell the burnt trees Thya and Cedrus a great way off.

Theophrastus attributeth great honour to this tree, showing that the
roofs of old temples became famous by reason of that wood, and that
the timber thereof, of which the rafters are made is everlasting,
and it is not hurt there by rotting, cobweb, nor any other infirmity
or corruption.

The Temperature.

The fruit and leaves of the Cypress are dry in the third degree, and
astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The Cypress nuts being stamped and drunken in wine, as
Dioscorides writeth, stoppeth the lask and bloody flux; it is good
against the spitting of blood and all other issues of blood.

B. They glue and heal up great ulcers in hard bodies: they safely
and without harm soak up and consume the hid and secret moisture
lying deep and in the bottom of weak and moist infirmities.

C. The leaves and nuts are good to cure the rupture, to take away
the polypus, being an excrescence growing in the nose.

D. Some do use the same against carbuncles and eating sores, mixing
them with parched barley meal.

E. The leaves of Cypress boiled in sweet wine or mead, helps the
strangury and difficulty of making water.

F. It is reported, that the smoke of the leaves doth drive away
gnats, and that the clogs do so likewise.

G. The shavings of the wood laid among garments preserveth them from
the moths: the resin killeth moths, little worms, and maggots.

CHAP. 46. Of the Tree of Life.

Fig. 1933. Tree of Life

The Description.

The Tree of Life groweth to the height of a small tree, the bark
being of a dark reddish colour: the timber very hard, the branches
spreading themselves abroad, hanging down toward the ground by
reason of the weakness of the twiggy branches surcharged with very
oleous and ponderous leaves, casting, and spreading themselves like
the feathers of a wing, resembling those of the Savin tree, but
thicker, broader, and more full of gummy or oleous substance: which
being rubbed in the hands do yield an aromatic, spicy, or gummy
savour, very pleasant and comfortable: amongst the leaves come forth
small yellowish flowers, which in my garden fall away without any
fruit: but as it hath been reported by those that have seen the
same, there followeth a fruit in hot regions, much like unto the
fruit of the Cypress tree, but smaller, compact of little and thin
scales closely packed one upon another, which myself have not yet
seen. The branches of this tree laid down in the earth will very
easily take root, even like the Woodbine or some such plant; which I
have often proved, and thereby have greatly multiplied these trees.

The Place.

This tree groweth not wild in England, but it groweth in my garden
very plentifully.

The Time.

 It endureth the cold of our Northern climate, yet doth it lose his
gallant greenness in the winter months: it flowereth in my garden
about May.

The Names.

Theophrastus and Pliny, as some think, have called this sweet and
aromatical tree Thuia, or Thya: some call it Cedrus lycia: the new
writers do term it Arbor vitæ: in English, the Tree of Life, I do
not mean that whereof mention is made, Genesis 3. 22.

The Temperature.

Both the leaves and boughs be hot and dry.

The Virtues.

Among the plants of the New-found land, this tree, which
Theophrastus calls Thuia, or Thua, is the most principal, and best
agreeing unto the nature of man, as an excellent cordial, and of a
very pleasant smell.

CHAP. 47. Of the Yew Tree.

Fig. 1934. Yew

The Description.

Instead of the description and place mentioned by our author (which
were not amiss) give me leave to present you with one much more
accurate, sent me by Mr. John Goodyer.

Taxus glandifera bacciferaque.
The Yew bearing acorns and berries.

The Yew tree that beareth acorns and berries is a great high tree
remaining always green, and hath usually an huge trunk or body as
big as the Oak, covered over with a scabbed or scaly bark, often
peeling or falling off, and a young smooth bark appearing
underneath; the timber hereof is somewhat red, near as hard as Box,
universally covered next the bark with a thick white sap like that
of the Oak, and hath many big limbs divided into many small
spreading branches: the leaves be about an inch long, narrow like
the leaves of Rosemary, but smooth, and of a darker green colour,
growing all alongst the little twigs or branches close together,
seldom one opposite against another, often having at the ends of the
twigs little branches composed of many leaves like the former, but
shorter and broader, closely compact or joined together: amongst the
leaves are to be seen at all times of the year, small slender buds
somewhat long, but never any flowers; which at the very beginning of
the spring grow bigger and bigger, till they are of the fashion of
little acorns, with a white kernel within: after they are of this
form, then groweth up from the bottoms of the acorns a reddish
matter, making beautiful reddish berries more long than round,
smooth on the outside, very clammy within, and of a sweet taste,
covering all the acorn, only leaving a little hole at the top, where
the top of the acorn is to be seen: these fallen, or devoured by
birds, leave behind them a little whitish husk made of a few scales,
appearing like a little flower, which peradventure may deceive some,
taking it to be so indeed: it seems this tree if it were not hindred
by cold weather, would always have acorns and berries on him, for he
hath always little buds, which so soon as the spring yields but a
reasonable heat, they grow into the form of acorns: about the
beginning of August, seldom before, you shall find them turned into
ripe berries, and from that time till Christmas, or a little after,
you may see on him both acorns and red berries.

Taxus tantum florens.
The Yew which only flowers.

The Yew which only beareth flowers and no berries, is like the other
in trunk, timber, bark, and leaves, but at the beginning of
November, or before, this tree doth begin to be very thick set or
fraught on the lower side or part of the twigs or little branches,
with small round buds, very near as big, and of the colour of Radish
seed, and do so continue all the winter, till about the beginning or
middle of February, when they open at the top, sending forth one
small sharp pointel, little longer than the husk, divided into many 
parts, or garnished towards the top with many small dusty things
like flowers, of the colour of the husks; and if you shall beat or
throw stones into this tree about the end of February, or a good
space after, there will proceed and fly from these flowers an
abundance of dusty smoke. These dusty flowers continue on the trees
till about harvest, and then some and some fall away, and shortly
after the round buds come up as aforesaid.
Dec. 19, 1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.

These trees are both very common in England: in Hampshire there is
good plenty of them growing wild on the chalky hills, and in
churchyards where they have been planted.

The Time.

The time is expressed in their descriptions.

The Names.

This tree is named by Dioscorides, Smilax, by Theophrastus, Milos:
but Nicander in his book Of Counterpoisons, Smilos: Galen doth also
call it Kaktos: it is named in Latin Taxus: in High Dutch,
Eybenbaum: in Low Dutch, Ibenboom: in Italian, Tasso: in Spanish,
Toxo, and Taxo: in French, Yf: in English, Ewe, or Yew tree: in the
unlearned shops of Germany, if any of them remain, it is called
Tamariscus; where in times past they were wont not without great
error, to mix the bark hereof in compound medicines, instead of the
Tamarisk bark.

The Temperature.

The Yew tree, as Galen reporteth, is of a venomous quality, and
against man's nature. Dioscorides writeth, and generally all that
heretofore have dealt in the faculty of herbarism, that the Yew tree
is very venomous to be taken inwardly, and that if any do sleep
under the shadow thereof it causeth sickness and oftentimes death.
Moreover, they say that the fruit thereof being eaten is not only
dangerous and deadly unto man, but if birds do eat thereof, it
causeth them to cast their feathers, and many times to die. All
which I dare boldly affirm is altogether untrue: for when I was
young and went to school, divers of my school-fellows and likewise
myself did eat our fill of the berries of this tree, and have not
only slept under the shadow thereof, but among the branches also,
without any hurt at all, and that not one time, but many times.
Theophrastus saith, That animalia, Galen translates them Iumenta, or
labouring beasts, do die, if they do eat of the leaves; but such
cattle as chew their cud receive no hurt at all thereby.

Nicander in his book Of Counterpoisons doth reckon the Yew tree
among the venomous phants: setting down also a remedy, and that in
these words, as Gorræus hath translated them.

Parce venenata Taxo, quæ surgit in Oeta
Abietibus similis, lethoque absumit acerbo
Ni præter morem pleno cratere meraca
Fundere vina pares, cum primum sentient æger
Arctari obtructas fauces animæque canalem.

Shun the poisonous Yew, the which on Oeta grows,
Like to the Fir, it causes bitter death,
Unless besides thy use pure wine that flows
From empty'd cups, thou drink, when as thy breath
Begins to fail, and passage of thy life
Grows strait.

Pena and Lobel also observed that which our author here affirms, and
daily experience shows it to be true, that the Yew tree in England
is not poisonous: yet divers affirm, that in Provençe in France, and
in most hot countries, it hath such a malign quality, that it is not
safe to sleep or long to rest under the shadow thereof.

CHAP. 48. Of the Juniper Tree.

The Kinds.

Among the Juniper trees one is lesser, another greater, being a
strange and foreign tree: one of these bringeth forth a flower and
no fruit; the other fruit and no flowers.


Fig. 1935. Juniper (1)
Fig. 1936. Great Juniper (2)

The Description.

1. The common Juniper tree groweth in some parts of Kent unto the
nature and bigness of a fair great tree, but most commonly it grows
very low like unto ground Furze: this tree hath a thin bark or rind,
which in hot regions will chop and rend itself into many crannies or
pieces: out of which rifts issueth a certain gum or liquor much like
unto frankincense: the leaves are very small, narrow, and hard, and
somewhat prickly, growing evergreen along the branches, thick
together: amongst which come forth round and small berries, green at
the first, but afterward black declining to blueness, of a good
savour, and sweet in taste, which do wax somewhat bitter after they
be dry and withered.

2. The great Juniper tree comes now and then to the height of the
Cypress tree, with a greater and harder leaf, and also with a fruit
as big as Olive berries, as Bellonius writeth, of an exceeding fair
blue colour, and of an excellent sweet savour.

Fig. 1937. Dwarf Alpine Juniper (3)

3. This exceeds not the height of a cubit, but grows low, and as it
were creeps upon the ground, and consists of sundry thicker and
shorter branches than the common kind, tough also, writhing, and
hard to break; leaves always growing at equal distances, as in the
common, but yet broader, shorter, and thicker, neither less pricking
than they, of a whitish green colour on the inside, and green
without, encompass the tender branches. Clusius, who gives us this
figure and history observed not the flower, but the fruit is like
that of the ordinary, but yet somewhat longer; It grows upon the
Austrian Alps, and ripens the fruit in August and September.

The Place.

The common Juniper tree is found in very many places, especially in
the South parts of England.

Bellonius reporteth, that the greater groweth upon mount Taurus:
Aloysius Anguillaria writeth, that it is found on the sea shores of 
the Ligurian and Adriatic sea and Illyricum, bringing forth great
berries: and others say that it grows in Provençe of France: it
cometh up for the most part in rough places and near to the sea, as
Dioscorides noteth.

The Time.

 The Juniper tree flowereth in May; the flower whereof is nothing
else but as it were a little yellowish dust or powder strewed upon
the boughs. The fruit is ripe in September, and is seldom found
either winter or summer without ripe and unripe berries, and all at
one time.

The Names.

The Juniper tree is called in Greeke Arkeuthos: the apothecaries
keep the Latin name Iuniperus: the Arabians call it Archonas and
Archencas: the Italians, Ginepro: in High Dutch, Wechholter: in
Spanish, Enebro, Ginebro, and Zimbro. the French men and base
Almaines Geneve: English, Juniper tree.

The lesser is named in Latin; Iuniperus. The great Juniper Tree is
called in Latin (by Lobel) Iuniperus maximus illyricus cærulea
bacca, by reason of the colour of the berries, and may be called in
English, Blue Juniper.

The berries are called grani iuniperi: in High Dutch, Krametbeer,
Weckholierbeer: in Low Dutch, Genevrebessen: in Spanish, Neurinas:
in English, Juniper berries.

The gum of the Juniper tree is usually called of the apothecaries
vernix: in Latin, lachryma iuniperi: Serapio nameth it sandarax and
sandaracha; but there is another sandaracha among the Grecians,
being a kind of orpiment, which grows in the same minerals wherein
orpiment doth, and this doth far differ from vernix, or the Juniper
gum. Pliny in his 11th book, 7th chapter maketh mention also of
another sandaracha, which is called Erithrace and Cerinthus; this is
the meat of bees whilst they be about their work.

The Temperature.

Juniper is hot and dry, and that in the third degree, as Galen
teacheth; the berries are also hot but not altogether so dry: the
gum is hot and dry in the first degree, as the Arabians write.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit of the Juniper tree doth cleanse the liver and kidneys,
as Galen testifieth: it also maketh thin clammy and gross humours:
it is used in counterpoisons and other wholesome medicines: being
over-largely taken it causeth gripings and gnawings in the stomach,
and maketh the head hot: it neither bindeth nor looseth the belly:
it provoketh urine.

B. Dioscorides reporteth, that this being drunk is a remedy against
the infirmity of the chest, coughs, windiness, gripings and poisons,
and that the same is good for those that be troubled with cramps,
burstings, and with the disease called the mother.

C. It is most certain that the decotion of these berries is singular
good against an old cough, and against that with which children are
now and then extremely troubled, called the chin cough, in which
they use to rise up raw, tough and clammy humours, that have many
times blood mixed with them.

D. Divers in Bohemia do take instead of other drink, the water
wherein those berries have been steeped, who live in wonderful good
health.

E. This is also drunk against poisons and pestilent fevers, and it
is not unpleasant in the drinking: when the first water is almost
spent, the vessel is again filled up with fresh.

F. The smoke of the leaves and wood driveth away serpents, and all
infection and corruption of the air, which bring the plague, or such
like contagious diseases: the juice of the leaves is laid on with
wine, and also drunk against the bitings of the viper.

G. The ashes of the burned bark, being applied with water, take away
scurf and filth of the skin.

H. The powder of the wood being inwardly taken, is pernicious and
deadly, as Dioscorides' vulgar copies do affirm; but the true copies
utterly deny it, neither do any of the old writers affirm it.

I. The fume and smoke of the gum doth stay phlegmatic humours that
distil out of the head, and stoppeth the rheum: the gum doth stay
raw and phlegmatic humours that stick in the stomach and guts, if it
be inwardly taken, and also drunk.

K. It killeth all manner of worms in the belly, it stayeth the
menses, and hæmorrhoids: it is commended also against spitting of
blood; it dryeth hollow ulcers, and filleth them with flesh, if it
be cast thereon: being mixed with oil of roses, it healeth chops in
the hands and feet.

L. There is made of this and of oil of Linseed, mixed together, a
liquor called varnish, which is used to beautify pictures and
painted tables with, and to make iron glister, and to defend it from
the rust.

CHAP. 49. Of the Prickly Cedar, or Cedar Juniper.

The Kinds.

The Prickly Cedar tree is like to Juniper, and is called the small
or little Cedar, for difference from the great and tall Cedar, which
bringeth cones; and of this there are two kinds, as Theophrastus and
Pliny do testify, that is to say, one of Lycia, and another crimson.


Fig. 1938. Crimson Prickly Cedar (1)
Fig. 1939. Rough Lycian Cedar (2)

The Description.

1. The Crimson or Prickly Cedar seemeth to be very like to the
Juniper tree in body and boughs, which are writhed, knotty, and
parted into very many wings: the substance of the wood is red, and
sweet of smell like that of the Cypress; the tree is covered over
with a rugged bark: the leaf be narrow and sharp pointed, harder
than those of Juniper, sharper and more pricking, and standing
thinner upon the branches: the fruit or berry is sometimes as big as
a hazel nut, or, as Theophrastus saith, of the bigness of Myrtle
berries, and being ripe it is of a reddish yellow, or crimson
colour, sweet of smell, and so pleasant in taste, as even the
countrymen now and than do eat of the same with bread.

2. The other low Cedar which grows in Lycia is not so high as the
former, having likewise a writhed body as big as a man's arm, full
of boughs; the bark is rough, yellowish without, and red within: the
leaves stand thicker, like at the first to those of Juniper, but yet
somewhat shorter, and in the third or fourth year thicker, long and
round withal, coming near to the leaves of the Cypress tree, or of
the second Savin, that is, blunt, and not pricking at all, which
being bruised between the fingers do yield a very pleasant smell: so
doth one and the selfsame plant firing forth below sharp and psickly
leaves, and above thick and blunt ones, as that notable learned
herbarist Clusius hath most diligently observed: the fruit or berry
is round like that of Juniper, of colour yellow when it is ripe,
inclining to a red, in taste somewhat bitter, but sweet of smell.

Fig. 1940. The Other Lycian Cedar (3)

3. This also hath Cypress-like leaves, not unlike those of the last
described, yet somewhat thicker and broader: the fruit is also much
larger, being as big as Hazel nuts, and of a red or scarlet colour;
whence Lobel calleth it Cedrus phnicia altera.

The Place.

The prickly Cedar with the crimson colour cometh up higher and
greater in certain places of Italy, Spain, and Asia, and in other
countries; for that which grows on Mount Garganus in Apulia is much
higher and broader than those that grow elsewhere, and bringeth
forth greater berries, of the bigness of an hazel nut, and sweeter,
as that most diligent writer Bellonius reporteth. Carolus Clusius
sheweth, that the prickly Cedar and the Juniper tree be of so great
a growth in divers places of Spain, as he hath observed, as that the
body of them is as thick as a man.

The Lycian Cedar is found in Provençe of France, not far from
Massilia, and groweth in a great part of Greece, in Illyricum and
Epirum.

The Time.

Both of them are always green, and in winter also full of fruit, by
reason that they continually bring forth berries, as when the old do
fall new come in their places: in the spring grow up new buds and
beginnings of berries: in autumn they wax ripe the second year, as
do the berries of Juniper.

The Names.

They are called in Greek Oxykedros, in Latin, Minores, and Humiles
Cedri, little and low Cedars, for difference from the tall and great
Cedar which beareth cones.

The former is named in Latin, Oxycedrus, and Cedrus punica: in
English, Prickly Cedar, and Crimson Cedar: Pliny surnameth it
Phnicea, of the crimson colour of the fruit: the Spaniards call
this also Enebro, as Clusius testifieth, even by the same name which
they give to the Juniper: wherein likewise they are thought to
imitate divers of the old writers, who have not by names
distinguished the Juniper from the Cedar, but have, as Theophrastus
noteth, called them Cedros, Cedar trees; yet with an addition,
Oxykedros, or prickly Cedar.

The other with the blunt leaf is named by Theophrastus, Likea
kedros, of Pliny also, Lycia Cedrus: in Provençe of France,
Morveine: divers name this Sabina, and use it instead of Savin,
which they want; as the apothecaries of Epidaurus, and in divers
cities of Greece, and also in Illyricum and Epirum, as Bellonius
testifieth. Some would have it to be Thya; but Thya, according to
Theophrastus, is like, not only in body, leaves, and boughs, but in
fruit also, to the Cypress tree, but the fruit of this is nothing
like to the Cypress cones.

The fruit of this Cedar is named by Theophrastus, Cedris:
notwithstanding Cedrus, as he himself doth also testify (Gaza nameth
it Credula) is a certain little shrub which never groweth to a tree.

The gum or liquor which issueth forth of the prickly Cedar is also
called vernix, and is sold instead thereof.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The little Cedar, as Galen writeth, is hot and dry in a manner in
the third degree: the matter or substance thereof is sweet of smell,
like that of Juniper, and is used for perfumes and odoriferous
smells together with the leaves,

B. The berries or fruit of the low Cedar have the faculties not so
strong, as the same author testifieth, insomuch as that they may
also be eaten, yet if they be taken too plentifully, they cause
headache, and breed heat and gnawings in the stomach. Yet there is a
difference between these two Cedar berries; for the crimson ones are
not so hot and dry, by reason they are sweeter and pleasanter to the
taste, and therefore they are better to be eaten, and do also yield
unto the body a kind of nourishment: but the berries of that of
Lycia are biting, hotter and and drier also than those of Juniper,
from which they differ especially in the biting quality, they bring
no nourishment at all, and though a man eat never so few of them he
shall feel gnawings in his stomach, and pain in his head.

C. The peasants do feed thereon rather to satisfy their hunger, than
for any delight they have in the taste, or the physical virtues
thereof; albeit they be good against the strangury, and provoke
urine.

CHAP. 50. Of Savin.

The Kinds.

There be two knds of Savin; one like in leaf to Tamarisk, the other
to the Cypress tree; whereof the one beareth berries, the other is
barren.


Fig. 1941. Barren Savin (1)
Fig. 1942. Berried Savin (2)

The Description.

1. The first Savin, which is the common kind, and best of all known
in this country, groweth in manner of a low shrub or tree: the stem
or trunk whereof is sometimes as big as a man's arm, dividing itself
into many branches set full of small leaves like unto Cypress, or
Tamarisk, but thicker, and more sharp or prickly, remaining green
winter and summer, in smell rank or very strong, barren both of
flowers and fruit.

2. The other Savin is an high tree, as Bellonius saith, as tall as
the Almond tree, and much like to the tame Cypress tree: the body is
writhed, thick, and sometimes of so great a compass as that it
cannot be fathomed; the substance of the wood is red within, as is
that of the Juniper, and of the prickly Cedar: the bark is not very
thick, and it is of a yellowish red: the leaves are of a marvellous
gallant green colour, like to those of the Cypress tree, yet thicker
or more in number; in taste bitter, of a spicy smell, and like
resin: the boughs are broader, and thick set as it were with wings,
like those of the Pitch Tree and of the Yew tree: on which grow a
great number of berries, very round like those of the little Cedars,
which at the first are green, but when they be ripe they are of a
blackish blue. Out of the root hereof issueth oftentimes a resin,
which being hard is like to that of the Juniper tree, and doth also
crumble in the chewing.

Fig. 1943. Lesser Berried Savin (3)

3. There is another, which differs from the last described only in
that the leaves are smaller and less pricking than those of the
former, as also the branches lesser: Lobel calls this Sabina baccata
altera.

The Place.

Both of them grow upon hills in woods, and in other like untoiled
places, as in Candy, Mysia, and elsewhere. P. Bellonius reporteth
that he found them both upon the tops of the mountains Taurus,
Amanus, and Olympus.

The first is planted in our English gardens almost everywhere: the
second is planted both by the seed and by the slip: the slips must
be set in a ground that is meanly moist and shadowy, till they have
taken root: the shrubs which grow of these decline toward the one
side, retaining still the nature of the bough: but that Savin which
is planted by the seed groweth more upright; this in continuance of
time bringeth forth seeds, and the other for the most part remains
barren: both these grow in my garden.

The Time.

They both continue always green: the one is found to be laden with
ripe fruit commonly in winter, but it hath fruit at all times; for
before the old berries fall, new are come up.

The Names.

Savin is called in Greek Brathus, or Brathu: in Latin, Sabina.

The first is commonly called in the apothecaries' shops by the name
Savina: of divers, Savimera: the Italians and Spaniards keep the
Latin name: it is called in High Dutch, Siben baum: in Low Dutch,
Savel boom: in French, Savenier: in English, common Savin, or garden
Savin.

Some name the other Cupressus cretica, or Cypress of Candy, as Pliny
saith, lib. 12. cap. 17, making mention of a tree called Bruta: some
there are that take this to be altera Sabina, or the second Savin,
and to be read Bruta for Brathu, by altering of the vowels. For it
is described by Pliny lib. 12. cap. 17. to be like the Cypress tree,
in these words: They seek in the mountain Elimæi the tree Bruta,
being like to the broad Cypress tree, having white boughs, yielding
a sweet smell when it is set on fire; whereof mention is made with a
miracle, in the stories of Claudius Cæsar. It is reported that the
Parthians do use the leaves in drinks; that the smell is very like
to that of the Cypress tree, and that the smoke thereof is a remedy
against other woods. It groweth beyond Pasitigris, near unto the
town Sittaca, on mount Zagrus. Thus far Pliny.

The mountains Elimæi are described by Strabo in the country of the
Assyrians, next after the mountain Sagrus above the Babylonians; by
Ptolomæus not far from the Persian gulf: therefore it is hard to say
that Bruta is Sabina altera, or the second Savin, seeing that so
great a distance of the place may undoubtedly cause a difference,
and that it is not largely but briefly described. It seemeth that
Thya mentioned by Theophrastus is more like unto Savin: but yet
forasmuch as Thya is like in fruit to the Cypress tree, and not to
the fruit or berries of the little Cedars, it is also very manifest,
that the second Savin is not Thya, neither Arbor vitæ, so called of
the later herbarists: it is likewise named by Lobel; Sabina genuina
baccifera, atrocærulea, that is, the true Savin that beareth berries
of a blackish blue colour.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Savin, which are most used in medicine, are hot and
dry in the third degree, and of subtle parts, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Savin boiled in wine and drunk provoke urine, bring
down the menses with force, draw away the afterbirth, expel the dead
child, and kill the quick: it hath the like virtue received under in
a perfume.

B. The leaves stamped with honey and applied, cure ulcers, stay
spreading and creeping ulcers, scour and take away all spots and
freckles from the face or body of man or woman.

C. The leaves boiled in oil olive, and kept therein, kill the worms
in children, if you anoint their bellies therewith: and the leaves
powdered and given in milk or muscatel do the same.

D. The leaves dried and beat into fine powder, and strewed upon
those kinds of excrescences sub præputio,["under the foreskin"]
called caroles, and such like, gotten by dealing with unclean women,
take them away perfectly, curing and healing them: but if they be
inveterate and old, and have been much tampered withal, it shall be
necessary to add unto the same a small quantity of auripigmentum in
fine powder, and use it with discretion, because the force of the
medicine is greatly increased thereby, and made more corrosive.

CHAP. 51. Of Tamarisk.


Fig. 1944. French Tamarisk (1)
Fig. 1945. German Tamarisk (2)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Tamarisk groweth like a small hedge tree,
covered with a reddish bark, having many branches set and bedecked
with leaves, much like unto Heath: among which come forth small
mossy white flowers declining to purple, which turn into a pappose
or downy seed, that flieth away with the wind, as that of Willow
doth: the root is woody as the roots of other shrubs be, and groweth
divers ways.

2. The German Tamarisk hath many woody branches or shoots rising
from the root, with a white bark, having his leaves thicker and
grosser than the former, and not so finely jagged or cut: The
flowers are reddish, and larger than the former, growing not upon
footstalks, many thick clustering together as those of the former,
but each a pretty distance from another on the tops of the branches
spike fashion, and begin to flower below: which do turn into seed,
that is likewise carried away with the wind.

The Place.

Tamarisk groweth by running streams, and many times by rivers that
break forth, and not seldom about fenny grounds, commonly in a
gravelly soil, for it best prospereth in moist and stony places: it
is found in Germany, Vindelicia, Italy, Spain, and also in Greece.

The Tamarisks do also grow in Egypt and Syria, as Dioscorides
writeth, and likewise in Tylus an island in Arabia, as Theophrastus
noteth: the wood whereof, saith he, is not weak as with us in
Greece, but strong like timber, or any other strong thing: this
Tamarisk Dioscorides doth call emeros, that is to say, tame, or
planted; and saith that it bringeth forth fruit very like to galls,
in taste rough and binding.

Petrus Bellonius in his Second Book of Singularities reporteth, that
he saw in Egypt very high Tamarisks and great like other trees, and
that sometimes in moist places by rivers' sides, and many times also
in dry and gravelly grounds where no other trees did grow, which now
and then did bear hanging on the boughs such a multitude of galls,
that the inhabitants call Chermasel, as being overladen, they were
ready to break. Both these grow and prosper well in gardens with us
here in England.

The Time.

These trees or shrubs flower in May, and in the later end of August,
their seed is carried away with the wind.

The Names.

They are called in Greek Myrika, and in Latin also Myrica, and
Tamarix: in shops, Tamariscus: of Octavius Horatianus, Murica:
Dioscorides maketh that which groweth in Greece and Italy to be
Agria, or wild Tamarisk: it is named in High Dutch Tamarischen holk,
and Pork: in Low Dutch, Ibenboom, Tamarischboome: in Italian,
Tamarigo: in Spanish, Tamarguira, and Tamariz: in French, Tamara: in
English, Tamarisk.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Tamarisk hath a cleansing and cutting faculty with a manifest
drying; it is also somewhat astringent or binding, and by reason of
these qualities it is very good for an hard spleen, being boiled
with vinegar or wine, either the root or leaves, or tender branches,
as Galen writeth.

B. Moreover Dioscorides teacheth, that the decotion of the leaves
made with wine, doth waste the spleen, and that the same is good
against the toothache, if the mouth be washed therewith: that it
bringeth down the menses, if the patient sit therein; that it
killeth lice and nits, if the parts be bathed therewith.

C. The ashes of burnt Tamarisk hath a drying faculty, and greatly
scouring withal, and a little binding.

D. The flowers and downy seed of the greater Tamarisk doth greatly
bind, infomuch as it cometh very near to the gall named galla
omphacitis, but that the roughness of taste is more evident in the
gall; the which flowers are of an unequal temperature, for there is
joined to the nature thereof a great thinness of parts, and
cleansing faculty, which the gall hath not, as Galen writeth.

These flowers we fitly use (saith Dioscorides) instead of gall, in
medicines for the eyes and mouth.

F. It is good to stanch blood, and to stay the lask and women's
whites, it helpeth the yellow jaundice, and also cureth those that
are bit of the venomous spider called Phalangium; the bark serveth
for the same purposes.

G. The leaves and wood of Tamarisk have great power and virtue
against the hardness and stopping of the spleen, especially the
leaves being boiled in water, and the decoction drunk, or else
infused in a small vessel of ale or beer, and continually drunk: and
if it tbe drunk forth of a cup or dish made of the wood or timber of
Tamarisk, is of greater efficacy.

CHAP. 51. Of Heath, Heather, or Ling.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Heath, some greater, some lesser; some with
broad leaves, and some narrower: some bringing forth berries, and
others nothing but flowers.


Fig. 1946. Common Heath (1)
Fig. 1947. Rough-Leaved Heath (2)

The Description.

1. The common Heath is a low plant, but yet woody and shrubby,
scarce a cubit high: it bringeth forth many branches, whereupon do
grow sundry little leaves somewhat hard and rough, very like to
those of Tamarisk, or the Cypress tree: the flowers are orderly
placed alongst the branches, small, soft, and of a light red colour
tending to purple: the root is also woody, and creepeth under the
upper crust of the earth: and this is the Heath which the ancients
took to be the right and true Heath.

There is another Heath which differeth not from the precedent,
saving that this plant bringeth forth flowers as white as snow,
wherein consisteth the difference: wherefore we may call it Erica
pumila alba, Dwarf Heath with white flowers.

2. The great Heath, (which Carolus Clusius at his being in England
found in the barren grounds about Windsor, which in his Spanish
travels he maketh the first kind): groweth to the height of two
cubits, seldom higher, full of branches, covered with a blackish
bark: whereon are set in very good order by couples, small, rough,
square leaves finer than those of Tamarisk or Cypress. The flowers
enclose the little twiggy branches round about at certain distances
from the lower part to the top fashioned like little bottles,
consisting of four parts, of a shining purple colour, very beautiful
to behold, and the rather to be esteemed because it flowereth twice
in the year: the root is likewise woody.

Fig. 1948. Kinds of Heath (3-6)

3. This, saith Clusius, which is the largest that I have seen,
sometimes exceeds the height of a man, very shrubby, having a hard
and blackish red wood: the leaves are small and short, growing about
the branches by fours, of a very astringent taste: it hath plentiful
store of flowers growing all alongst the branches, so that sometimes
the larger branches have flowers for a foot in length: this flower
is hollow and longish, well smelling, white and beautiful. It grows
between Lisbon and the University of Coimbra in Portugal where it
flowers in November, December, and January.

4. Of this kind there is another sort with whitish purple flowers,
more frequently found than the other sort, which flowers are
somewhat greater than the former, but in form like, and flowering at
the same time. The leaves also are hairy, and grow commonly by
fours: the hollow flowers grow clustering together at the very tops
of the branches, and are to be found in July and August; it grows on
divers heathy places of this kingdom.

5. Crossed Heath groweth to the height of a cubit and a half, full
of branches, commonly lying along upon the ground, of a swart dark
colour: whereon do grow small leaves, set at certain spaces by two
upon one side, and two on the other, opposite, one answering
another, even as do the leaves of Crosswort. The flowers in like
manner stand alongst the branches cross fashion, of a dark overworn
greenish colour. The root is likewise woody, as is all the rest of
the plant.

6. This Steeple Heath hath likewise many woody branches, garnished
with small leaves which easily fall off from the dried stalks; among
which come forth divers little mossy greenish flowers of small
moment. The whole bush for the most part groweth round together like
a little cock of hay, broad at the lower part, and sharp above like
a pyramid or steeple, whereof it took his name.


Fig. 1949. Small-Leaved Heath (7)
Fig.1950. Chalice Heath (8)

7. This Small- or Thin-Leaved Heath is also a low and base shrub,
having many small and slender shoots coming from the root, of a
reddish brown colour; whereupon do grow very many leaves, not unlike
to them of common Thyme, but much smaller and tenderer: the flowers
grow in tufts at certain spaces, of a purple colour. The root is
long and of a woody substance. The branches of this are commonly
whitish, the leaves very green: the flowers are smallest at both
ends and biggest in the midst, hollow, and of a fair purple colour,
which doth not easily decay: it flowers most part of Summer, and
grows in many heathy grounds.

8. Chalice Heath hath also many woody branches growing from the
roots, slender, of a reddish brown colour, a foot and a half high,
garnished with very little leaves, lesser than those of Thyme: the
flowers grow on the tops and upper parts of the branches, and be in
number, five, six or more, hanging downwards, in fashion long,
hollow within like a little tunnel or open cup or chalice, of a
light purplish colour: the root creepeth and putteth forth in divers
places new springs or shoots.


Fig. 1951. Berried Heath (9)
Fig. 1952. Small-Leaved Berried Heath (10)

9. The Heath that bringeth forth berries hath many weak and slender
branches of a reddish colour, which trailing upon the ground do take
hold thereof in sundry places, whereby it mightily increaseth: the
leaves are somewhat broad, of a thick and fleshy substance, in taste
something drying at the first, but afterwards somewhat sharp and
biting the tongue: among which come forth small flowers of an herby
colour: which being faded there succeed small round berries, that at
the first are green, and afterward black, being as big as those of
Juniper wherein is contained purple juice like that of the Mulberry:
within those berries are contained also small three-cornered grains:
the root is hard, and of a woody substance. I found this growing in
great plenty in Yorkshire on the tops of the hills by Guisborough,
between it and RosemaryToping (a round hill so called) and some of
the people thereabouts told me they called the fruit crake berries.
This is the same that Matthiolus calls Erica baccifera: and it is
the Erica coris folio 11 Of Clusius.

10. This which our author figured as you see in the tenth place
(putting the description of the former thereto) hath brittle
branches growing some cubit high, covered with a bark blacker than
the rest: the leaves are like those of the former, but blacker and
smaller, growing about the stalks by threes, of a hottish taste with
some astriction. In September and October it carries a fruit on the
tops of the branches different from the rest, for it is very
beautiful, white, transparent, resembling dusky and uneven pearls in
form and colour, succulent also, and of an acid taste, commonly
containing three little seeds in each berry: in November this fruit
becomes dry, and falls away of itself. Clusius only observed this in
Portugal, and at the first sight afar off took the white berries to
have been grains of manna. He calls it Erica coris folio 10.

Fig. 1953. Kinds of Heath (11-14)

11. I remember (saith Dodonæus) that I observed another Heath which
grew low; yet sent forth many woody and twiggy branches, having upon
them little narrow and longish leaves; on these stalks spike fashion
to the tops of them, yet but on one side, grow elegant red flowers,
pointed with black. This grows in that tract of Germany which leads
from Bohemia to Nuremberg on dry and untilled places, and near
woods. It flowers in April.

12. This shrubby Heath is commonly some cubit high, having slender
branches which come out of the main stems commonly three together;
and the leaves also grow in the same order; the tops of the branches
are adorned with many flowers of a dark purple colour, hollow,
round, bigger below, and standing upon long footstalks. Clusius
found this growing in the untilled places of Portugal above Lisbon,
where it flowered in December; he calls it Erica coris folio 5.
Besides all these (saith Lobel, having first treated of divers
plants of this kind) there is a certain rarer species growing like
the rest after the manner of a shrub in pots, in the garden of Mr.
John Brancion: the leaf is long, and the purple flowers, which as
far as I remember consisted of four little leaves apiece, grow on
the tops of the branches. I know not whence it was brought, and
therefore for the rarity I call it Erica peregrina, that is,
Strange, or Foreign Heath.

14. This hath many round blackish purple branches some foot or cubit
high, lying oft-times along upon the ground: these are beset with
many narrow little leaves, almost like those of the third described,
yet somewhat longer, commonly growing four, yet sometimes five
together, of an astringent taste; the little flowers grow on the top
of the branches, longish, hollow, and of a light purple colour,
coming out of four little leaves almost of the same colour; when
these are ripe and dried they contain a blackish and small seed; the
root is hard, woody, and runs divers ways; the weak branches also
that lie upon the ground now and then take root again. Clusius found
this growing plentifully in divers mountainous places of Germany
where it flowered in June and July.

Fig. 1954. Small Austrian Heath (15)

15. The weak stalks of this are some foot high, which are set with
many small green leaves growing commonly together by threes; the
tops of the branches are decked with little hollow and longish
flowers divided at their ends into four parts, of a flesh colour,
together with the four little leaves out of which they grow, having
eight blackish little threads in them, with a purplish pointel in
the middle. The seed is black and small; root woody as in other
plants of this kind. Clusius found this in some mountainous woods of
Austria, where it flowered in April and May.

The Place.

Heath groweth upon dry mountains which are hungry and barren, as
upon Hampstead Heath near London, where all the sorts do grow,
except that with the white flowers, and that which beareth berries.
So saith our author, but there are not above three or four sorts
that I could ever observe to grow there.

Heath with the white flowers groweth upon the downs near unto
Gravesend.

Heath which beareth berries groweth in the North parts of England,
namely, at a place called Crosby Ravenswaith, and in Crag Close also
in the same country: from whence I have received the red berries by
the gift of a learned gentleman called Mr James Thwaites.
The Time.

These kinds or sorts of Heath do for the most part flower all the
summer, even until the last of September.

The Names.

Heath is called in Greek; Ereika: in Latin also Erica. divers do
falsly name it Myrica: in high and low Dutch, Heijden: in Italian,
Erica: in Spanish, Breso Quirro: in French, Bruyre: in English,
Heath, Heather, and Ling.

The Temperature.

Heath hath, as Galen saith, a digesting faculty, consuming by
vapors: the flowers and leaves are to be used.

The Virtues.

A. The tender tops and flowers, saith Dioscorides, are good to be
laid upon the bitings and stinging of any venomous beast: of these
flowers the bees do gather bad honey.

B. The bark and leaves of Heath may be used for and in the same
causes that Tamarisk is used.

CHAP. 53. Of Heath of Jericho.


Fig. 1955. Heath Rose of Jericho.
Fig. 1956. Dried Heath Rose of Jericho.

The Description.

This kind of Heath which of the laater writers hath been called by
the name Rosa hiericontea; the coiner spoiled the name in the mint,
for of all plants that have been written of, there is not any more
unlike unto the Rose, or any kind thereof than this plant: what
moved them thereto I know not: but thus much of my own knowledge, it
hath neither shape, nature, nor faculty agreeing with any Rose; the
which doubtless is a kind of Heath, as the barren soil, and that
among Heath, doth evidently show, as also the heathy matter
wherewith the whole plant is possessed, agreeing with the kinds of
Heath in very notable points. It riseth up out of the ground, of the
height of four inches, or an hand breadth, compact or made of sundry
hard sticks, (which are the stalks) clasping or shutting itself
together into a round form, intricately weaving itself one stick
overthwart another, like a little net: upon which woody sticks do
grow leaves not unlike to those of the Olive tree, which maketh the
whole plant of a round form, and hollow within; among the leaves on
the inside grow small mossy flowers, of a whitish herby colour,
which turn into little seed, like the seed of Rocket, but lesser:
the whole plant is of the substance of heath, and woody.

The second figure setteth forth the dried plant, as it is brought
unto us from beyond the seas: which being set into a dish of warm
water, for half an hour; openeth itself in form, as when it did
grow, and taken forth until it be dry, returneth shut up again as
before.

The Place.

It groweth in the barren grounds of France, and other hot regions,
among the Heath and such like plants: it is a stranger in England,
yet dried we have them in great plenty. Thus our author: I have not
read nor heard that this grows wild in France; but Bellonius saith
it grows in Arabia Deserta: Bauhine saith it easily grew and
flourished many years in his garden at Basel.

The Time.

The seed being sown in our cold climate, is sown in April; it
perisheth when it is sprung up, and bringeth neither flowers nor
seed.

The Names.

This kind of Heath is called Rosa hiericontea, or de hiericho, the
Rose of Jericho: of some, the Rose of Jerusalem, and also Rosa
Mariæ: in English, the Heath Rose.

The Temperature and Virtues.

There is not any of the ancient nor later writers that have set down
any certainty of this plant as touching the temperature and
faculties, but only a bare picture with a slender description.

CHAP. 54. Of the Chaste Tree.


Fig. 1957. Chaste Tree (1)
Fig. 1958. Cut-Leaved Chaste Tree (2)

The Description.

Vitex, or the Chaste Tree, groweth after the manner of a bushy shrub
or hedge tree, having many twiggy branches, very pliant and easy to
be bent without breaking, like to the willow: the leaves are for the
most part divided into five or seven sections or divisions, much
like the leaves of Hemp, whereof each part is long and narrow, very
like unto the willow leaf, but smaller: the flowers do grow at the
uppermost parts of the branches, like unto spiky ears, clustering
together about the branches, of a light purple or blue colour, and
sweet smell: the fruit is small and round, like unto the grains or
corns of pepper.

2. Lobel mentions another variety hereof that differs from the
former only in that it hath broader leaves, and these also snipped
about the edges.

The Place.

Vitex groweth naturally in Italy, and other hot regions, by water
courses and running streams: I have it growing in my garden.

The Time.

Vitex beginneth to recover his last leaves in May, and the flowers
come forth in August.

The Names.

The Grecians call this shrub Agnos, and Lyzos: agnos i.e. castus,
chaste: because, saith Pliny in his 24th book, 9th chapter, the
Athenian matrons in their feast called Thesmophoria dedicated to the
honour of Ceres, desirous to keep themselves chaste, do lay the
leaves in their beds under them: the Latins name it Vitex, and of
divers it is termed, as we find among the bastard and counterfeit
names Agynos: in Latin, Salix marina, or Salix amerina, and Piper
agreste: in High Dutch, Schaffmulle, Keuschbaum: in Low Dutch, and
also of the apothecaries, Agnus Castus: the Italians, Vitice, Agno
Casto: in Spanish, Gattile casto: in English, Chaste tree, Hemp
tree, and of divers Agnus castus. The name Agnus castus comes by
consounding the Greek name Agnos with Castus, the Latin
interpretation thereof.

The Temperature.

The leaves and fruit of Agnus castus are hot and dry in the third
degree: they are of very thin parts, and waste or consume wind.

The Virtues.

A. Agnus castus is a singular medicine and remedy for such as would
willingly live chaste, for it withstandeth all uncleanness, or
desire to the flesh, confirming and drying up the seed of
generation, in what sort soever it be taken, whether in powder only,
or the decoction drunk, or whether the leaves be carried about the
body; for which cause it was called Castus; that is to say, chaste,
clean, and pure.

B. The seed of Agnus castus drunken, driveth away, and dissolveth
all windiness of the stomach; openeth and cureth the stoppings of
the liver and spleen; and in the beginning of dropsies, it is good
to be drunk in wine in the quantity of a dram.

C. The leaves stamped with butter, dissolve and assuage the
swellings of the genitories and cods, being applied thereto.

D. The decoction of the herb and seed is good against pain and
inflammations about the matrix; if women be caused to sit and bathe
their privy parts therein: the seed being drunk with pennyroyal
bringeth down the menses, as it doth also both in a fume and in a
pessary: in a poultice it cureth the headache; the frantic, and
those that have the lethargy are wont to be bathed herewith, oil and
vinegar being added thereto.

E. The leaves used in a fume, and also strewed, drive away serpents;
and being laid on do cure their bitings.

F. The seed laid on with water doth heal the clefts or rifts of the
fundament; with the leaves, it is a remedy for limbs out of joint,
and for wounds.

G. It is reported that if such as journey or travel do carry with
them a branch or rod of Agnus castus in their hand, it will keep
them from merry-galls, and weariness: Dioscorides.

CHAP. 55. Of the Willow Tree.


Fig. 1959. Common Willow (1)
Fig. 1960. Osier or Water willow (2)

The Description.

1. The common Willow is an high tree, with a body of a mean
thickness, and riseth up as high as other trees do if it be not
topped in the beginning, soon after it is planted; the bark thereof
is smooth, tough, and flexible: the wood is white, tough and hard to
be broken: the leaves are long, lesser and narrower than those of
the Peach tree, somewhat green on the upper side and slippery, and
on the nether side softer and whiter: the boughs be covered either
with a purple, or else with a white bark: the catkins which grow on
the tops of the branches come first of all forth, being long and
mossy, and quickly turn into white and soft down, that is carried
away with the wind.

2. The lesser bringeth forth of the head, which standeth somewhat
out, slender wands or twigs, with a reddish or green bark, good to
make baskets and such like works of: it is planted by the twigs or
rods being thrust into the earth, the upper part whereof when they
are grown up, is cut off; so that which is called the head
increaseth under them, from whence the slender twigs do grow, which
being oftentimes cut, the head waxeth greater: many times also the
long rods or wands of the higher withy trees be lopped off and
thrust into the ground for plants, but deeper, and above man's 
height: of which do grow great rods, profitable for many things, and
commonly for bands, wherewith tubs and casks are bound.


Fig. 1961. Round-Leaved Goat Willow (3)
Fig. 1962. Broad-Leaved Goat Willow (4)

3. The Sallow tree or Goat's Willow, groweth to a tree of a mean
bigness: the trunk or body is soft and hollow timber, covered with a
whitish rough bark: the branches are set with leaves somewhat rough,
green above, and hoary underneath: among which come forth round
catkins, or aglets that turn into down, which is carried away with
the wind.

4. This other Sallow tree differeth not from the precedent, but in
this one point, that is to say, the leaves are greater and longer,
and every part of the tree larger, wherein is the difference. Both
those last described have little roundish leaves like little ears
growing at the bottoms of the footstalks of the bigger leaves,
whereby they may tbe distinguished from all other plants of this
kind.


Fig. 1963. English Rose Willow (5)
Fig. 1964. Low Willow (6)

5. The Rose Willow groweth up likewise to the height and bigness of
a shrubby tree, the body whereof is covered with a scabbed rough
bark: the branches are many, whereupon do grow very many twigs of a
reddish colour, garnished with small long leaves, somewhat amongst
which come forth little flowers, or rather a multiplication of
leaves, joined together in form of a Rose, of a greenish white
colour, which do not only make a gallant show, but also yield a most
cooling air in the heat of summer, being set up in houses, for the
decking of the same.

6. The low or base Willow groweth but low, & leaneth weakly upon the
ground, having many small and narrow leaves, set up on limber and
pliant branches, of a dark or blackish green colour: amongst which
come forth long slender stems full of mossy flowers, which turn into
a light downy substance that flieth away with the wind.


Fig. 1965. Dwarf Willow (7)
Fig. 1966. Creeping Dwarf Willow (8)

7. The dwarf Willow hath very small and slender branches, seldom
times above a foot, but never a cubit high, covered with a duskish
bark, with very little and narrow leaves, of a green colour above,
and on the upper side, but underneath of a hoary or overworn
greenish colour, in bigness and fashion of the leaves of garden
Flax: among which come forth little duskish flowers, which do turn
into down that is carried away with the wind: the root is small and
thready, of the bigness of a finger, and of a blackish colour.

8. There is another kind of willow like to the former, and differeth
from it in that, the leaves of this kind are smaller and narrower,
as big as the leaves of Myrtle, having small knobby flowers of a
duskish colour, which turn into down that flieth away with the wind:
the root is small and limber, not growing deep, but running along
upon the upper crust of the earth.

The Place.

These Willows grow in divers places of England: the Rose Willow
groweth plentifully in Cambridgeshire, by the rivers and ditches
there: in Cambridge town they grow abundantly about the places
called Paradise and Hell-mouth, in the way from Cambridge to
Grantchester: I found the Dwarf Willows growing near to a bog or
marsh ground at the further end of Hampstead Heath upon the
declining of the hill, in the ditch that encloseth a small cottage
there, not half a furlong from the said house or cottage.

The Time.

The willows do flower at the beginning of the spring.

The Names.

The Willow tree is called in Greek, Itea: in Latin, Salix: in High
Dutch, Wryden: in Low Dutch, Wilgen: in Italian, Salice: in French,
Saux: in Spanish, Salguiero, Salzer, and Sauz: in English, Sallow,
Withy, and Willow.

The greater is called in Latin Salix perticalis, common Withy,
Willow, and Sallow, especially that which being often lopped sendeth
out from one head many boughs: the kind hereof with the red bark is
called of Theophrastus, Black Withy; and the other, White: Pliny
calleth the black Græca or Greek Withy (the red, being the Greek
Withy, saith he, is easy to be cleft) and the whiter, Amerina.

Theophrastus writeth, that the Arcadians do call the lesser Elike,
not Itea. Pliny also nameth this Helice: both of them do make this
to be Salicis tertia species, the third kind of Sallow: the same is
likewise called in Latin, Salix pumila, Salix viminalis, Salix
gallica; and by Columella, Sabina, which he saith that many do term
Amerina: in High Dutch; Kleyn Weyden: in Low Dutch, Wijmen: in
English, Osier, small Withy, Twig Withy: Petrus Crescentius nameth
it Vincus.

The Temperature.

The leaves, flowers, seed, and bark of Willows are cold and dry in
the second degree, and astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves and bark of Withy or Willows do stay the spitting of
blood, and all other fluxes of blood whatsoever in man or woman, if
the said leaves and bark be boiled in wine and drunk.

B. The green boughs with the leaves may very well be brought into
chambers and set about the beds of those that be sick of fevers, for
they do mightily cool the heat of the air, which thing is a
wonderful refreshing to the sick patients.

C. The bark hath like virtues: Dioscorides writeth, that this being
burnt to ashes, and steeped in vinegar, takes away corns and other
like risings in the feet and toes: divers, saith Galen, do slit the
bark whilst the Withy is in flowering, and gather a certain juice,
with which they use to take away things that hinder the sight, and
this is when they are constrained to use a cleansing medicine of
thin and subtle parts.

CHAP. 56. Of the Olive Tree.


Fig. 1967. Cultivated Olive (1)
Fig. 1968. Wild Olive (2)

The Description.

1. The tame or manured Olive tree groweth high and great with many
branches, full of long narrow leaves not much unlike the leaves of
Willows, but narrower and smaller; the flowers be white and very
small, growing upon clusters or bunches: the fruit is long and
round, wherein is an hard stone: from which fruit is pressed that
liquor which we call oil olive.

2. The wild Olive is like unto the tame or garden Olive tree, saving
that the leaves are something smaller: among which sometimes do grow
many prickly thorns: the fruit hereof is lesser than of the former,
and more in number, which do seldom come to maturity or ripeness in
somuch that the oil which is made of those berries continueth ever
green, and is called Oil Omphacine, or oil of unripe olives.
The place.

Both the tame and the wild Olive trees grow in very many places of
Italy, France, and Spain, and also in the islands adjoining: they
are reported to love the sea coasts; for most do think, as Columella
writeth, that above sixty miles from the sea they either die, or
else bring forth no fruit: but the best, and they that do yield the
most pleasant oil are those that grow in the island called Candy.

The Time.

All the Olive trees flower in the month of June: the fruit is
gathered in November or December: when they be a little dried and
begin to wrinkle they are put into the press, and out of them is
sqeezed oil, with water added in the pressing: the olives which are
to be preserved in salt and pickle must be gathered before they be
ripe, and whilst they are green.

The Names.

The tame or garden Olive tree is called in Greek Elaia, and Elaia
emeros: in Latin, Olea sativa, and urbana: in High Dutch, Oelbaum:
in Low Dutch, Olijfboome: in Italian, Olivo domestico: in French,
Olivier: in Spanish, Olivo, and Olivera: in English, Olive tree.

The berry is called Oliva: in Greek also Elaia: in Spanish,
Azeytuna: in French, Dutch, and English, Olive. Olives preserved in
brine or pickle are called colymbades.

The wild Olive tree is named in Greek, Agrielaia; in Latin, Olea
sylvestris, Oleaster, Cotinus, Olea æthiopica: in Dutch, Wald
Oelbaum: in Italian, Olivo salvatico: in Spanish, Azebuche,
Azambulheyro: in French, Olivier sauvage: in English, wild Olive
tree.

The Temperature and virtues.

A. The olives which be so ripe as that either they fall off
themselves, or be ready to fall, which are named in Greek,
drupeteis, be moderately hot and moist, yet being eaten they yield
to the body little nourishment.

B. The unripe olives are dry and binding.

C. Those that are preserved in pickle, called colymbades, do dry up
the overmuch moisture of the stomach, they remove the loathing of
meat, stir up an appetite; but there is no nourishment at all that
is to be looked for in them, much less good nourishment.

D. The branches, leaves, and tender buds of the Olive tree do cool,
dry, and bind, and especially of the wild Olive; for they be of
greater force than those of the tame: therefore by reason they be
milder they are better for eye medicines, which have need of binding
things to be mixed with them.

E. The same do stay St. Anthony's fire, the shingles, epinyctides,
night wheals, carbuncles, and eating ulcers: being laid on with
honey they take away eschars, cleanse foul and filthy ulcers, and
quench the heat of hot swellings, and be good for kernels in the
flank: they heal & skin wounds in the head, and being chewed they
are a remedy for ulcers in the mouth.

F. The juice and decoction also are of the same effect: moreover,
the juice doth stay all manner of bleedings, and also the whites.

G. The juice is pressed forth of the stamped leaves, with wine added
thereto (which is better) or with water, and being dried in the sun
it is made up into little cakes like perfumes.

H. The sweat or oil which issueth forth of the wood whilst it is
burning healeth tetters, scurfs and scabs, if they be anointed
therewith.

I. The same which is pressed forth of the unripe olives is as cold
as it is binding.

K. The old oil which is made of sweet and ripe olives, being kept
long, doth withal become hotter, and is of greater force to digest
or waste away; and that oil which was made of the unripe olives,
being old, doth as yet retain some part of his former astriction,
and is of a mixed faculty, that is to say, partly binding, and
partly digesting; for it hath got this digesting or consuming
faculty by age, and the other property of binding of his own nature,

L. The oil of ripe olives mollifieth and assuageth pain, dissolveth
tumors or swellings, is good for the stiffness of the joints, and
against cramps, especially being mingled according to art, with good
and wholesome herbs appropriate unto those diseases and griefs, as
Hypericum, Camomile, Dill, Lilies, Roses, and many others, which do
fortify and increase his virtues.

M. The oil of unripe olives, called Omphacinum oleum, doth stay,
repress, and drive away the beginning of tumours and inflammations,
cooling the heat of burning ulcers and exulcerations.

CHAP. 57. Of Privet or Prim-Print.

Fig. 1969. Privet

The Description.

1. Privet is a shrub growing like a hedge tree, the branches and
twigs whereof be straight, and covered with soft glistering leaves
of a deep green colour, like those of Periwinkle, but yet longer,
greater also than the leaves of the Olive tree: the flowers be
white, sweet of smell, very little, growing in clusters; which being
faded there succeed clusters of berries, at the first green, and
when they be ripe black like a little cluster of grapes, which yield
a purple juice: the root groweth every way aslope.

The Place.

The common Privet groweth naturally in every wood, and in the
hedgerows of our London gardens: it is not found in the country of
Polonia and other parts adjacent.

The Time.

It flowereth in the end of May, or in June: the berries are ripe in
autumn or about winter, which now and then continue all the winter
long; but in the mean time the leaves fall away, and in the spring
new come up in their places.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Ligustrum: in Italian at this day, Guistrico,
by a corrupt word drawn from Ligustrum. It is the Grecians
Phillyria, and in no wise Kypros: for Cyprus is a shrub that groweth
naturally in the East, and Privet in the West. They be very like one
unto another, as the descriptions do declare, but yet in this they
differ, as witnesseth Bellonius, because the leaves of Privet do
fall away in winter, and the leaves of Cyprus are always green:
moreover, the leaves of Cyprus do make the hair red, as Disocorides
saith, and (as Bellonius reporteth) do give a yellow colour: but the
leaves of Privet have no use at all in dyeing. And therefore Pliny,
lib. 24. cap. 14, was deceived, in that he judged Privet to be the
selfsame tree which Cyprus is in the East: which thing
notwithstanding he did not write as he himself thought, but as other
men suppose; for, lib. 12. cap. 14, he writeth thus: Some (saith he)
affirm this, viz. Cyprus, to be that tree which is called in Italy,
Ligustrum; and that Ligustrum or Privet is that plant which the
Grecians call Phillyria, the description doth declare.

Phillyria, saith Dioscorides, is a tree like in bigness to Cyprus,
with leaves blacker and broader than those of the Olive tree: it
hath fruit like to that of the Mastic tree, black, something sweet,
standing in clusters, and such a tree for all the world is Privet,
as we have before declared.

Serapio the Arabian, cap. 44, doth call Privet Mahaleb. There is
also another Mahaleb, which is a grain or seed of which Avicenna
maketh mention, cap. 478, that it doth by his warm and comfortable
heat dissolve and assuage pain. Serapio seemeth to treat of them
both, and to contain divers of the Mahaleb under the title of one
chapter: it is named in High Dutch, Beinholtzlein, Mundtholtz, Rhein
oder Schulweiden: in Low Dutch, Keelkruyt, Monthout: in French,
Troesne: in English Privet, Prim-print, and Print.

Some there be that would have the berries to be called vaccinia, and
Vaccinium to be that of which Vitruvius hath made mention in his
seventh book Of Architecture or the Art of Building, chap. 24, Of
purple colours: after the same manner, saith he, they temper
vaccinium, and putting milk unto it do make a gallant purple: in
such brevity of the old writers what can be certainly determined?

The Temperature.

The leaves and fruit of Privet are cold, dry, and astringent.

The Virtues.

The leaves of Privet do cure the swellings, apostumations, and
ulcers of the mouth or throat, being gargarised with the juice or
decoction thereof, and therefore they be excellent good to be put
into lotions, to wash the secret parts, and the scaldings with
women, cankers and sores in children's mouths.

CHAP. 58. Of Mock Privet.


Fig. 1970. Narrow-Leaved Mock Privet (1)
Fig. 1971. Broad-Leaved Mock Privet (2)

The Description.

1. Cyprus is a kind of Privet, and is called Phillyrea, which name
all the sorts or kinds thereof do retain; though for distinctions'
sake they pass under sundry titles. This plant groweth like an hedge
tree, sometimes as big as a Pomegranate tree, beset with slender
twiggy boughs which are garnished with leaves growing by couples,
very like the leaves of the Olive tree, but broader, softer, and of
a green colour: from the bosoms of these leaves come forth great
bunches of small white flowers, of a pleasant sweet smell: which
being faded, there succeed clusters of black berries very like the
berries of the Alder tree.

2. The second Cyprus, called also Phillyrea latifolia, is very like
the former in body, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruit; and the
difference is this, that the leaves of this plant are broader, but
in faculty they are like.

Fig. 1972. Clusius' Second Toothed Privet (3)

3. This kind of Privet riseth up like an hedge bush, of the height
of five or six cubits: the branches are long, fragile or brittle,
covered with a whitish bark, whereon are set leaves somewhat broad,
jagged on the edges like the teeth of a saw, and of a deep green
colour: among which come forth the flowers, which neither my author
nor myself have seen: the berries grow upon small footstalks, for
the most part three together, being round, and of the bigness of
pepper grains, or Myrtle berries, of a black colour when they be
ripe.

The Place.

These plants do grow in Syria near the city Ascalon, and were found
by our industrious Pena in the mountains near Narbonne and
Montpellier in France: the which I planted in the garden at Barn
Elms near London, belonging to the right Honourable the Earl of
Essex: I have them growing in my garden likewise.

The Time.

The leaves shoot forth in the first of the spring: the flowers show
themselves in May and June: the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

This Privet is called in Greek, Kypros, and in Latin also Cyprus;
and may be named in English, Easterlin Privet, and Mock Privet, for
the reason following: they are deceived who taking Pliny for their
author, do think that it is Ligustrum, or our Western Privet, as we
have shewed in the former chapter. It is the Arabians Alcanna, or
Henne: and it is also called of the Turks Henne even at this present
time.

The Temperature.

The leaves of these kinds of Privet have a binding quality, as
Dioscorides writeth.

The Virtues.

A. Being chewed in the mouth they heal the ulcers thereof; and are a
remedy against inflammations or hot swellings.

B. The decoction thereof is good against burnings and scaldings.

C. The same being stamped and steeped in the juice of Mullein and
laid on, do make the hair red, as Dioscorides noteth. Bellonius
writeth, that not only the hair, but also the nether parts of man's
body and nails likewise are coloured and dyed herewith, which is
counted an ornament among the Turks.

D. The flowers being moistened in vinegar and applied to the temples
assuageth headache.

E. There is also made of these an oil called oleum cyprinum, sweet
of smell, and good to heat and supple the sinews.

CHAP. 59. Of Bastard Privet.


Fig. 1973. Bastard Privet (1)
Fig. 1974. Coral Privet (2)

The Description.

1. This shrubby tree, called Macaleb, or Mahaleb, is also one of the
Privets: it riseth up like unto a small hedge tree, not unlike unto
the Damson or Bullace tree, having many upright stalks and spreading
branches: whereon do grow leaves not unlike those of the Phillyrea
of Clusius' description: amongst which come forth mossy flowers of a
white colour, and of a perfect sweet smell, growing in clusters,
many hanging upon one stem, which the graver hath omitted: after
which come the berries, green at the first, and black when they be
ripe, with a little hard stone within, in which lieth a kernel.

2. Gesner and Matthiolus have set forth another Macaleb, being also
another bastard Privet. It groweth to a small hedge tree, having
many green branches set with round leaves like those of the Elm
tree, somewhat snipped about the edges: the flowers are like those
of the precedent: The fruit, or rather the kernel thereof, is as
hard as a bead of coral, somewhat round, and of a shining black
colour; which the cunning French perfumers do bore through, making
thereof bracelets, chains, and such like trifling toys, which they
send into England, smeared over with some odd sweet compound or
other, and they are here sold unto our curious ladies and
gentlewomen for rare and strange pomanders, for great sums of money.

The Place.

These trees grow in divers places of France, as about Toulouse, and
sundry other places: they are strangers in England.

The Time.

The flowers bud forth in the spring: the fruit is ripe in November
and December.

The Names.

This bastard Privet is that tree which divers suspect to be that
Mahaleb or Macaleb of which Avicenna writeth, cap. 478. and which
also Serapio speaketh of out of Mesue: but it is an hard thing to
affirm any certainty thereby, seeing that Avicenna hath described it
without marks: notwithstanding this is taken to be the same of most
writers, and those of the best: we may call it in English, Bastard
Privet, or Coral, or Pomander Privet, being without doubt a kind
thereof.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Concerning this bastard Privet we have learned as yet no use
thereof in physic. The kernels which are found in the stones or
fruit, as they be like in taste to those of Cherries, so be they
also answerable to them in temperature; for they are of a temperate
heat, and do gently provoke urine, and be therefore good for the
stone: more we have not to write than hath been spoken in the
description.

CHAP. 60. Of the Fruitless Privet.


Fig. 1975. Fruitless Privet (1)
Fig. 1976. Lesser Fruitless Privet (2)

The Description.

1. This shrubby bush, called of Pliny and Carolus Clusius,
Alaternus, groweth up to a small hedge tree, in form like unto a
Bastard Privet; but the leaves are more like those of Ilex, or the
French Oak, yet stiffer and rounder than those of Macaleb: amongst
which come forth tufts of greenish yellow flowers like those of the
Lentisk tree: under and among the leaves come forth the berries,
like those of Laurustinus, in which are contained two kernels like
to the acins or stones of the Grape.

2. The second kind of Alaternus is likewise a fruitless kind of
Privet, having narrow leaves somewhat snipped about the edges: from
the bosoms whereof come forth small herby coloured flowers; which
being faded, there succeedeth the fruit, whereof Avicenna speaketh,
calling it by the name Fagaras, being a fruit in bigness and form
like those in shops called cocculus indi, and may be the same for
anything that hath been written to the contrary. This fruit hangeth
as it were in a dark ash-coloured skin or husk, which encloseth a
slender stiff shell like the shell of a nut, covered with a thin or
black film; whether it be the fruit of this plant it is not
censured; notwithstanding you shall find the figure hereof among the
Indian fruits, by the name Fagaras.

This hath shorter branches and rounder leaves than the former: the
flowers are larger and greener; to which succeed fruit clustering
together, first green, then red, and afterwards black, and
consisting of three kernels: it flowers in February and the
beginning of March, and grows in sundry places of Spain. The fruit
of this is not the Fagaras, neither doth the Fagaras mentioned by
our author any way agree with the cocculus indi of the shops, as
shall be showed hereafter in their fit places.

The Place.

These plants do grow in the shadowy woods of France, and are
strangers in England.

The Time.

The time answereth the rest of the Privets.

The Names.

Alaternus of Pliny is the same Phillyrea which Theophrastus hath
written of by the name Philyca, and Bellonius also, lib. 1. cap. 42
of his Singularities, and the people of Candy call it Elæprinon: the
Portugals, Casca: in French, Dalader, and Sangin blanc: in English,
barren or fruitless Privet: notwithstanding some have thought it to
bear fruit, which at this day is called Fagaras: with us, Cocculus
Indi, as we have said.

Thus saith our author, but I can by no means approve of the English
name here given by him; but judge the name of Evergreen Privet,
(given it by Mr. Parkinson) to be much more fitting to the thing.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Whether the plant be used in medicine I cannot as yet learn: the
fishermen of Portugal do use to seethe the bark thereof in water,
with the which decoction they colour their nets of a reddish colour,
being very fit for that purpose: the wood also is used by dyers to
dye a dark black withal.


CHAP. 61. Of the White and Blue Pipe Privet.


Fig. 1977. White Pipe (1)
Fig. 1978. Blue Pipe (2)

The Description.

1. The White Pipe groweth like an hedge tree, or bushy shrub: from
the root whereof arise many shoots, which in short time grow to be
equal with the old stock, whereby in little time it increaseth to
infinite numbers, like the common English Prim or Privet, whereof
doubtless it is a kind; if we consider every circumstance: the
branches are covered with a rugged gray bark: the timber is white,
with some pith or spongy matter in the middle like Elder, but lesser
in quantity. These little branches are garnished with small crumpled
leaves of the shape and bigness of Pear tree leaves, and very like
in form: among which come forth the flowers, growing in tufts,
compact of four small leaves of a white colour, and of a pleasant
sweet smell; but in my judgement they are too sweet, troubling and
molesting the head in very strange manner. I once gathered the
flowers and laid them in my chamber window, which smelled more
strongly after they had lain together a few hours, with such an
unacquainted savour, that they awaked me out of my sleep, so that I
could not take any rest till I had cast them out of my chamber. When
the flowers be faded then followeth the fruit, which is small,
curled, and as it were compact of many little folds, broad towards
the upper part, and narrow towards the stalk, and black when it is
ripe, wherin is contained a slender and long seed. The root hereof
spreadeth itself abroad in the ground, after the manner of the roots
of such shrubby trees.

2. The Blue Pipe groweth likewise in manner of a small hedge tree,
with many shoots rising from the root like the former, as our common
Privet doth, whereof it is a kind. The branches have some small
quantity of pith in the middle of the wood, and are covered with a
dark black greenish bark or rind. The leaves are exceeding green,
and crumpled or turned up like the brims of an hat, in shape very
like unto the leaves of the Poplar tree: among which come the
flowers, of an exceeding fair blue colour, compact of many small
flowers in the form of a bunch of grapes: each flower is in show
like those of Valeriana rubra dodonæi, consisting of four parts like
a little star, of an exceeding sweet savour or smell, but not so
strong as the former. When these flowers be gone, there succeed flat
cods, and somewhat long, which being ripe are of a light colour,
with a thin membrane or film in the midst, wherein are seeds almost
four square, narrow and ruddy.


Fig. 1979. Arabian Pipe (3)
Fig. 1980. The oily acorn (4)

3. This (which Clusius setteth forth by the name of Iasminum
arabicum, or Syringa arabica) groweth some two or three cubits high,
divided into many slender branches, whereon by couples at each joint
stand leaves like those of the first described, but thinner, and not
snipped about the edges: on the tops of the branches grow the
flowers, wholly white, consisting of nine, ten, or twelve leaves set
in two ranks: these flowers are very sweet, having a scent as it
were compounded of the Spanish Jasmine, and Orange flowers. It is a
tender plant, and may be grafted upon the common Jasmine, whereon it
thrives well; and flowers most part of the summer. It groweth
plentifully in Egypt; and Prosper Alpinus is thought to mention this
by the name of Salvac arabum, sive Gelseminum arabicum.

4. Glans unguentaria, or the oily acorn, is the fruit of a tree like
Tamarisk, of the bigness of an Hazelnut, out of the kernel whereof,
no otherwise than out of bitter Almonds, is pressed an oily juice
which is used in pretcious ointments, as Dioscorides affirmeth:
neither is it in our time wholly rejected; for the oil of this fruit
mixed with sweet odours serveth to perfume gloves and divers other
things; and is vulgarly known by the name of Oil of Ben.
The Place.

1, 2. These trees grow not wild in England, but I have them growing
in my garden in very great plenty.

The Time.

They flower in April and May, but as yet they have not borne any
fruit in my garden, though in Italy and Spain their fruit is ripe in
September.

The Names.

The later physicians call the first Syringa, or rather Syrinx: that
is to say, a pipe, because the stalks and branches thereof, when the
pith is taken out, are hollow like a pipe: it is also many times
surnamed candida, or white, or Syringa candido flore, or Pipe with a
white flower, because it should differ from Lillach, which is
sometimes named Syringa cærulea, or blue Pipe, in English, Pipe.

Blue Pipe the later physicians, as we have said, do name Lillach, or
Lilac: of some, Syringa cærulea, or blue Pipe: most do expound the
word Lillach, and call it Ben: Serapio's and the Arabians' Ben is
Glans unguentaria, which the Grecians name Balanus myrepsica, from
which Lillach doth very much differ: among other differences it is
very apparent, that Lillach bringeth forth no nut, howsoever
Matthiolus doth falsely picture it with one; for it hath only a
little cod, the seed whereof hath in it no oil at all. The figure of
the Balanus myrepsica we have thought good to insert in this
chapter, for want of a more convenient room.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Balanus myrepsica taken in the quantity of a dram, causeth
vomit; drunk with hydromel it purges by stool, but is hurtful to the
stomach.

B. The oil pressed out of this fruit, which is usually termed oil of 
Ben, as it hath no good or pleasing smell, so hath it no ill scent,
neither doth it become rancid by age, which is the reason that it is
much used by perfumers.

D. The oil smoothes the skin, softens and dissolves hardness, and
conduces to the cure of all cold affects of the sinews:; and it is
good for the pain and noise in the ears, being mixed with Goose-
grease, and so dropped in warm in a small quantity.

CHAP. 62. Of Widow-Wail, or Spurge Olive.

Fig. 1981. Widow-Wail

The Description.

Widow-Wail is a small shrub about two cubits high. The stalk is of a
woody substance, branched with many small twigs, full of little
leaves like Privet, but smaller and blacker, on the ends whereof
grow small pale yellow flowers: which being past, there succeedeth a
three-cornered berry like the Tithymales, for which cause it was
called Tricoccos, that is, three-berried Chamelæa: these berries are
green at the first, red afterward, and brown when they be withered;
and contain in them an oily fatness like that of the Olive; being of
an hot and biting taste, and that do burn the mouth, as do both the
leaves and rind. The root is hard and woody.

The Place.

It is found in most untilled grounds of Italy and Languedoc in
France, in rough and desert places. I have it growing in my garden.

The Time.

It is always green: the seed is ripe in autumn.

The Names.

The Grecians call it Chamælaia, as though they should say, low or
short Olive tree: the Latins, Oleago, and Oleastellus, and likewise
Citocacium: it is also named of divers, Olivella, as Matthiolus
Sylvaticus saith: it is called in English, Widow-Wail, quia facit
viduas ["which makes widows"].

The fruit is named in Latin, Coccus cnidicus: but he is deceived,
saith Dioscorides, that nameth the fruit of Spurge-Olive, Coccos
cnidicus: Avicenna and Serapio call Chamelæa, or Spurge Olive,
Mezereon: under which name notwithstanding they have also contained
both the Chamæleons or Carlines; and so have they confounded
Chamelæa or Spurge Olive with the Carlines, and likewise Thymælea,
or Spurge flax.

The Temperature.

Both the leaves and fruit of Spurge Olive, as we have said, are of a
burning and extreme hot temperature.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves, saith Dioscorides, purge both phlegm and choler,
especially taken in pills, so that two parts of Wormwood be mixed
with one of Spurge Olive, and made up into pills with mead or
honeyed water. They melt not in the belly, but as many as be taken
are voided whole.

B. Mesue likewise hath a description of pills of the leaves of
Mezereon, that is, Chamelæa, or Spurge Olive (yet Sylvius expoundeth
it Thymelæa, or Spurge-Flax) but instead of Wormwood he taketh the
outward substance of the yellow Mirobalans and Cepula Mirobalans,
and maketh them up with Tereniabin, that to say, with manna and sour
dates, which they call Tamarinds, dissolved in Endive water; and
appointeth the same leaves to be first tempered with very strong
vinegar, and to be dried.

C. These pills are commended against the dropsy, for they draw forth
watery humours, but are violent to nature; therefore we must use
them as little as may be. Moreover, Disocorides addeth, that the
leaves of Spurge Olive beaten with honey do cleanse filthy or
crusted ulcers.

CHAP. 63. Of German Olive Spurge.

Fig. 1982. German Olive Spurge

The Description.

The dwarf Bay tree called of Dutch men Mezereon, is a small shrub
two cubits high: the branches be tough, limber, & easy to bend, very
soft to be cut; whereon grow long leaves like those of Privet, but
thicker and fatter. The flowers appear before the leaves, oft-times
in January, clustering together about the stalks at certain
distances, of a whitish colour rending to purple, and of a most
fragrant and pleasant sweet smell: after come the small berries,
green at the first, but being ripe, of a shining red colour, and
afterward wax of a dark black colour, of a very hot and burning
taste, inflaming the mouth and throat, being tasted, with danger of
choking. The root is woody.

The Place and Time.

This plant grows naturally in the moist and shadowy woods of most of
the East countries, especially about Meluin in Poland, from whence I
have had great plenty thereof for my garden, where they flower in
the first of the spring, and ripen their fruit in August.

The Names.

It is usually called in High Dutch, Zeilant, Zeidelbast, Lenszkraut,
and Kellerhals: the apothecaries of our country name it Mezereon,
but we had rather call it Chamelæa germanica: in English, Dutch
Mezereon, or it may be called German Olive Spurge. We have heard,
that divers Italians do name the fruit thereof piper montanum,
mountain pepper; Some say that Laureola, or Spurge Laurel is this
plant, but there is another Laureola, of which we will hereafter
treat: but by what name it is called of the old writers, and whether
they knew it or no, it is hard to tell. It is thought to be Cneoron
album theophrasti, but by reason of his brevity, we can affirm no
certainty.

There is, saith he, two kinds of Cneoron, the white and the black,
the white hath a leaf, long, like in form to Spurge Olive: the black
is full of substance like Myrtle; the low one is more white, the
same is with smell, and the black without smell. The root of both
which groweth deep, is great: the branches be many, thick, woody,
immediately growing out of the earth, or little above the earth,
tough: wherefore they use these to bind with, as with Osiers. They
bud and flower when the autumn equinoctial is past, and a long time
after. Thus much Theophrastus.

The German Spurge Olive is not much unlike to the Olive tree in
leaf: the flower is sweet of smell: the buds whereof, as we have
written, come forth after autumn: the branches are woody and
pliable: the root long, growing deep: all which show that it hath
great likeness and affinity with Cneoron, if it be not the very
same.

The Temperature.

This plant is likewise in all parts extreme hot: the fruit, the
leaves, and the rind are very sharp and biting: they bite the
tongue, and set the throat on fire.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Mezereon do purge downward, phlegm, choler, and
waterish humours with great violence.

B. Also ifa drunkard do eat one grain or berry of this plant, he
cannot be allured to drink any drink at that time; such will be the
heat of his mouth and choking in the throat.

C. This plant is very dangerous to be taken into the body, & in
nature like to the Sea Tithymale, leaving (if it be chewed) such an
heat and burning in the throat, that it is hard to be quenched.

D. The shops of Germany and of the Low Countries do when need
require use the leaves hereof instead of Spurge Olive, which may be
done without errors for this German Spurge Olive is like in virtue
and operation to the other, therefore it may be used instead
thereof, and prepared after the like and selfsame manner.

CHAP. 64. Of Spurge Flax.

Fig. 1983. Spurge Flax

The Description.

Spurge Flax bringeth forth many slender branched sprigs above a
cubit high, covered round with long and narrow leaves like those of
flax, narrower & lesser than the leaves of Spurge Olive. The flowers
are white, small, standing on the upper parts of the sprigs: the
fruit is round, green at the first, but red when it is ripe, like
almost to the round berries of the Hawthorn, in which is a white
kernel covered with a black skin, very hot and burning the mouth
like Mezereon: the root is hard and woody.

The Place.

It groweth in rough mountains, and in untoiled places in hot
regions. It. groweth in any garden.

The Time.

It is green at any time of the year, but the fruit is perfected in
autumn.

The Names.

The Grecians call it Thymelaia: the Syrians, as Diosciorides
witnesseth, Apolinon: divers also Chamelæa, but not properly: but as
Dioscorides saith, the leaf is properly called Cneoron, & the fruit
coccos cnidios; notwithstanding those which Theophrastus calleth
Cneora seem to differ from Thymelæa, or Spurge Flax, unless Nigrum
Cneoron be Thymelæa, for Theophrastus saith that there be two kinds
of Cneoron; the one white, the other black: this may be called in
English, Spurge Flax, or Mountain Widow-Wail: the seed of Thymelæa
is called in shops, Granum Gnidium.

The Temperature.

Spurge Flax is naturally both in leaves and fruit extreme hot,
biting, and of a burning quality.

The Virtues.

A. The grains or berries, as Dioscorides saith, purge by siege
choler, phlegm and water, if twenty grains of the inner part be
drunk, but it burneth the mouth and throat, wherefore it is to be
given with fine flour or barley meal, or in raisins, or covered with
clarified honey, that it may be swallowed.

B. The same being stamped with nitre and vinegar, serveth to anoint
those with, which can hardly sweat.

C. The leaves must be gathered about harvest, and being dried in the
shade, they are to be laid up and reserved.

D. They that would give them must beat them, and take forth the
strings: the quantity of two ounces and two drams put into wine
tempered with water, purgeth and draweth forth watery humours: but
they purge more gently if they be boiled with Lentils, and mixed
with pot-herbs chopped.

E. The same leaves beaten to powder and made up into trochisks or
flat cakes, with the juice of sour grapes are reserved for use.

F. The herb is an enemy to the stomach, which also destroyeth the
birth if it be applied.

CHAP. 65. Of Spurge Laurel.


Fig. 1984. Spurge Laurel in Flower
Fig. 1985. Spurge Laurel with Fruit

The Description.

Spurge Laurel is a shrub of a cubit high, oftentimes also of two,
and spreadeth with many little boughs, which are tough and lithy,
and covered with a thick rind. The leaves be long, broad, gross,
smooth, blackish green, shining, like the leaves of Laurel, but
lesser, thicker, and without smell, very many at the top, clustering
together. The flowers be long, hollow, of a whitish green, hanging
beneath and among the leaves: the berries when they be ripe are
black, with a hard kernel within, which is a little longer than the
seed of Hemp: the pulp or inner substance is white:. the root woody,
tough, long, and diversely parted, growing deep: the leaves, fruit
and bark, as well of the root as of the little boughs, do with their
sharpness and burning quality bite and set on fire the tongue and
throat.

The Place.

It is found on mountains, in untilled, rough, shadowy, and woody
places, as by the lake of Lausanne or Geneva, and in many places
near the river of Rhine and of the Meuse. It grows abundantly also
in the woods in the most parts of England.

The Time.

The flowers bud very soon, a little after the Autumn equinoctial:
they are full blown in winter, or in the first spring: the fruit is
ripe in May and June: the plant is always green, and endureth the
cold storms of winter.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Daphnoides, of the likeness it hath with the
leaves of the Laurel or Bay trees, in Latin likewise Daphnoides: the
later Latinists for the same cause name it Laureola, as though they
should say Laurus minor, or little Laurel: it is called Chamædaphne
and Peplion, notwithstanding there is another Chamædaphne, and
another Peplion. This shrub is commonly called in English, Spurge
Laurel; of others, Laurel or Lowry.

Some say that the Italians name the berries hereof piper montanum,
or mountain pepper, as also the berries of Dutch Mezereon: others
affirm them to tbe called in High Dutch also, Zeilant.

It may be Theophrastus his Cneoron: for it is much like to a Myrtle
in leaf, it is also a branched plant, tough and pliable, having a
deep root, without smell, with a black fruit.

The Temperature.

It is like in temperature and faculty to the German Spurge Olive,
throughout the whole substance biting and extreme hot.

The Virtues.

A. The dry or green leaves of Spurge Laurel, saith Dioscorides,
purgeth by siege phlegmatic humors; procureth vomit and bringeth
down menses, and being chewed it draweth water out of the head.

B. It likewise causeth neezing; moreover, fifteen grains of the seed
thereof drunk, are a purgation.

CHAP. 66. Of Rose Bay, or Oleander.


Fig. 1986. Rose Bay (1)
Fig. 1987. White Rose Bay (2)

The Description.

1. Rose Bay is a small shrub of a gallant show like the Bay tree,
bearing leaves, thicker, greater, longer and rougher than the leaves
of the Almond tree: the flowers be of a fair red colour, divided
into five leaves, not much unlike a little Rose: the cod or fruit is
long, like Asclepias, or Vincetoxicum, and full of such white down,
among which the seed lieth hidden: the root is long, smooth, and
woody.

2. The second kind of Rose bay, is like the first, & differeth in
that, that this plant hath white flowers; but in other respects it
is very like.

The Place.

These grow in Italy and other hot regions, by rivers and the
seaside: I have them growing in my garden.

The Time.

In my garden they flower in July and August: the cods be ripe
afterwards.

The Names.

This plant is named in Greek Nerion, by Nicander, Nereis: in Latin
likewise Nerion, and also Rhododendron and Rhododaphne, that is to
say, Rosea arbor,["Rosy branch"] and Rosea laurus ["Rosy Laurel"]:
in shops, Oleander: in Italian, Oleandro: in Spanish, Adelfa,
Eloendro, and Alendro: in French, Rosagine: in English, Rose tree,
Rose Bay, Rose Bay tree and Oleander.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. This tree being outwardly applied, as Galen saith, hath a
digesting faculty: but if it be inwardly taken it is deadly and
poisonsome, not only to men, but also to most kinds of beasts.

B. The flowers and leaves kill dogs, asses, mules, and very many of
other four footed beasts: but if men drink them in wine they are a
remedy against the bitings of serpents, and the rather if Rue be
added.

C The weaker sort of cattle, as sheep and goats, if they drink the
water wherein the leaves have been steeped, are sure to die.

CHAP. 67. Of Dwarf Rose Bay.

Fig. 1988. Dwarf Rose Bay

The Description.

Dwarf Nerium, or Rose Bay, hath leaves which for the most part are
always green, rough, and small, of a pale yellow colour like Box,
far lesser than Oleander: the whole plant is of a shrub by stature,
leaning this way and that way, as not able to stand upright without
help; his branches are covered and set full of small flowers, of a
shining scarlet or crimson colour; growing upon the hills as ye go
from Trent to Verona, which in June and July are as it were covered
with a scarlet coloured carpet, of an odoriferous savor, and
delectable aspect, which being fallen there cometh seed and fair
berries like Asparagus.

The Place.

The place and time are expressed in the description.

The Names.

This may be called in English, Dwarf Rose Bay of the Alps. I find
not anything extant of the virtues, so that I am constrained to
leave the rest unto your own discretion.

CHAP. 68. Of the Bay or Laurel Tree.

Fig. 1989. Bay

The Description.

1. The Bay or Laurel tree cometh oftentimes to the height of a tree
of a mean bigness; it is full of boughs, covered with a green bark:
the leaves thereof are long, broad, hard, of colour green, sweetly
smelling, and in taste somewhat bitter: the flowers alongst the
boughs and leaves are of a green colour: the berries are more long
than round, and be covered with a black rind or pill: the kernel
within is cloven, into two parts, like that of the Peach and Almond,
and other such, of a brown yellowish colour, sweet of smell, in
taste smewhat bitter, with a little sharp or biting quality.

2. There is also a certain other kind hereof more like to a shrub,
sending forth out of the roots many offsprings, which
notwithstanding groweth not so high as the former; and the barks of
the boughs be somewhat red: the leaves be also tenderer, and not so
hard: in other things not unlike.

These two Bay trees Dioscorides was not ignorant of; for he saith,
that the one is narrow-leaved, and the other broader-leaved, or
rather harder-leaved which is more like.

The Place.

The Laurel or Bay tree groweth naturally in Spain and such hot
regions, we plant and set it in gardens, defending it from cold at
the beginning of March especially.

I have not seen any one tree thereof growing in Denmark, Sweden,
Poland, Livonia, or Russia, or in any of those cold countries where
I have travelled.

The Time.

The Bay tree groweth green winter and summer: it flowereth in the
spring, and the black fruit is ripe in October.
The Names.

This tree is called in Greek Daphne, in Latin, Laurus: in Italian,
Lauro: in High Dutch, Looerbeerbaum: in Low Dutch, Laurus boome: in
French, Laurier: in Spanish, Laurel, Lorel, and Loureiro: in
English, Laurel, or Bay tree.

The fruit is named in Greek Daphnides: in Latin, Lauri baccæ: in
High Dutch, Looerbeeren: in Low Dutch, Bakeleer: in Spanish, Vayas:
in English, Bay berries.

The poets feign that it took his name of Daphne, Lado his daughter,
with whom Apollo fell in love.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The berries and leaves of the Bay tree, saith Galen, are hot and
very dry, and yet the berries more than the leaves.

B. The bark is not biting and hot, but more bitter, and it hath also
a certain astrictive or binding quality.

C. Bay berries with honey or cute, are good in a licking medicine,
saith Dioscorides, against the pthisic or consumption of the lungs,
difficulty of breathing, and all kind of fluxes or rheums about the
chest.

D. Bay berries taken in wine, are good against the bitings and
stingings of any venomous beast, and against all venom and poison:
they cleanse away the morphew: the juice pressed out hereof is a
remedy for pain of the ears, and deafness, if it be dropped in with
old wine and oil of roses: this is also mixed with ointments that
are good against wearisomness, and that heat and discuss or waste
away humours.

E. Bay berries are put into mithridate, treacle, and such-like
medicines that are made to refresh such people as are grown sluggish
and dull by means of taking opiate medicines, or such as have any
venomous or poisoned quality in them.

F. They are good also against cramps and drawing together of sinews.

G. We in our time do not use the berries for the infirmities of the
lungs, or chest, but minister them against the diseases of the
stomach, liver, spleen, and bladder: they warm a cold stomach, cause
concoction of raw humours, stir up a decayed appetite, take away the
loathing of meat, open the stopping of the liver and spleen, provoke
urine, bring down the menses, and drive forth the secondine.

H. The oil pressed out of these, or drawn forth by decoction, doth
in short time take away scabs and such like filth of the skin.

I. It cureth them that are beaten black and blue, and that be
bruised by squats and falls, it removeth black and blue spots and
congealed blood, and digesteth and wasteth away the humours gathered
about the grieved part.

J. Dioscorides saith, that the leaves are good for the diseases of
the mother and bladder, if a bath be made thereof to bathe and sit
in: that the green leaves do gently bind, that being applied, they
are good against the stingings of wasps and bees; that with barley
meal parched and bread, they assuage all kind of inflammations, and
that being taken in drink they mitigate the pain of the stomach, but
procure vomit.

L. The berries of the Bay tree stamped with a little Scammony and
Saffron, and laboured in a mortar with vinegar and oil of roses to
the form of a liniment, and applied to the temples and forepart of
the head, do greatly cease the pain of the migraine.

M. It is reported that common drunkards were accustomed to eat in
the morning fasting two leaves thereof against drunkenness.

N. The later physicians do oftentimes use to boil the leaves of
Laurel with divers meats, especially fishes, and by so doing there
happeneth no desire of vomiting: but the meat seasoned herewith
becometh more savoury and better for the stomach.

O. The bark of the root of the Bay tree, as Galen writeth, drunken
in wine provoketh urine, breaks the stone, and driveth forth gravel:
it openeth the stoppings of the liver, the spleen, and all other
stoppings of the inward, parts: which thing also Dioscorides
affirmeth, who likewise addeth that it killeth the child in the
mother's womb.

N. It helpeth the dropsy and the jaundice, and procureth unto women
their desired sickness.

CHAP. 69. Of the Wild Bay Tree.


Fig. 1990. Wild Bay (1)
Fig. 1991. Portuguese Wild Bay (2)

The Description.

1. Laurus tinus, or the wild Bay tree, groweth like a shrub or hedge
bush, having many tough and pliant branches, set full of leaves very
like to the Bay leaves, but smaller and more crumpled, of a deep and
shining green colour: among which come forth tufts of whitish
flowers, turning at the edges into a light purple: after which
follow small berries of a blue colour, containing a few grains or
seeds like the stones or seeds of grapes: the leaves and all the
parts of the plant are altogether without smell or savour.

2. Tinus lusitanica groweth very like to Cornus fmina, or the Dog-
berry tree, but the branches be thicker, and more stiff, covered
with a reddish bark mixed with green: the leaves are like the
former, but larger, having many sinews or veins running through the
same like as in the leaves of Sage: the flowers hereof grow in tufts
like the precedent, but they are of colour more declining to purple:
the small branches are likewise of a purple colour: the leaves have
no smell at all, either good or bad: the berries are smaller than
the former, of a blue colour declining to blackness.

The Place.

The Wild Bay groweth plentifully in every field of Italy, Spain, and
other regions, which differ according to the nature and situation of
those countries: they grow in my garden and prosper very well.

The Time.

The wild Laurel is evergreen, and may oftentimes be seen most part
of the winter, and the beginning of the spring, with the flowers and
ripe berries growing both at one season.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Tinus, and Laurus sylvestris: Cato nameth it
Laurus sylvatica: in Italian, Lauro sylvatico: in Spanish, Uva de
Perro, otherwise Follado; and of divers, Durillo: in English Wild
Bay.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Pliny nor any other of the ancients have touched the faculties of
this Wild Bay, neither have we any understanding thereof by the
later writers, or by our own experience.

CHAP. 70. Of the Box Tree.

Fig. 1992. Box

The Description.

The great Box is a fair tree, bearing a great body or trunk: the
wood or timber is yellow and very hard, and fit for sundry works,
having many boughs and hard branches, beset with sundry small hard
green leaves, both winter and summer like the Bay tree: the flowers
are very little, growing among the leaves, of a green colour: which
being faded there succeed small black shining berries, of the
bigness of the seeds of Coriander, which are enclosed in round
greenish husks, having three feet or legs like a brass or boiling
pot: the root likewise yellow, and harder than the timber, but of
greater beauty, and more fit for dagger hafts, boxes, and such like
uses, whereto the trunk or body serveth, than to make medicines;
though foolish emperics and women leeches, do minister it against
the apoplexy and such diseases: turners and cutlers, if I mistake
not the matter, do call this wood dudgeon, wherwith they make
dudgeon-hafted daggers.

There is also a certain other kind hereof, growing low, and not
above half a yard high, but it spreadeth all abroad: the branches
hereof are many and very slender: the leaves tbe round, and of a
light green.

The Place.

Buxus, or the Box tree groweth upon sundry waste and barren hills in
England, and in divers gardens.

The Time.

The Box tree groweth green winter and summer: it flowereth in
February and March, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

The Grecians call it Pyxos: in Latin, Buxus: in High Dutch,
Buchszbaum: in Low Dutch, Busboom: in Italian, Bosso: in English,
Box tree.

The lesser may be called in Greek Chamæpyxos: and in Latin, Humi
Buxus, or Humilis Buxus: in English, Dwarf Box, or Ground Box, and
it is commonly called Dutch Box.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The leaves of the Box tree are hot, dry, and astringent, of an
evil and loathsome smell, not used in medicine, but only as I said
before in the description.

CHAP. 71. Of the Myrtle Tree.


Fig. 1993. Myrtle (1)
Fig. 1994. Great Spanish Myrtle (2)

The Description.

The first and greatest Myrtus is a small tree, growing to the height
of a man, having many fair and pliant branches covered with a brown
bark, and set full of leaves much like unto the Laurel or Bay leaf,
but thinner and smaller, somewhat resembling the leaves of
Periwinkle, which being bruised do yield forth a most fragrant
smell, not much inferior unto the smell of Cloves, as all the rest
of the kinds do: among these leaves come forth small white flowers,
in shape like the flowers of the Cherry tree, but much smaller, and
of a pleasant savour, which do turn into small berries, green at the
first, and afterwards black.

2. There is also another kind of Myrtus called Myrtus btica
latifolia, according to Clusius Myrtus laurea, that hath leaves also
like Bay leaves, growing by couples upon his pleasant green
branches, in a double row on both sides of the stalks, of a light
green colour, and somewhat thicker than the former, in scent and
smell sweet: the flowers and fruit are not much differing from the
first kind.

Fig. 1995. Kinds of Myrtle (3-6)

3. There is likewise another kind of Myrtus called exotica, that is
strange and not common: it groweth upright unto the height of a man
like unto the first before mentioned, but that it is replenished
with greater plenty of leaves, which do fold in themselves hollow
and almost double, broader pointed, and keeping no order in their
growing, but one thrusting within another, and as it were crossing
one another confusedly; in all other points agreeing with the
precedent.

4. There is another sort like unto the former in flowers and
branches, but the leaves are smooth, flat and plain, and not
crumpled or folded at all, they are also much smaller than any of
the former. The fruit is in shape like the other, but that it is of
a white colour, whereas the fruit of the other is black.

5. There is also another kind of Myrtle, called Myrtus minor, or
noble Myrtle, as being the chief of all the rest (although most
common and best known) and it groweth like a little shrub or hedge
bush, very like unto the former, but much smaller: the leaves are
small and narrow, very much in shape resembling the leaves of Mastic
Thyme called Marum, but of a fresher green colour: the flowers be
white, nothing differing from the former saving in greatness, and
that sometimes they are more double.

6. This grows not very high, neither is it so shrubby as the former:
the branches are small and brittle: the leaves are of a middle
bigness, sharp pointed, standing by couples in two rows, seldom in
four as the former, they are blackish also and well-smelling. The
flower is like that of the rest: the fruit is round, growing upon
long stalks out of the bosoms of the leaves, first green; then
whitish, lastly black, of a winy and pleasant taste with some
astriction. This grows wild in divers places of Portugal, where
Clusius found it flowering in October: he calls it Myrtus bætica
sylvestris.

The Place.

These kinds of Myrtles grow naturally upon the woody hills and
fertile fields of Italy and Spain. The two last are nourished in the
garden of Mistress Tuggy in Westminster, and in some other gardens.

The Time.

Where they joy to grow of themselves they flower when the Roses do:
the fruit is ripe in autumn: in England they never bear any fruit.

The Names.

It called in Latin, Myrtus: in the Arabic tongue, Alas: in Italian,
Myrto: in Spanish, Arrayhan: in the Portugal language, Murta, and
Murtella: other nations do almost keep the Latin name, as in English
it is called Myrtle, or Myrtle tree.

Among the Myrtles that which hath the fine little leaf is surnamed
of Pliny, tarentina; & that which is so thick and full of leaves is
exotica, strange or foreign. Myrtus nigra is that which hath the
black berries: candida, which hath the white berries, and the leaves
of this also are of a lighter green: sativa, or the tame planted one
is cherished in gardens and orchards: sylvestris, or the wild Myrtle
is that which groweth of itself; the berries of this are oftentimes
lesser, and of the other, greater. Pliny doth also set down other
kinds; as patritia, plebeia, and coniugalis: but what manner of ones
they are he doth not declare: he also placeth among the Myrtles,
Oxymyrsine, or Kneeholm, which notwithstanding is none of the
Myrtles, but a thorny shrub.

Pliny in his 14th book, 16th chap, saith, that the wine which is
made of the wild Myrtle tree is called myrtidanum, if the copy be
true. For Dioscorides and likewise Sotion in his Geoponikes report,
that wine is made of Myrtle berries when they be thorough ripe, but
this is called vinum myrteum, or myrtites, Myrtle wine.

Moreover, there is also a wine made of the berries and leaves of
Myrtle stamped and steeped in must, or wine new pressed from the
grape, which is called, as Dioscorides saith, myrsinite vinum, or
wine of Myrtles.

The Myrtle tree was in times past consecrated to Venus. Pliny in his
15th book, 29th chapter, saith thus, There was an old altar
belonging to Venus which they now call Murtia.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Myrtle consisteth of contrary substances, a cold earthiness
bearing the pre-eminence; it hath also a certain subtle heat,
therefore, as Galen saith, it drieth notably.

B. The leaves, fruit, buds, and juice do bind, both outwardly
applied and inwardly taken they stay the spitting of blood, and all
other issues thereof: they stop both the whites and reds in women,
if they sit in a bath made therewith: after which manner and by
fomenting also they stay the superfluous course of the hemorrhoides.

C. They are a remedy for lasks, and for the bloody flux, they quench
the fiery heat of the eyes, if they be laid on with parched barley
meal.

D. They be also with good success outwardly applied to all
inflammations newly beginning, and also to new pain upon some fall,
stroke or strain.

E. They are wholesome for a moist and watery stomach: the fruit and
leaves dried provoke urine: for the green leaves contain in them a
certain superfluous and hurtful moisture.

F. It is good with the decoction hereof made with wine, to bathe
limbs that are out of joint, and burstings that are hard to be
cured, and ulcers also of the outward parts: it helpeth spreading
tetters, scoureth away the dandruff and sores of the head, maketh
the hairs black, and keepeth them from shedding; withstandeth
drunkenness, if it be taken fasting, and prevaileth against poison,
and the bitings of any venomous beast.

G. There is drawn out of the green berries thereof a juice, which is
dried and reserved for the aforesaid uses.

H. There is likewise pressed out of the leaves a juice, by adding
unto them either old wine or rainwater, which must be used when it
is new made, for being once dry it putrefieth, and as Dioscorides
saith, loseth his virtues.

CHAP. 72. Of Sweet Willow or Gale.

Fig. 1996. Gale

The Description.

Gale is a low and little shrub or woody plant, having many brown &
hard branches: whereupon do grow leaves somewhat long, hard, thick,
and oleous, of an hot savour or smell somewhat like Myrtus: among
the branches come forth other little ones, whereupon do grow many
spoky ears or tufts, full of small flowers, and after them succeed
great store of square seeds clustering together, of a strong and
bitter taste. The root is hard, and of a woody substance.

The Place.

This Gale groweth plentifully in sundry places of England, as in the
Isle of Ely, & in the fenny countries thereabouts, whereof there is
such store in that country, that they make faggots of it and
sheaves, which they call Gale sheaves, to burn and heat their ovens.
It groweth also by Colebrooke, and in sundry other places.

The Time.

The Gale flowereth in May and June, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

This tree is called of divers in Latin, Myrtus brabantica, and
Pseudomyrsine; and Cordus calleth it Elæagnus, Chamæleagnus and
Myrtus brabantica. Elæagnus is described by Theophrastus to be a
shrubby plant like unto the Chaste tree, with a soft and downy leaf,
and with the flower of the Poplar tree: and that which we have
described is no such plant. It hath no name among the old writers
for aught we know, unless it be Rhus sylvestris plinii, or Pliny his
wild Sumach, of which he hath written in his 24th book, 11th chap.
[There is, saith he, a wild herb with short stalks, which is an
enemy to poison, and a killer of moths.] It is called in Low Dutch,
Gagel: in English, Gale.
The Temperature.

Gale or the wild Myrtle, especially the seed, is hot and dry in the
third degree: the leaves be hot and dry, but not so much.
The Virtues.

A. The fruit is troublesome to the brain; being put into beer or ale
whilst it is in boiling (which many use to do) it maketh the same
heady, fit to make a man quickly drunk.

B. The whole shrub, fruit and all, being laid among clothes, keepeth
them from moths and worms.

CHAP. 73. Of Worts or Whortleberries.

The Kinds.

Vaccinia, or Worts, of which we treat in this place, differ from
Violets, neither are they esteemed for their flowers but berries: of
these Worts there be divers sorts found out by the later writers.


Fig. 1997. Black Whortleberry (1)
Fig. 1998. Red Whortleberry (2)

The Descritpion.

1. Vaccinia nigra, the black Whortle or Hurtle, is a base and low
shrub or woody plant, bringing forth many branches of cubit high,
set full of small leaves of a dark green colour not much unlike the
leaves of Box or the Myrtle tree: amongst which come forth little
hollow flowers turning into small berries, green at the first,
afterward red, and at the last of a black colour, and full of a
pleasant and sweet juice: in which do lie divers little thin whitish
seeds: these berries do colour the mouth and lips of those that eat
them, with a black colour: the root is woody, slender, and now and
then creeping.

2. Vaccinia rubra, or Red Whortle, is like the former in the manner
of growing, but that the leaves are greater and harder, almost like
the leaves of the Box tree, abiding green all the winter long: among
which come forth small carnation flowers, long and round, growing in
clusters at the top of the branches: after which succeed small
berries, in show and bigness like the former, but that they are of
an excellent red colour, and full of juice, of so orient and
beautiful a purple to limn withal; that Indian lacca is not to be
compared thereunto, especially when this juice is prepared and
dressed with alum according to art, as myself have proved by
experience: the taste is rough and astringent: the root is of a
woody substance.

Fig. 1999. Kinds of Whortleberry (3-6)

3. Vaccinia alba, or the white Whortle, differs from the former in
form and bigness; for it sends forth many stalks from the root, and
these three, four, or five cubits high, thick, and divided into
sundry branches, covered for the most part with a blackish bark: at
the beginning of the spring it sends forth, from the buds at the
sides of the branches, leaves all hoary and hairy underneath, and
green above: from the midst of these, upon little footstalks stand
clustering together many little flowers, consisting of five white
leaves apiece without smell; and then the leaves by little and
little unfold themselves and cast off their downiness, and become
snipped about the edges. The fruit that succeeds the flowers is
round, black; somewhat like, but bigger than a haw, full of juice of
a very sweet taste; wherein lies ten or more longish smooth blackish
seeds. It grows upon the Austrian and Styrian Alps, where the fruit
is ripe in August. Clusius calls it Vitis idæa 3. Pena and Lobel,
Amelancher: Gesner by divers names, as Myrtomalus, Petromelis, Pyrus
cervinus, &c.

4. Carolus Clusius in his Pannonic Observations hath set down
another of the Whortleberries, under the name of Vitis idæa, which
differeth from the other Whortleberries, not only in stature, but in
leaves and fruit also. The leaves are long, narrow, sharp pointed,
full of veins, a little hairy, and lightly snipped about the edges,
greener above than below: the fruit grows from the tops of the
branches of the former year, hanging upon long footstalks, and being
as big as little cherries, first green, then red, and lastly black,
full of juice, and that of no unpleasant taste, containing no
kernels, but flat white seeds commonly five in number: the stalks
are weak, and commonly lie upon the ground: Clusius found it upon
the Austrian mountain Snealben, with the fruit partly ripe, and
partly unripe, in August. It is his Vitis ideæa 1.

5. The same author also setteth forth another of the Whortleberries,
under the title of Uva ursi, which is likewise a shrubby plant,
having many feeble branches, whereon grow long leaves blunt at the
points, and of an overworn green colour: among which, at the tops of
the stalks come forth clusters of bottle-like flowers of a whitish
purple colour: the fruit followeth, growing likewise in clusters,
green at the first, and black when they be ripe: the root is of a
woody substance. This is always green.

6. This differs from the second, in that the leaves are thinner,
more full of veins, and whiter underneath: the flower is like the
common kind, whitish purple, hollow, and divided into fine parts;
the fruit also is black, and like that of the described. This grows
on divers mountainous places of Germany, where Clusius observed it,
who made it his Vitis idæa 2.

The Place.

These plants prosper best in a lean barren soil, and in untoiled
woody places: they are now and then found on high hills subject to
the wind, and upon mountains: they grow plentifully in both the
Germanies, Bohemia, and in divers places of France and England;
namely in Middlesex on Hampstead Heath, and in the woods thereto
adjoining, and also upon the hills in Cheshire called Broxen hills,
near Beeston castle, seven miles from Nantwich; and in the wood by
Highgate called Finchley Wood, and in divers other places.

The red Whortleberry groweth in Westmorland at a place called Crosby
Ravenswaith, where also doth grow the Whortle with the white berry,
and in Lancashire also upon Pendle hills.

Thus our author: I have seen none of these but only the first
described, growing upon Hampstead Heath.

The Time.

The Whortleberries do flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in
June.

The Names.

Whortleberries is called in High Dutch, Heydelbeeren: in Low Dutch,
Crakeberien, because they make a certain crack whilst they be broken
between the teeth: of divers, Haverbesien: the French men, Airelle,
or Aurelle, as Iohannes de Choul writeth: and we in England, Worts,
Whortleberries, Blackberries, Bilberries, and Bulberries, and in
same places, Whimberries.

Most of the shops of Germany do call them Myrtilli, but properly
Myrtilli are the fruit of the Myrtle tree, as the apothecaries name
them at this day. This plant hath no name for aught we can learn,
either among the Greeks or ancient Latins; for whereas most do take
it to be Vitis idæa, or the Corinth tree, which Pliny surnameth
Alexandrina, it is untrue; for Vitis idæa is not only like to the
common Vine, but is also a kind of Vine: and Theophrastus, who hath
made mention hereof doth call it, without an epithet, Ampelos,
simply, as a little after we will declare; which without doubt he
would not have done if he had found it to differ from the common
Vine: For what things soever receive a name of some plant, the same
are expressed with some epithet added to be known to differ from
others. as Laurus alexandrina, Vitis alba, Vitis nigra, Vitis
sylvestris, and such like.

Moreover, those things which have borrowed a name from some plant
are like thereunto, if not wholly, yet either in leaf or fruit, or
in some other thing. Vitis alba & nigra, that is, the white and
black Bryonies, have leaves and clasping tendrils as hath the common
Vine, and climb also after the same manner: Vitis sylvestris, or the
wild Vine, hath such like stalks as the Vine hath, and bringeth
forth fruit like to the little Grapes. Laurus alexandrina, and
chamædaphne, and also daphnoides, are like in leaves to the Laurel
tree: Sycomorus is like in fruit to the Fig tree, and in leaves to
the Mulberry tree: Chamædrys hath the leaf of an Oak; Peucedanus of
the Pine tree: so of others which have taken their names from some
other: but this low shrub is not like the Vine either in any part,
or in any other thing.

This Vitis idæa groweth not on the uppermost and snowy parts of
mount Ida (as some would have it, but about Ida, even the hill Ida,
not of Candy, but of Troas in the lesser Asia which Ptolomy in his
fifth book Of Geography, chap. 3. doth call Alexandri Troas, or
Alexander his Troy: whereupon it is also advisedly named of Pliny,
lib. 14. cap. 3. Vita alexandrina, no otherwise than Laurus
alexandrina is said of Theophrastus to grow there: Laurus, surnamed
alexandrina, and Ficus quædam, or a certain Fig tree, and Ampelos,
that is to say the Vine, are reported, saith he, to grow properly
about Ida. Like unto this Vine are those which Philostratus in the
Life of Apollonius reporteth to grow in Mæonia, and Lydia, situated
not far from Troy, comparing them to those vines which grow in India
beyond Caucasus: The Vines there, saith he, be very small, like as
be those that do grow in Mæonia and Lydia, yet is the wine which is
pressed out of them of a marvellous pleasant taste. This Vine which
grows near to Mount Ida is reported to be like a shrub, with little
twigs and branches of the length of a cubit, about which are grapes
growing aslope, black, of the bigness of a bean, sweet, having
within a certain winy substance, soft: the leaf of this is round,
uncut, and little.

This is described by Pliny, lib. 4, cap. 3, almost in the selfsame
words: It is called, saith he, Vitis alexandrina and groweth near
unto Phalacra: it is short, with branches a cubit long, with a black
grape of the bigness of the Latins' Bean, with a soft pulp and very
little, with very sweet clusters growing aslope, and a little round
leaf without cuts.

And with this description the little shrub which the apothecaries of
Germany do call Myrtillus doth nothing at all agree, as it is very
manifest; for it is low, scarce a cubit high, with a few short
branches not growing to a cubit in length: it doth not bring forth
clusters or bunches, nor yet fruit like unto grapes, but berries
like those of the Yew tree, not sweet, but somewhat sour and
astringent; in which also there are many little white flat seeds:
the leaf is not round, but more long than round, not like to that of
the Vine, but of the Box tree. Moreover, it is thought that this is
not found in Italy, Greece, or in the lesser Asia, for that
Matthiolus affirmeth the same to grow nowhere but in Germany and
Bohemia; so far is it from being called or accounted to be Vitis
idæa or alexandrina.

The fruit of this may be thought not without cause to be named
vaccinia, sith they are berries; for they may be termed of baccæ,
berries, vaccinia, as though they should be called baccinia. Yet
this letteth not that there may be also other vaccinias: for
vaccinia is polysemos dictio, or a word of divers significations.
Virgil in the first book of his Bucolics, Eclogue 10, affirmeth,
that the written Hyacinth is named of the Latins, Vaccinium,
translating into Latin Theocritus his verse which is taken out of
his tenth Idyll.

Et nigræ Violæ, sunt & Vaccinia nigra.
["and there are Black Violets and Black Hyacinths"]

Vitruvius, lib. 7 of his Architecture doth also distinguish
vaccinium from the Violet, and showeth, that of it is made a gallant
purple; which seeing that the written Hyacinth cannot do, it must
needs be that this vaccinium is another thing than the Hyacinth is,
because it serves to give a purple dye.

Pliny also, lib. 16, cap. 18 hath made mention of vaccinia, which
are used to dye bond-slaves' garments with, and to give them a
purple colour.

But whether these be our Vaccinia or Whortleberries it is hard to
affirm, especially seeing that Pliny reckoneth up Vaccinia amongst
those plants which grow in watery places, but ours grow on high
places upon mountains subject to winds, neither is it certainly
known to grow in Italy. Howsoever it is, these our Whortles may be
called Vaccinia, and do agree with Pliny's and Vitruvius his
Vaccinia, because garments and linen cloth may take from these a
purple dye.

The red Whortleberries have their name from the black Whortles, to
which they be in form very like, and are called in Latin, Vaccinia
rubra: in High Dutch, Rooter Heidelbeere: in Low Dutch, Roode
Crackebessen: the Frenchmen, Aurelles Rouges: they be named in
English Red Whorts, or Red Whortleberries. Conradus Gesnerus hath
called this plant Vitis idæa rubris acinis: but the growing of the
berries doth show, that this doth far less agree with Vitis idæa,
than the black; for they do not hang upon the sides of the branches
as do the black (which deceived them that thought it to be Vitas
idæa) but from the tops of the sprigs in clusters.

As concerning the names of the other they are touched in their
several descriptions.

The Temperature.

These Vaccinia or Whortleberries are cold even in the latter end of
the second degree and dry also, with a manifest astriction or
binding quality.

Red Whortleberries are cold and dry, and also binding.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of the black Whortleberries is boiled till it become
thick, and is prepared or kept by adding honey and sugar unto it:
the apothecaries call it Rob, which is preferred in all things
before the raw berries themselves for many times whilst they be
eaten or taken raw they are offensive to a weak and cold stomach, so
far are they from binding the belly, or staying the lask, as that
they also trouble the same through their cold and raw quality, which
thing the boiled juice called Rob doth not any whit at all.

B. They be good for an hot stomach, they quench thirst, they
mitigate and allay the heat of hot burning agues, they stop the
belly, stay vomiting, stay the bloody flux proceeding of choler, and
help the felony, or the purging of choler upwards and downwards.

C. The people of Cheshire do eat the black whorts in cream and milk,
as in these South parts we eat strawberries, which stop and bind the
belly, putting away also the desire to vomit.

D. The red Whortle is not of such a pleasant taste as the black, and
therefore not so much used to be eaten; but (as I said before) they
make the fairest carnation colour in the world.

CHAP. 74. Of the Marsh Whortleberries or Fen-Berries.

Fig. 2000. Marsh Whortleberry

The Description.

The Marsh Whortleberries grow upon the bogs in marsh or moorish
grounds, creeping thereupon like unto wild Thyme, having many small
limber and tender stalks laid almost flat upon the ground, beset
with small narrow leaves fashioned almost like the leaves of Thyme,
but lesser: among which come forth little berries like unto the
common black Whortleberry in shape, but somewhat longer, sometimes
all red, and sometimes spotted or specked with red spots of a deeper
colour: in taste rough and astringent.

The Place.

The Marsh Whortle grows upon bogs and such like waterish and fenny
places especially in Cheshire and Staffordshire, where I have found
it in great plenty.

The Time.

The Berries are ripe about the end of July, and in August.

The Names.

They are called in High Dutch, Moszbeeren, Veenbesien: that is to
say, Fen-Grapes, or Fen-Berries, and Marsh-whorts, or Marsh-Berries:
Valerius Cordus nameth them Oxycoccon; we have called them Vaccinia
palustria, or Marsh Whortleberries, of the likeness they have to the
other berries: some also call them Moss-Berries, or Moor-berries.

The Temperature.

These Whortleberries are cold and dry, having withal a certain
thinness of parts and substance, with a certain binding quality
adjoined.

The Virtues

A. They take away the heat of burning agues, and also the drought,
they quench the furious heat of choler, they stay vomiting, restore
an appetite to meat which was lost by reason of choleric and corrupt
humours, and are good against the pestilent diseases.

B. The juice of these also is boiled till it be thick, with sugar
added that it may be kept, which is good for all things that the
berries are, yea and far better.

CHAP. 75. Of Cloudberry.

Fig. 2001. Cloudberry

The Description.

The Cloudberry hath many small thready roots, creeping far abroad
under the upper crust of the earth, and also the moss, like unto
Couch-Ggrass, of an overworn reddish colour, set here and there with
small tufts of hairy strings: from which rise up two small stalks,
hard, tough, and of a woody substance (never more nor less) on which
do stand the leaves like those of the wild Mallow, and of the same
colour, full of small nerves or sinews running in each part of the
same: between the leaves cometh up a stalk Iikewise of a woody
substance, whereon doth grow a small flower consisting of five
leaves, of an herby or yellowish green colour like those of the wild
Avens. After cometh the fruit, green at the first, after yellow, and
the sides next the sun red when they be ripe; in form almost like
unto a little heart, made as it were of two, but is no more but one,
open above, and closed together in the bottom, of a harsh or sharp
taste, wherein is contained three or four little white seeds.

The Place.

This plant groweth naturally upon the tops of two high mountains
(among the mossy places) one in Yorkshire called Ingleborough, the
other in Lancashire called Pendle, two of the highest mountains in
all England, where the clouds are lower than the tops of the same
all winter long, whereupon the people of the country have called
them Cloudberries, found there by a curious gentleman in the
knowledge of plants, called Mr. Hesketh, often remembered.

The Time.

The leaves spring up in May, at which time it flowereth: the fruit
is ripe in July.

The Temperature.

The fruit is cold and dry, and very astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit quencheth thirst, cooleth the stomach, and allayeth
inflammations, being eaten as Whorts are, or the decotion made and
drunk.

CHAP. 76. Of Shrub Heartwort of Ethiopia.

Fig. 2002. Shrub Sesely, or Ethiopian Heartwort

The Description

This kind of Sesely, being the Ethiopian Sesely, hath blackish
stalks of a woody substance: this plant divideth itself into sundry
other arms or branches, which are beset with thick far and oleous
leaves, fashioned somewhat like the Woodbine leaves. but thicker and
more gummy, approching very near unto the leaves of Oleander both in
shape and substance, being of a deep or dark green colour, and of a
very good savour and smell, and continueth green in my garden both
winter and summer, like the Bay or Laurel. The flowers do grow at
the tops of the branches in yellow roundels like the flowers of
Dill; which being past, there succeedeth a dark or dusky seed
resembling the seed of Fennel, and of a bitter taste. The root is
thick and of a woody substance.

The Place.

It is found both in stony places, and on the sea coasts not far from
Marseilles, and likewise in other places of Languedoc: it also
groweth in Ethiopia, in the dark and desert woods: it groweth in my
garden.

The Time.

It flourisheth, flowereth and seedeth in July and August.
The Names.

The Grecians and the Latins likewise call it Seseli æthiopicum: the
Egyptians, Dogs' Horror: in English, Sesely of Ethiopia, or
Ethiopian Heartwort.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Sesely of Ethiopia is thought to have the same faculties that the
Sesely of Marsilles hath, whereunto I refer it.

CHAP. 77. Of the Elder Tree.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Elders, some of the land, and some of the
water or marsh grounds; some with very jagged leaves, and others
with double flowers, as shall be declared.


Fig. 2003. Common Elder (1)
Fig. 2004. White-Berried Elder (2

The Description.

The Common Elder groweth up now and then to the bigness of a mean
tree, casting his boughs all about, and oftentimes remaineth a
shrub: the body is almost all woody, having very little pith within;
but the boughs and especially the young ones which be jointed, are
full of pith within, and have but little wood without: the bark of
the body and great arms is rugged and full of chinks, and of an ill
favoured wan colour like ashes: that of the boughs is not very
smooth, but in colour almost like; and that is the outward bark, for
there is another under it nearer to the wood, of colour green: the
substance of the wood is sound, somewhat yellow, and that may be
easily cleft: the leaves consist of five or six particular ones
fastened to one rib, like those of the Walnut tree, but every
particular one is lesser, nicked in the edges, and of a rank and
stinking smell. The flowers grow on spoky roundels, which be thin
and scattered, of a white colour and sweet smell: after them grow up
little berries, green at the first, afterwards black, whereout is
pressed a purple juice, which being boiled with alum and such like
things, doth serve very well for the painters' use, as also to
colour vinegar: the seeds in these are a little flat, and somewhat
long. There groweth oftentimes upon the bodies of those old trees or
shrubs a certain excrescence called auricula Iudaæ, or Jew's ear,
which is soft, blackish, covered with a skin, somewhat like now and
then to a man's ear, which being plucked off and dried, shrinketh
together and becometh hard. This Elder groweth everywhere, and is
the common Elder.

2. There is another also which is rare and strange, for the berries
of it are not black, but white: this is like in leaves to the
former.


Fig. 2005. Jagged Elder (3)
Fig. 2006. Harts' Elder (4)

3. The Jagged Elder tree groweth like the common Elder in body,
branches, shoots, pith, flowers, fruit, and stinking smell, and
differeth only in the fashion of the leaves, which doth so much
disguise the tree, and put it out of knowledge, that no man would
take it for a kind of Elder, until he hath smelt thereunto, which
will quickly show from whence he is descended: for these strange
Elder leaves are very much jagged, rent or cut even unto the middle
rib. From the trunk of this tree as from others of the same kind,
proceedeth a certain fleshy excrescence like unto the ear of a man,
especially from those trees that are very old.

4. This kind of Elder hath flowers which are white, but the berries
red, and both are not contained in spoky roundels, but in clusters,
and grow after the manner of a cluster of grapes: in leaves and
other things resembleth the common Elder, save that now and then it
groweth higher.

The Place.

The common Elder groweth everywhere: it is planted about cony
burrows for the shadow of the conies; but that with the white
berries is rare: the other kinds grow in like places; but that with
the clustered fruit groweth upon mountains; that with the jagged
leaves groweth in my garden.

The Time.

These kinds of Elders do flower in April and May, and their fruit is
ripe in September.

The Names.

This tree is called in Latin and of the apothecaries, Sambucus: of
Giullielmus Salicetus, Beza: in High Dutch, Holunder, Holder: in Low
Dutch, Vlier: in Italian, Sambuco: in French, Hus and Suin: in
Spanish, Sauco, Sauch, Sambugueyro: in English, Elder, and Elder
tree: that with the white berries divers would have to be called
Sambucus sylvestris, or wild Elder, but Matthiolus calleth it
montana, or mountain Elder.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Galen attributeth the like faculty to Elder that he doth to
Danewort, and saith that it is of a drying quality, gluing, and
moderately digesting: and it hath not only these faculties, but
others also; for the bark, leaves, first buds, flowers, and fruit of
Elder, do not only dry, but also heat, and have withal a purging
quality, but not without trouble and hurt to the stomach.

B. The leaves and tender crops of common Elder taken in some broth
or pottage open the belly, purging both thick phlegm and choleric
humours: the middle bark is of the same nature, but stronger, and
purgeth the said humours more violently.

C. The seeds contained within the berries dried are good for such as
have the dropsy, and such as are too fat, and would fain be leaner,
if they be taken in a morning to the quantity of a dram with wine
for a certain space.

D. The leaves of Elder boiled in water until they be very soft, and
when they are almost boiled enough a little oil of sweet Almonds
added thereto, or a little Linseed oil; then taken forth and laid
upon a red cloth, or a piece of scarlet, and applied to the
haemorrhoids or piles as hot as can be suffered, and so let to
remain upon the part affected, until it be somewhat cold, having the
like in a readiness, applying one after another upon the diseased
part, by the space of an hour or more, and in the end some bound to
the place, and the patient put warm a-bed; it hath not as yet failed
at the first dressing to cure the said disease; but if the patient
be dressed twice it must needs do good if the first fail.

E. The green leaves pounded with deer's suet or bull's tallow are
good to be laid to hot swellings and tumors, and doth assuage the
pain of the gout.

F. The inner and green bark doth more forcibly purge: it draweth
forth choler and watery humours; for which cause it is good for
those that have the dropsy, being stamped, and the liquor pressed
out and drunk with wine or whey.

G. Of like operation are also the fresh flowers mixed with some kind
of meat, as fried with eggs, they likewise trouble the belly and
move to the stool: being dried they lose as well their purging
quality as their moisture, and retain the digesting and attenuating
quality.

H. The vinegar in which the dried flowers are steeped are wholesome
for the stomach: being used with meat it stirreth up an appetite, it
cutteth and attenuateth or maketh thin gross and raw humours.

I. The faculty of the seed is somewhat gentler than that of the
other parts: it also moveth the belly, and draweth forth watery
humours, being beaten to powder, and given to a dram weight: being
new gathered, steeped in vinegar, and afterwards dried, it is taken,
and that effectually, in the like weight of the dried lees of wine,
and with a few Anise seeds, for so it worketh without any manner of
trouble, and helpeth those that have the dropsy. But it must be
given for certain days together in a little wine, to those that have
need thereof.

K. The jelly of the Elder, otherwise called Jew's ear, hath a
binding and drying quality: the infusion thereof, in which it hath
been steeped a few hours, taketh away inflammations of the mouth,
and almonds of the throat in the beginning, if the mouth and throat
be washed therewith, and doth in like manner help the uvula.

L. Dioscorides saith, that the tender and green leaves of the Elder
tree, with barley meal parched, do remove hot swellings, and are
good for those that are burnt or scalded, and for such as be bitten
with a mad dog, and that they glue and heal up hollow ulcers.

M. The pith of the young boughs is without quality: This being
dried, and somewhat pressed or quashed together, is good to lay upon
the narrow orifices or holes of fistulas and issues, if it be put
therein.

CHAP. 78. Of Marsh or Water Elder.


Fig. 2007. Marsh Elder (1)
Fig. 2008. Rose Elder (2)

The Description.

1. Marsh Elder is not like to the common Elder in leaves, but in
boughs: it growth after the manner of a little tree: the boughs are
covered with a bark of an ill favoured ash colour, as be those of
the common Elder they are set with joints by certain distances and
have in them great plenty of white pith, therefore they have less
wood, which is white and brittle: the leaves be broad, cornered,
like almost to Vine leaves, but lesser and softer: among which come
forth spoked roundels which bring forth little flowers, the
uttermost whereof alongst the borders be greater, of a gallant white
colour, every little one consisting of five leaves: the other in the
midst and within the borders be smaller, and it flowers by degrees,
and the whole tuft is of a most sweet smell: after which come the
fruit or berries, that are round like those of the common Elder, but
greater, and of a shining red colour, and black when they be
withered.

2. Sambucus rosea, or the Elder Rose groweth like an hedge tree,
having many knotty branches or shoots coming from the root, full of
pith like the common Elder; the leaves are like the vine leaves;
among which come forth goodly flowers of a white colour, sprinkled
and dashed here and there with a light and thin carnation colour,
and do grow thick and closely compact together, in quantity and bulk
of a man's hand, or rather bigger, of great beauty, and savouring
like the flowers of the Hawthorn: but in my garden there groweth not
any fruit upon this tree, nor in any other place, for aught that I
can understand.

3. This kind is likewise an hedge tree, very like unto the former in
stalks and branches, which are jointed and knotted by distances, and
it is full of white pith: the !eaves likewise cornered: the flowers
hereof grow not out of spoky roundels, but stand in a round thick
and globed tuft, bigness also and fashion like to the former, saving
that they tend to a deeper purple colour, wherein only the
difference consists.

The Place.

Sambucus palustris, the water Elder, grows by running streams and
water courses, and in hedges by moist ditch sides.

The Rose Elder groweth in gardens, and the flowers are there doubled
by art, as it is supposed.

The Time.

These kinds of Elders do flower in April and May, and the fruit of
the water Elder is ripe in September.

The Names.

The water Elder is called in Latin, Sambucus aquatica, and Sambucus
palustris: it is called Opulus and Platanus, and also Chamæplatanus,
or the dwarf Plane tree, but not properly: Valerius Cordus maketh it
to be Lycostaphylos: the Saxons, saith Gelber, do call it Uva
Lupina;["Wolf's grapes"] from whence Cordus invented the name
Lycostaphylos: it is named in High Dutch, Walt holter, and Hirsch
holder: in Low Dutch, Swelken, and Swelckenhout: of certain French
men, Obiere: in English, Marsh Elder, and Whitten-tree, Ople tree,
and Dwarf Plane tree.

The Rose Elder is called in Latin, Sambucus rosea, and Sambucus
aquatica, being doubtless a kind of the former water Elder, the
flowers being doubled by art, as we have said: it is called in
Dutch, Gheldersche Roose: in English, Guelder Rose, and Rose Elder.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Concerning the faculties of these Elders, and the berries of the
Water Elder, there is nothing found in any writer, neither can we
set down anything hereof of our own knowledge.

CHAP. 79. Of Danewort, Wallwort, or Dwarf Elder.

Fig. 2009. Dwarf Elder

The Description.

Danewort, as it is not a shrub, neither is it altogether an herby
plant, but as it were a plant participating of both, being doubtless
one of the Elders, as may appear both by the leaves, flowers, and
fruit, as also by the smell and taste.

Wallwort is very like unto Elder in leaves, spoky tufts, and fruit,
but it hath not a woody stalk; it bringeth forth only green stalks,
which wither away in winter: these are edged, and full of joints,
like to the young branches and shoots of Elder: the leaves grow by
couples, with distances, wide, and consist of many small leaves
which stand upon a thick ribbed stalk, of which every one is long,
broad, and cut in the edges like a saw, wider and greater than the
leaves of the common Elder tree: at the top of the stalks there grow
tufts of white flowers tipped with red, with five little chives in
them pointed with black, which turn into black berries like the
Elder, in the which be little long seed: the root is tough, and of a
good and reasonable length, better for physic's use than the leaves
of Elder.

The Place.

Danewort grows in untoiled places near common ways, and in the
borders of fields: it groweth plentifully in the lane at Kilburn
Abbey by London: also in a field by St. John's near Dartford in
Kent: and also in the highway at old Branford town's end next
London, and in many other places.

The Time.

The flowers are perfected in summer, and the berries in autumn.

The Names.

It is named in Greek, Chamaeacte, that is Sambucus humulis, or low
Elder: It is called in Latin, Ebulus, and Ebulum: in High Dutch,
Attich: in Low Dutch, Hadich: in Italian, Ebulo: in French, Hieble:
in Spanish, Yezgos: in English, Wallwort, Danewort, and Dwarf Elder.

The Temperature.

Wallwort is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree, and of a
singular quality, which Galen doth attribute unto it, to waste and
consume; and also it hath a strange and special faculty to purge by
the stool: the roots be of greatest force, the leaves have the
chiefest strength to digest and consume.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Wallwort boiled in wine and drunken are good against
the dropsy, for they purge downwards watery humours.

B. The leaves do consume and waste away hard swellings if they be
applied poultice-wise, or in a fomentation or bath.

C. Dioscorides saith, that the roots of Wallwort do soften and open
the matrix, and also correct the infirmities thereof, if they be
boiled for a bath to sit in; and dissolve the swellings and pains of
the belly.

D. The juice of the root of Danewort doth make the hair black.

E. The young and tender leaf quencheth hot inflammations, being
applied with barley meal: it is with good success laid upon
burnings, scaldings, and upon the bitings of mad dogs; and with
bull's tallow or goat's suet it is a remedy for the gout.

F. The seed of Wallwort drunk in the quantity of a dram is the most
excellent purger of watery humours in the world, and therefore most
singular against the dropsy.

G. If one scruple of the seed be bruised and taken with syrup of
Roses and a little sack, it cureth the dropsy, and easeth the gout,
mightily purging downwards waterish humours, being once taken in the 
week.

CHAP. 80. Of Bean Trefoil.


Fig. 2010. Bean Trefoil (1)
Fig. 2011. Stinking Bean Trefoil (2)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Anagyris or Laburnum groweth like unto a small
tree, garnished with many small branches like the shoots of Osiers,
set full of pale green leaves, always three together, like the Lotus
or Meadow Trefoil, or rather like the leaves of Vitex, or the
Cytisus bush: among which come forth many tufts of flowers of a
yellow colour, not much unlike the flowers of Broom: when these
flowers be gone there succeed small flat cods, wherein are contained
seeds like Galega or the Cytisus bush: the whole plant hath little
or no savour at all the root is soft and gentle, yet of a woody
substance.

2. Stinking Trefoil is a shrub like to a little tree, rising up to
the height of six or eight cubits, or sometimes higher: it sendeth
forth of the stalks very many slender branches; the bark whereof is
of a deep green colour: the leaves stand always three together, like
those of Lotus or Meadow Trefoil, yet of a lighter green on the
upper side: the flowers be long, as yellow as gold, very like to
those of Broom, two or three also joined together: after them come
up broad cods, wherein do lie hard fruit like kidney beans, but
lesser; at the first white, afterwards tending to a purple, and last
of all of a blackish blue: the leaves and flowers hereof have a
filthy smell, like those of the stinking Gladdon, and so rank
withal, as even the passers by are annoied therewith.

Of Anagyris there are four kinds, two with stinking leaves; the one
with longish leaves, the other with rounder. Two other whose leaves
do not stink; the one of these hath sometimes four or five leaves on
one stalk, and the leaves are long and large. The other hath them
lesser and narrower.

The Place.

These grow of themselves in most places of Languedoc and Spain, and
in other countries: also by highways' sides, as in the Isle of
Candy, as Bellonius writeth: the first I have in my garden; the
other is a stranger in England. Master Tradescant hath two sorts
hereof in his garden.

The Time.

They flower in June, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

The Bean Trefoil is called in Greek Anagyris, which name remaineth
uncorrupt in Candy even to this day: in Latin also Anagyris and
Laburnum: of the people of Anagni in Italy named Eghelo, which is
referred unto Laburnum, of which Pliny writeth in his 16th book,
18th chapter. In English, Bean Trefoil, or the Peascod Tree.

The Temperature.

Bean Trefoil, as Galen writeth, hath a hot and digesting faculty.

The Virtues.

A. The tender leaves, saith Dioscorides, being stamped and laid upon
cold swellings, do waste away the same.

B. They are drunk with cute in the weight of a dram against the
stuffing of the lungs, and do bring down the menses, the birth, and
the afterbirth.

C. They cure the headache being drunk with wine; the juice of the
root digesteth and ripeneth, if the seed be eaten it procureth
vomit, which thing, as Matthiolus writeth, the seed not only of
Stinking Bean Trefoil doth effect, but that also of the other
likewise.

CHAP. 81. Of Judas Tree.

Fig. 2012. Judas Tree

The Description.

Judas tree is likewise one of the hedge plants: it groweth up unto a
tree of a reasonable bigness, covered with a dark coloured bark,
whereon do grow many twiggy tough branches of a brown colour,
garnished with round leaves, like those of round Birthwort, or
Sowbread, but harder, and of a deeper green colour: among which come
forth small flowers like those of Peas, of a purple colour mixed
with red, which turn into long flat cods, pressed hard together, of
a tawny or wan colour, wherein is contained small flat seeds, like
the Lentil, or rather like the seed of Medica, fashioned like a
little kidney: the root is great and woody.

The Place.

This shrub is found in divers provinces of Spain, in hedges, and
among briers & brambles: the mountains of Italy, and the fields of
Languedoc are not without this shrub; it groweth in my garden.

The Time.

The flowers come forth in the spring, and before the leaves: the
fruit or cods be ripe in summer.

The Names.

It is commonly named in Latin Arbor iudæ: some have called it
sycomorus, or Sycamore tree, and that because the flowers and cods
hang down from the bigger branches: but the right Sycomore tree is
like the Fig tree in fruit, & in leaves to the Mulberry tree,
whereupon it is so named. Others take it to be Kerkis, of which
Theophrastus writeth thus: Cercis bringeth forth fruit in a cod;
which words are all so few, as that of this no certainty can be
gathered for there be more shrubs that bring forth fruit in cods.
The Frenchmen call it Guainier, as though they should say, Vaginula:
or a little sheath: most of the Spaniards do name it Algorovo loco,
that is, Siliqua sylvestris or fatua, wild or foolish cod: others,
Arbol d'amor, for the braveness' sake: it may be called in English
Judas Tree, for that it is thought to be that whereon Judas did hang
himself, and not upon the Elder tree, as it is vulgarly said.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The temperature and virtues of this shrub are unknown, and not found
out: for whereas Matthiolus maketh this to be Acacia, by adding
falsely thorns unto it, it is but a surmise.

CHAP. 82. Of the Carob Tree, or Saint John's Bread.

Fig. 2013. Carob

The Description.

1. The Carob tree is also one of those that bear cods; it is a tree
of a middle bigness, very full of boughs: the leaves long, and
consist of many set together upon one middle rib, like those of the
Ash, but every particular one of them is broader, harder and
rounder: the fruit or long cods in some places are a foot in length,
in other places shorter by half, an inch broad, smooth, & thick; in
which do lie flat and broad seeds: the cods themselves are of a
sweet taste, and are eaten of divers, but not before they be
gathered and dried; for being as yet green, though ripe, they are
unpleasant to be eaten by reason of their ill-favoured taste.

The Place.

This groweth in Apulia, a province of the kingdom of Naples, and
also in divers untoiled places in Spain: it is likewise found in
India and other countries eastward, where the cods are so full of
sweet juice as that it is used to preserve ginger and other fruits,
as Matthiolus showeth. Strabo, lib. 15, saith, that Aristobulus
reporteth how there is a tree in India of no great bigness, which
hath great cods, ten inches long, full of honey; Quas qui edirent
non facile servari ["those who eat it do not easily survive"]; which
thing peradventure is only to be understood of the green cods, &
those that are not yet dry: it is very well known in the coasts of
Nicea and Liguria in Italy, as also in all the tracts and coasts of
the West Indies, and Virginia. It groweth also in sundry places of
Palestine, where there is such plenty of it, that it is left unto
swine and other wild beasts to feed upon, as our acorns and Beech
mast. Moreover, both young and old feed thereon for pleasure and
some have eaten thereof to supply and help the necessary nourishment
of their bodies. This of some is called Saint John's bread, and
thought to be that which is translated Locusts, whereon St. John did
feed when he was in the wildrness, besides the wild honey whereof he
did also eat; but there is small certainty of this: but most certain
that the people of that country do feed upon these cods, in Greek
called Keratia, in Latin, Siliquæ: but Saint John food is called in
Greek Akrides: which word is often used in the Revelation written by
Saint John, and translated locusts. Now we must also remember that
this Greek word hath two several interpretations or significations,
for taken in the good part, it signifieth a kind of creeping
creature, or fly, which hoppeth or skippeth up and down, as doth the
grashopper; of which kind of creatures it was lawful to eat, Levit.
11:22, and Matt. 3:4. It signifieth also those Locusts which came
out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, mentioned Apoc. 9:3,4. &c.,
which were like unto horses prepared for battle. The Hebrew word
which the English translators have turned grasshoppers, Tremelius
dares not give the name locust unto it, but calleth it by the Hebrew
name Arbis, after the letters and Hebrew name, saying thus in the
note upon the 22nd verse of the 11th chapter of Leviticus. These
kinds of creeping things neither the Hebrews nor the
historiographers, nor ourselves do know what they mean: wherefore we
still retain the Hebrew words, for all the four kinds thereof: but
it is certain that the East country grasshoppers and locusts were
sometimes used in meat, as Matth. 3:4 and Marc. 16:1, Pliny Lib. 11
Natur. Histor. cap. 26 and 29. Thus far Tremulus and Junius. By that
which hath been said it appeareth what St. John the Baptist fed of,
under the title locusts: and that it is nothing like unto this fruit
Ceratia siliqua: I rather take the husks or shells of the fruit of
this tree to be the cods or husks whereof the prodigal child would
have fed, but none gave them unto him, though the swine had their
fill thereof. These cods being dry are very like bean cods, as I
have often seen. I have sown the seeds in my garden, where they have
prospered exceeding well.

Thus saith our author, but I say that there is no doubt but the
Keratia or Siliqua mentioned in Saint Luke's Gospel, Chap. 15:16
were the cods or fruit of this tree. I cannot believe that either
the fruit of this or the Locusts, were the Akrides, mentioned in the
third chapter of Saint Matthew v. 4. But I am of the opinion of the
Greek Father Isodore Pelusiota, who, lib. 1, epist. 132 hath these
words: The Acrides which John fed upon are not living creatures like
to beetles, as some unlearnedly suppose, far be it from us so to
think; but they are the tender buds of herbs and plants or trees;
neither on the other side is the Meliagrion any herb so called, but
mountain honey gathered by wild bees, &c.

The Time.

The Carob tree bringeth forth fruit in the beginning of the spring,
which is not ripe till autumn.

The Names.

The Carob tree is called in Greek Keratonia: in Latin likewise,
Ceratonia: in Spanish, Garovo: in English, Carob tree; and of some,
Bean tree, and Saint John's Bread: the fruit or cod is named
keration: in Latin Siliqua, or Siliqua dulcis: in divers shops,
Xylocaracta: in other shops in Italy, Carobe, or Carobole: of the
apothecaries of Apulia, Salequa: it is called in Spanish, Alfarobas,
or Algarovas and without an article Garovas: in High Dutch, S.
Johans brot, that is to say, Sancti Iohanni panis, or St. John's
Bread, neither is it known by any other name in the Low-countries:
Some call it in English, Carob.

The Temperature.

The Carob tree is dry and astringent, as is also the fruit, and
containeth in it a certain sweetness, as Galen saith.
The Virtues.

A. The fruit of the Carob Tree, being eat when it is green, doth
gently loose the belly; but being dry it is hard of digestion, and
stoppeth the belly, it provoketh urine, it is good for the stomach,
and nourisheth well, and much better than when it is green and
fresh.

CHAP. 83. Of Cassia Fistula, or Pudding Pipe.

Fig. 2014. Pudding Pipe Tree

The Description.

Cassia purgatrix, or Cassia fistula, groweth up to be a fair tree,
with a tough bark like leather, of the colour of Box, whereupon some
have supposed it to take the name in Latin Coriaceus: the arms and
branches of this are small and limber, beset with many goodly
leaves, like those of the Walnut tree: among which come forth small
flowers of a yellow colour, compact or consisting of six little
leaves, like the flowers of Chelidonium minus, or Pilewort: after
these be faded, there succeed goodly black round, long cods, whereof
some are two foot long, and of a woody substance: in these cods are
contained a black pulp, very sweet and soft, of a pleasant taste,
and serving to many uses in physic, in which pulp lieth the seed
couched in little cells or partitions: this seed is flat and
brownish, not unlike the seed of Ceratia siliqua, and in other
respects very like unto it also.

The Place.

This tree groweth much in Egypt, especially about Memphis and
Alexandria, and most parts of Barbary, and is a stranger in these
parts of Europe.

The Time.

The Cassia is tree groweth green winter and summer: it sheddeth his
old leaves when new are come, by means whereof it is never void of
leaves: it flowereth early in the spring, and the fruit is ripe in
autumn.

The Names.

This tree was unknown to the old writers, or so little accounted of,
as that they have made no mention of it at all: the Arabians were
the first that esteemed of it, by reason they knew the use of the
pulp which is found in the Pipes: and after them the later Grecians,
as Actuarius and other of his time, by whom it was named Kasia
melania that is to say in Latin, Casia nigra. The fruit hereof,
saith Actuarius in his first book, is like a long pipe, having
within a thick humour or moisture, which is not congealed all alike
through the pipe, but is separated and, divided with many
partitions, being thin woody skins.The apothecaries call it Casia
fistula, and with a double s, Cassia fistula: is called in English
after the apothecaries' word, Cassia fistula, and may also be
Englished, Pudding Pipe, because the cod or Pipe is like a pudding:
but the old Cassia fistula, is that sweet and odorous bark that is
rolled together, after the manner of a long and round pipe, now
named of the apothecaries Cassia lignea, which is a kind of
Cinnamon.

The Temperature.

The pulp of this pipe which is chiefly in request, is moist in the
later end of the first degree, and little more than temperately hot.

The Virtues.

A. The pulp of Cassia fistula extracted with violet water, is a most
sweet and pleasant medicine, and may be given without danger to all
weak people of what age and sex soever they be, yea it may be
ministered to women with child, for it gently purgeth choleric
humours and slimy phlegm, if be taken in the weight of an ounce.

B. Cassia is good for such as be vexed with hot agues, pleurisies,
jaundice, or any other inflammation of the liver, being taken as
afore is showed.

C. Cassia is good for the reins and kidneys, driveth forth gravel
and the stone, especially if it be mingled with the decotion of
Parsley, and Fennel roots, and drunk.

D. It purgeth and purifieth the blood, making it more clean than
before, breaking therewith the acrimony and sharpness of the mixture
of blood and choler together.

E. It dissolveth all phlegmons and inflammations of the breast,
lungs, and the rough artery called Trachea arteria, easing those
parts exceeding well.

F. Cassia abateth the vehemency of thirst in agues, or any hot
disease whatsoever, especially if it be taken with the juice of
Intybum, Cichoreum, or Solanum, depured according to art: it abateth
also the intemperate heat of the reins, if it be received with
diuretic simples, or with the decoction of Liquorice only, and will
not suffer the stone to grow in such persons as do receive and use
this medicine.

G. The best Cassia for your use is to be taken out of the mot full,
most heavy, & fairset cods, or canes, and those which do shine
without, and are full of soft pulp within; that pulp which is newly
taken forth is better than that which is kept in boxes, by what art
soever.

H. Cassia being outwardly applied, taketh away the roughness of the
skin, and being laid upon hot swellings, it bringeth them to
suppuration.

I. Many singular compounded medicines are made with this Cassia,
which here to recite belongs not to my purpose or history.

CHAP. 84. Of the Lentisk, or Mastic Tree.

Fig. 2015. The Mastic Tree

The Description.

The Mastic tree groweth commonly like a shrub without any great
body, rising up with many springs and shoots like the Hazel; and
oftentimes it is of the height and bigness of a mean tree: the
boughs thereof are tough, and flexible; the bark is of a yellowish
red colour, pliable likewise, and hard to be broken: there stand
upon one rib for the most part 8 leaves, set upon a middle rib, much
like to the leaves of Liquorice, but harder, of a deep green colour,
and oftentimes somewhat red in the brims, as also having divers
veins running along of a red colour, and something strong of smell:
the flowers be mossy, and grow in clusters upon long stems: after
them come up the berries, of the bignesse of Vetches, green at the
first, afterwards of a purple colour, and last of all black, fat,
and oily, with a hard black stone within; the kernel whereof is
white, of which also is made oil, as Dioscorides witnesseth: it
bringeth forth likewise cods besides the fruit (which may be rather
termed an excrescence, than a cod) writhed like a horn; in which
lieth at the first a liquor, and afterwards when this waxeth stale,
little living things like unto gnats, as in the Turpentine horns,
and in the folded leaves of the Elm tree. There cometh forth of the
Mastic tree a resin, but dry, called mastic.

The Place.

The Mastic tree groweth in many regions, as in Syria, Candy, Italy,
Languedoc, and in most provinces of Spain: but the chiefest is in
Chios an island in Greece, in which it is diligently and specially
looked unto, and that for the mastic's sake, which is there gathered
from the husbanded Mastic trees by the inhabitants every year most
carefully, and is sent from thence into all parts of the world.

The Time.

The flowers be in their pride in the spring time, and the berries in
autumn: the mastic must be gathered about the time when the Grapes
be.

The Names.

This tree is named in Latin, Lentiscus: in Italian, Lentisque: in
Spanish, Mata, and Arcoyra: in English, Mastic tree; and of some,
Lentisk tree.

The Resin is called in Latin, lentiscina resina, and likewise
mastiche: in shops, mastix: in Italian, Mastice: in high and Low
Dutch and French also, mastic: in Spanish, Almastiga, Mastech, and
almecega: in English, Mastic.

Clusius writeth, that the Spaniards call the oil that is pressed out
of the berries, Azeyte de Mata.

The Temperature.

The leaves, bark, and gum of the Mastic tree are of a mean and
temperate heat, and are dry in the second degree, and somewhat
astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves and bark of the Mastic tree stop the lask, the bloody
flux, the spitting of blood, the pissing of blood, and all other
fluxes of blood: they are also good against the falling sickness,
the falling down of the mother, and coming forth of the fundament.

B. The gum mastic hath the same virtue, if it be relented in wine
and given to be drunk.

C. Mastic chewed in the mouth is good for the stomach, stayeth
vomiting, increaseth appetite, comforteth the brains, stayeth the
falling down of the rheums and watery humours, and maketh a sweet
breath.

D. The same infused in Rose water is excellent to wash the mouth
withal, to fasten loose teeth, and to comfort the jaws, The same
spread upon a piece of leather or velvet, and laid plasterwise upon
the temples, stayeth the rheum from falling into the jaws and teeth,
and easeth the pains thereof.

F. It prevaileth much against ulcers and wounds, being put into
digestives and healing unguents.

G. It draweth phlegm forth of the head gently and without trouble.

H. It is also used in waters which serve to cleanse and make fair
the face with.

I. The decoction of this filleth up hollow ulcers with flesh if they
be bathed therewith.

K. It knitteth broken bones, stayeth eating ulcers, and provoketh
urine.

CHAP. 85. Of the Turpentine Tree.


Fog. 2016. Turpentine Tree (1)
Fig. 2017. Broad-Leaved Turpentine Tree (2)

The Description.

1. The first Turpentine Tree groweth to the height of a tall and
fair tree, having many long boughs or branches, dispersed abroad,
beset with long leaves, consisting of sundry other small leaves,
each whereof resembleth the Bay leaf, growing one against another
upon a little stem or middle rib, like unto the leaves of the Ash
tree: the flowers be small & reddish, growing upon clusters or
bunches that turn into round berries, which at their beginning are
green, afterwards reddish, but being ripe wax black, or of a dark
blue colour, clammy, full of fat and oleous in substance, and of a
pleasant savour: this plant beareth an empty cod, or crooked horn
somewhat reddish, wherein are found small flies, worms or gnats,
bred and engendered of a certain humorous matter, which cleaveth to
the inner sides of the said cods or horns, which worms have no
physical use at all. The right turpentine issueth out of the
branches of these trees, if you do cut or wound them, the which is
fair and clear, and better than that which is gathered from the bark
of the Fir tree.

2. The second kind of Turpentine tree is very like unto the former,
but that it groweth not so great: yet the leaves are greater and
broader, and of the same fashion, but very like to the leaves of the
Pistacia tree. The berries are first of a scarlet colour, and when
they be ripe of a sky colour. The great horned cods are sharp
pointed, and somewhat cornered, consisting as it were of the
substance of gristles. And out of those bladders being broken, do
creep and come small flies or gnats, bred of a fuliginous excrement,
and engendered in those bladders. The tree doth also yield his
Turpentine by dropping like the former.

The Place.

These trees grow, as Dioscorides saith, in Jewry, Syria, Cyprus,
Africa, and in the islands called Cyclades. Bellonius reporteth that
there are found great store of them in Syria, and Cilicia, and are
brought from thence to Damascus to be sold. Clusius saith, that it
grows of itself in Languedoc, and in very many places of Portugal
and Spain, but for the most part like a shrub, and without bearing
Turpentine.

Theophrastus writeth, that it groweth about the hill Ida, and in
Macedonia, short, in manner of a shrub, and writhed; and in Damascus
and Syria great, in manner of a small tree: he also setteth down a
certain male Turpentine tree, and a female: the male, saith he, is
barren, and the female fruitful. And of these he maketh the one with
a berry red at the first, of the bigness of a Lentil, which cannot
come to ripeness; and the other with the fruit green at the first,
afterwards somewhat of a yellowish red, and in the end black, waxing
ripe in the spring, of the bigness of the Grecians' Bean, and
resiny.

He also writeth of a certain Indian Turpentine tree, that is to say,
a tree like in boughs and leaves to the right Turpentine tree, but
differing in fruit, which is like unto almonds.

The Time.

The flowers of the Turpentine tree come forth in the spring together
with the new buds: the berries are ripe in September and October, in
the time of Grape gathering. The horn appear about the same time.

The Names.

This tree is called in Latin, Terebinthus: in Italian, Terebintho:
in Spanish, Cornicabra: in French, Terebinte: in English, Turpentine
tree: the Arabians call it Botin, and with an article Albotin.

The resin is surnamed in Latin, Terebinthina: in High Dutch,
Termintijn: in English Turpentine, and Right Turpentine: in the
Arabian language Albotin, who name the fruit Granum viride, or green
berries.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The bark, leaves, and fruit of the Turpentine tree do somewhat
bind, they are hot in the second degree, and being green they dry
moderately, but when they are dried they dry in the second degeee;
and the fruit approacheth more near to those that be dry in the
third degree, and also hotter. This is fit to be eaten, as
Dioscorides saith, but it hurteth the stomach.

B. It provoketh urine, helpeth those that have bad spleens, and is
drunk in wine against the bitings of the poisonsome spiders called
Phalangia.

C. The resin of the Turpentine tree excelleth all other resins
according to Dioscorides his opinion: but Galen writeth, that the
resin of the mastic tree beareth the pre-eminence, and then the
Turpentine.

D. This resin hath also an astringent or binding faculty, and yet
not so much as mastic, but it hath withal a certain bitterness
joined, by reason whereof it digesteth more than that of the Mastic
tree: through the same quality there is likewise in it so great a
cleansing, as also it healeth scabs, as Galen saith in his 8th book
Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines; but in his book Of Medicines
According to Their Kinds, he maketh that of the Turpentine tree to
be much like the resins of the Larch tree, which he affirmeth to be
moister than all the rest, and to be without both sharpness and
biting.

E. The fruit of Turpentine provoketh urine and stirreth up fleshly
lust.

F. The resin of this tree, which is the right Turpentine, looseth
the belly, openeth the stoppings of the liver and spleen, provoketh
urine, and driveth forth gravel, being taken the quantity of two or
three beans.

G. The like quantity washed in water divers times until it be white,
then must be put thereto the like quantity of the yolk of an egg,
and laboured together adding thereto by little and little
(continually stirring it) a small draught of posset drink made of
white wine, and given to drink in the morning fasting, it helpeth
most speedily the gonorrhæa, or running of the reins, commonly at
the first time, but the medicine never faileth at the second time of
the taking of it, which gives stools from four to eight, according
to the age and strength of the patient.

CHAP. 86. Of the Frankincense Tree.


Fig. 2018. The Frankincense Tree
Fig. 2019. The supposed leaf of the Frankincense Tree

The Description.

The tree from which frankincense floweth is but low, and hath leaves
like the Mastic tree; yet some are of opinion that the leaf is like
the leaf of a Pear tree, and of a grassy colour: the rind is like
that of the Bay tree, whereof there are two kinds: the one groweth
in mountains and rocky places, the other in the plain: but those in
the plains are much worse than those of the mountains: the gum
hereof is also blacker, fitter to mingle with Pitch, and such other
stuff to trim ships, than for other uses.

Thevet in his Cosmography saith, that the Frankincense tree doth
resemble a gummy or resiny Pine tree, which yieldeth a juice that in
time groweth hard, and is called Thus, frankincense, in whom is
found sometime certain small grains like unto gravel, which they
call the Manna of frankincense.

Of this there is in Arabia two other sorts, the one, the gum whereof
is gathered in the Dog days when the sun is in Leo, which is white,
pure, clear, and shining. Pena writeth that he hath seen the clear
frankincense called Limpidum, and yielding a very sweet smell when
it is burnt, but the leaf hath been seldom seen; which the physician
Launanus gave to Pena and Lobel, together with some pieces of the
resin, which he had of certain mariners, but he could affirm nothing
of certainty whether it were the leaf of the Frankincense, or of
some other Pine tree, yielding the like juice or gum. It is, saith
he (which doth seldom happen in other leaves) from the lower part or
foot of the leaf, to the upper end, as it were doubled, consisting
of two thin rinds or coats, with a sheath a span and a half long, at
the top gaping open like a hood or fool's coxcomb, and as it were
covered with a helmet, which is a thing seldom seen in a leaf, but
is proper to the flowers of Napellus, or Lonchitis, as writers
affirm; the other is gathered in the spring, which is reddish,
worser than the other in price or value, because it is not so well
concocted in the heat of the Sun. The Arabians wound this tree with
a knife, that the liquor may flow out more abundantly, whereof some
trees yield threescore pounds of frankincense.

The Place.

Dioscorides saith it groweth in Arabia, and especially in that
quarter which is called Thurifera, the best in that country is
called Stagontas, and is round, and if it be broken, is fat within,
and when it is burned doth quickly yield a smell: next to it in
goodness is that which groweth in Smilo, lesser than the other, and
more yellow.

The Time

The time is already declared in the description.

The Names.

It is called in Greek, Libanos: in Latin, Thus: in Italian, Incenso:
In Dutch, Vueirauch: in Spanish, Encenso: in French, Enceus: in
English, frankincense, and Incense: in the Arabian tongue, Louan,
and of some few, Conder. The resin carries the same name; but in
shops it is called Olibanum, of the Greek name and article put
before it.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. It hath, as Dioscorides saith, a power to heat and bind.

B. It driveth away the dimness of the eyesight, filleth up hollow
ulcers, it closes raw wounds, stayeth all corruptions of blood,
although it fall from the head.

C. Galen writeth thus of it; Thus doth heat in the second degree,
and dry in the first, and hath some small astriction, but in the
white there is a manifest astriction; the rind doth manifestly bind
and dry exceedingly, and that most certainly in the second degree,
for it is of more grosser parts than frankincense, and not so sharp,
by reason whereof it is much used in spitting of blood, swellings in
the mouth, the colic passion, the flux in the belly rising from the
stomach, and bloody fluxes.

D. The fume or smoke of it hath a more drier and hotter quality than
the frankincense itself, being dry in the third degree.

E. It doth also cleanse and fill up the ulcers in the eies, like
unto Myrrh: thus far Galen.

F. Dioscorides saith, that if it be drunk by a man in health, it
driveth him into a frenzy: but there are few Greeks of his mind.

G. Avicenna reporteth that it doth help and strengthen the wit and
understanding, but the often taking of it will breed the headache,
and if too much of it be drunk with wine it killeth.

CHAP. 87. Of Fistic Nuts.

Fig. 2020. Fistic Nut

The Description.

The tree which beareth Fistic Nuts is like to the Turpentine tree:
the leaves hereof be greater than those of the Mastic tree, but set
after the same manner, and in like order that they are, being of a
faint yellow colour out of a green; the fruit or nuts do hang by
their stalks in clusters, being greater than the nuts of Pine
apples, and much lesser than Almonds: the husk without is of a
grayish colour sometimes reddish, the shell brittle and white; the
substance of the kernel green; the taste sweet, pleasant to be
eaten, and something sweet of smell.

The Place.

Fistic nuts grow in Persia, Arabia, Syria, and in India; now they
are made free denizens in Italy, as in Naples and in other Provinces
there.

The Time.

This tree doth flower in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

This nut is called in Latin Pistacion, Bistacion, or Phistacion: the
Apothecaries, Fistici: the Spaniards, Alhocigos, and Fisticos; in
Italian, Pistacchi: in English, Fistic nut.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The kernels of the Fistic nuts are oftentimes eaten as be those
of the Pine apples; they be of temperature hot and moist; they are
not so easily concoted, but much easier than common nuts: the juice
is good, yet somewhat thick; they yield to the body no small
nourishment, they nourish bodies that are consumed; they recover
strength.

B. They are good for those that have the phthisic, or rotting away
of the lungs.

C. They concoct, ripen, and cleanse forth raw humours that cleave to
the lights and chest.

D. They open the stoppings of the liver, and be good for the
infirmities of the kidneys; they also remove out of the kidneys sand
and gravel; and assuage their pain: they are also good for ulcers.

E. The kernels of Fistic nuts condited, or made into comfits, with
sugar, and eaten, do procure bodily lust, unstop the lungs and the
breast, are good against the shortness of breath, and are an
excellent preservative medicine being ministered in wine against the
bitings of all manner of wild beasts.

CHAP. 88. Of the Bladder Nut.

Fig. 2021. Bladder Nut

The Description.

This is a low tree, having divers young springs growing forth of the
root:the substance of the wood is white, very hard & sound; the bark
is of a light green: the leaves consist of five little ones, which
be nicked in the edges like those of the Elder, but lesser, not so
green nor rank of smell. It hath the pleasant whitish flowers of
Bryony or Labrusca, both in smell and shape, which turn into small
cornered bladders like those of winter Cherries, called Alkakengie,
but of an overworn greenish colour: in these bladders are contained
two little nuts, and sometimes no more than one, lesser than the
Hazel nut, but greater than the Ram Cich, with a woody shell and
somewhat red: the kernel within is something green; in taste at the
first sweet, but afterwards loathsome, and ready to provoke vomit.

The Place.

It groweth in Italy, Germany and France, it groweth likewise at the
house of Sir Walter Culpepper near Flimwell in the Weald of Kent, as
also in the Friar-yard without Saint Paul's Gate in Stamford, and
about Spalding Abbey, and in the garden of the right honourable the
Lord Treasurer my very good Lord and Master, and by his house in the
Strand. It groweth also in my garden, and in the garden hedges of
Sir Frank Carew near Croydon, seven miles from London.

The Time.

This tree flowereth in May, the nuts be ripe in August and
September.

The Names.

It is commonly called in High Dutch, Pimpernusz, which signifieth in
Low Dutch Pimpernoten: divers call it in Latin Pistacium germanicum:
we think it best to call it Nux vesicaria. Matthiolus in his
Epistles doth judge the Turks' Coulcoul and Hebulben to agree with
this: Gulielmus Quacelbenus affirmeth, Coulcoul to be used of divers
in Constantinople fot a dainty, especially when they be new brought
out of Egypt. This plant hath no old name, unless it be
Staphylodendron plinii for which it is taken of the later
writers:and Pliny hath written of it in his 16th book, 16th chap.
There is also (saith he) beyond the Alps a tree, the timber whereof
is very like to that of white Maple, and is called Staphylodendron,
it beareth cods, and in those kernels, having the taste of the Hazel
nut. It is called in English, St. Anthony's nuts, wilde Pistacia, or
Bladder nuts:the Italians call it Pistachio salvaticke: the French
men call it Baguenaudes a patre nostres, for that the friars do use
to make beads of the nuts.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. These nuts are moist and full of superfluous raw humours, and
therefore they easily procure a readiness to vomit, and trouble the
stomach, by reason that withal they be somewhat binding, and
therefore they be not to be eaten.

B. They have as yet no use in medicine, yet notwithstanding some
have attributed nto them some virtues in provoking of venery.

CHAP. 89. Of the Hazel Tree.


Fig. 2022. Filbert Hazelnut (1)
Fig. 2023. Wild Hedge Hazelnut (2)

The Description.

1. The Hazel tree groweth like a shrub or small tree, parted into
boughs without joints, tough and pliable: the leaves are broad,
greater and fuller of wrinkles than those of the Alder tree, cut in
the edges like a saw, of colour green, and on the back side more
white, the bark is thin: the root is thick, strong, and growing
deep; instead of flowers hang down catkins, aglets, or blowings,
slender, and well compact: after which come the nuts standing in a
tough cup of green colour, and jagged at the upper end, like almost
unto the beards in Roses, The shell is smooth and woody: the kernel
within consisteth of a white, hard, and sound pulp, and is covered
with a thin skin, oftentimes red, most commonly white; this kernel
is sweet and pleasant unto the taste.

2. Corylus sylvestris is our hedge nut or Hazelnut tree, which is
very well known, and therefore needeth not any description: whereof
there are also sundry sorts, some great, some little, some rathe
ripe, some later, as also one that is manured in our gardens, which
is very great, bigger than any Filbert, and yet a kind of Hedge nut:
this then that hath been said shall suffice for Hedge nuts.

Fig. 2024. Turkish Hazelnut (3)

3. The small Turkey nut tree grows but low, and the leaves grow
without order, upon the twigs, they are in shape like those of the
former, but somewhat longer: the chief difference consists in the
fruit, which is small, and like an Hazelnut, but shorter: the husk,
wherein somtimes one, otherwhiles more nuts are contained, is very
large, tough, and hard, divided both above and below into a great
many jags, which on every side cover and hold in the nuts, and these
cups are very rough without, but smooth on the inside. Clusius first
set this forth (having received it from Constantinople) by the name
of Avellana pumila byzantina.

The Place.

The Hazel trees do commonly grow in woods and in dankish untoiled
places: they are also set in orchards, the nuts whereof are better,
and of a sweeter taste, and be most commonly red within.

The Time.

The catkins or aglets come forth very timely, before winter be fully
past, and fall away in March or April, so soon as the leaves come
forth: the nuts be ripe in August.

The Names.

This shrub is called in Latin, Corylus: in Greeke, Karua Pontika,
that is, Nux Pontica, or Pontic nut: in High Dutch, Hasel strauck:
in Low Dutch, Haseleer: in English, Hazel tree, and Filbert tree;
but the Filbert tree is properly that which groweth in gardens and
orchards, and whose fruit is commonly wholly covered over with the
husk and the shell is thinner.

The nut is named in Latin, Nux pontica, Nux tenuis, Nux parva: it is
also called Nux prænesti, Nux heracleotica, and commonly Nux
avellana, by which name it is usually known to the apothecaries: in
High Dutch, Hasel Nusz: in Low Dutch, Hasel Noten: in Italian,
Nocciuole, Avellane, Nocelle; in French, Noisettes & Noiselles: in
Spanish, Avellanas: in English, Hazelnut, and Filbert.

These nuts that have their skin red are the garden and planted nuts,
and the right Pontic nuts or filberts: they are called in High
Dutch, Rhusnusz, and Rotnusz: in Low Dutch, Roode Hasel Noten: in
English, filberts, and red filberts.

The other nuts which be white are judged to be wild.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Hazelnuts newly gathered, and not as yet dry, contain in them a
certain superfluous moisture, by reason whereof they are windy: not
only the new gathered nuts, but the dry also, be very hard of
digestion; for they are of an earthy and cold essence, and of an
hard and sound substance, for which cause also they very slowly pass
through the belly, therefore they are troublesome and clogging to
the stomach, cause headache, especially when they be eaten in too
great a quantity.

B. The kernels of nuts made into milk like almonds do mightily bind
the belly, and are good for the lask and the bloody flux.[Thus our
author, but see E below]

C. The same doth cool exceedingly in hot fevers and burning agues.

D. The catkins are cold and dry, and likewise binding: they also
stay the lask.

E. The kernels of nuts rather cause than cure the bloody flux and
lasks, wherefore they are not to be used in such diseases. [added by
Johnson]

CHAP. 90. Of the Walnut Tree.

Fig. 2025. Walnut

The Description.

This is a great tree with a thick and tall body: the bark is
somewhat green, and tending to the colour of ashes, and oftentimes
full of clefts: the boughs spread themselves far abroad: the leaves
consist of five or six fastened to one rib, like those of the Ash
tree, and with one standing on the top, which be broader and longer
than the particular leaves of the Ash, smooth also, and of a strong
smell: the catkins or aglets come forth before the nuts: these nuts
do grow hard to the stalk of the leaves, by couples, or by three &
three; which at the first when they be yet but tender have a sweet
smell, and be covered with a green husk: under that is a woody shell
in which the kernel is contained, being covered with a thin skin,
parted almost into four parts with a woody skin as it were: the
inner pulp whereof is white, sweet and pleasant to the taste; and
that is when it is new gathered, for after it is dry it becometh
oily and rank.

The Place.

The Walnut tree groweth in fields near common highways, in a fat and
fruitful ground, and in orchards: it prospereth on high fruitful
banks, it loveth not to grow in watery places.

The Time.

The leaves together with the catkins come forth in the Spring: the
nuts are gathered in August.

The Names.

The tree is called in Greek, Carya: in Latin, Nux, which name doth
signify both the tree and the fruit: in High Dutch, Nuszbaum: in Low
Dutch, Noote boom, and Nootelaer: in French, Noisier: in Spanish,
Nogueyra: in English, Walnut tree, and of some, Walsh nut tree.

The nut is called in Greek, caryon basilikon, that is to say, nux
regia, or the kingly nut: it is likewise named nux inglans, as
though you should say Iovis glans, Jupiter's acorn; or iuvans glans,
the helping acorn: and of divers, persica nux, or the Persian nut:
in High Dutch, Welsch Nusz, and Baumnusz: in Low Dutch, Dokernoten,
Walsch Noten: in Italian, noci: in French, noix: in Spanish, nuezes
and nous: in English, walnut; and of some, walsh nut.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The fresh kernels of the nuts newly gathered are pleasant to the
taste: they are a little cold, and have no small moisture, which is
not perfectly concocted: they be hard of digestion, and nourish
little: they slowly descend.

B. The dry nuts are hot and dry, and those more which become oily
and rank: these be very hurtful to the stomach, and besides that
they be hardly concocted, they increase choler, cause headache, and
be hurtful for the chest, and for those that be troubled with the
cough.

C. Dry nuts taken fasting with a fig and a little Rue withstand
poison, prevent and preserve the body from the infection of the
plague, and being plentifully eaten they drive worms forth of the
belly.

D. The green and tender nuts boiled in sugar and eaten as succade,
are a most pleasant and delectable meat, comfort the stomach, and
expel poison.

E. The oil of walnuts made in such manner as oil of almonds, maketh
smooth the hands and face, and taketh away scales or scurf, black
and blue marks that come of stripes or bruises.

F. Milk made of the kernels, as almond milk is made, cooleth and
pleaseth the appetite of the languishing sick body.

G. With onions, salt, and honey, they are good against the biting of
a mad dog or man, if they be laid upon the wound.

H. Being both eaten, and also applied, they heal in short time, as
Dioscorides saith, gangrenes, carbuncles, ægilops, and the pilling
away of the hair: this also is effectually done by the oil that is
pressed out of them, which is of thin parts, digesting and heating.

I. The outward green husk of the nuts hath a notable binding
faculty.

K. Galen devised and taught to make of the juice thereof a medicine
for the mouth, singular good against all inflammations thereof.

L. The leaves and first buds have a certain binding quality, as the
same author showeth; yet there doth abound in them an hot and dry
temperature.

M. Some of the later physicians use these for baths and lotions for
the body, in which they have a force to digest and also to procute
sweat.

CHAP. 91. Of the Chestnut Tree.

Fig. 2026. Chestnut (1)

The Description.

1. The Chestnut tree is a very great and high tree: it casteth forth
very many boughs: the body is thick, and sometimes of so great a
compass as that two men can hardly fathom it: the timber or
substance of the wood is sound and durable: the leaves be great,
rough, wrinkled, nicked in the edges, and greater than the
particular leaves of the Walnut tree. The blowings or catkins be
slender, long, and green: the fruit is enclosed in round a rough and
prickly husk like to an hedgehog or urchin, which opening itself
doth let fall the ripe fruit or nut. This nut is not round, but flat
on the one side, smooth, and sharp pointed: it is covered with a
hard shell, which is tough and very smooth, of a dark brown colour:
the meat or inner substance of the nut is hard and white, and
covered with a thin skin which is under the shell.


Fig. 2027. Horse Chestnut (2)
Fig. 2028. Horse Chestnut Fruit (2)

2. The Horse Chestnut groweth likewise to be a very great tree,
spreading his great and large arms or branches far abroad, by which
means it maketh a very good cool shadow. These branches are
garnished with many beautiful leaves, cut or divided into five, six,
or seven sections or divisions, like to the Cinquefoil, or rather
like the leaves of Ricinus, but bigger. The flowers grow at the top
of the stalks, consisting of four small leaves like the Cherry
blossom, which turn into round rough prickly heads like the former,
but more sharp and harder: the nuts are also rounder. The flowers of
this, saith Clusius (whose figure of them I here give you) come out
of the bosom of the leaf which is the uppermost of the branch, and
they are many in number growing upon pretty long footstalks,
consisting each of them of four white leaves of no great bigness;
the two uppermost area little larger than the rest, having round
purple spots in their middles: our of the middle of the flower come
forth many yellowish threads with golden pendants. The fruit is
contained in a prickly husk that opens in three parts, and it is
rounder and not so sharp pointed as the ordinary Chestnut, neither
under the outter coat hath it any peeling within as the other hath,
neither is it of so good a taste.

Fig. 2029. American Chestnut Fruit (3)

3. This American Chestnut is almost round, but that it is a little
flatted on the sides, especially whereas it is fastened to the
stalk: the outer coat is sufficiently thick, yet brittle, and as it
were fungous, of a brownish yellow colour: under this are abundance
of small yet stiff prickles, fast sticking to the shell that
contains the kernel: the shell itself is brownish, not thick, but
tough and hard to break, smooth and shining on the inside, wherein
is contained a kernel of the bigness and colour of an hare's kidney,
white within, and sweet in taste like an almond or the common
Chestnut. Clusius calls this Castanea peruana, or Chestnut of Peru;
and he saith he had it from the famous Geographer Abraham Ortelius,
who had it sent him by Benedictus Arias Montanus.

The Place.

The first grows on mountains and shadowy places, and many times in
the valleys: they love a soft and black soil. There be sundry woods
of Chestnuts in England, as a mile and a half from Feversham in
Kent, and in sundry other places: in some countries they be greater
and pleasanter: in others smaller, and of worse taste.

The Horse Chestnut groweth in ltaly, and in sundry places of the
East countries. It is now growing with Mr. Tradescant at South
Lambeth.

The Time.

The blowings or aglets come forth with the leaves in April; but the
nuts later, and be not ripe till autumn.

The Names.

The Chestnut tree bears the name of the nut both in Greek and Latin:
in High Dutch Kestenbaum, and Kastanibaum: in Low Dutch,
Castaniboom: in French, Castagnier: in English, Chestnut tree.

The nut is called in Greek, Kastenon: in Latin, Castanea, Iovis
glans, Sardinia glans: in High Dutch, Kesten: in Low Dutch,
Castanien: in Italian, Castagne: in French, Chastaigne: in Spanish,
Marones, Castanas: in English, Chestnut: the greater nuts be named
of the Italians, Marroni: of the French men and of divers base
Almaines, Marons.

The Horse Chestnut is called in Latin, Castanea equina: in English,
Horse Chestnut, for that the people of the East countries do with
the fruit thereof cure their horses of the cough, shortness of
breath, and such like diseases.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. Our common chestnuts are very dry and binding, and be neither hot
nor cold, but in a mean between both: yet have they in them a
certain windiness, and by reason of this, unless the shell be first
cut, they skip suddenly with a crack out of the fire whilst they be
roasting.

B. Of all the acorns, saith Galen, the chestnuts are the chiefest,
and do only of all the wild fruits yield to the body commendable
nourishment; but they slowly descend, they be hardly concocted, they
make a thick blood, and engender wind: they also stay the belly,
especially if they be eaten raw.

C. Being boiled or roasted they are not of so hard digestion, they
more easily descend, and are less windy, yet they also make the body
costive.

D. Some affirm, that of raw chestnuts dried, and afterwards turned
into meal, there is made a kind of bread: yet it must needs be, that
this should be dry and brittle, hardly concocted, and very slow in
passing through the belly; but this bread may be good against the
lask and bloody flux.

E. An electuary of the meal of Chestnuts and honey is very good
against the cough and spitting of blood.

F. The bark of the Chestnut tree boiled in wine and drunk, stops the
lask, the bloody flux, and all other issues of blood.

CHAP. 92. Of the Beech Tree.

Fig. 2030. Beech

The Description

The Beech is an high tree, with boughs spreading oftentimes in
manner of a circle, and with a thick body having many arms: the bark
is smooth: the timber is white, hard, and very profitable: the
leaves be smooth, thin, broad, and lesser than those of the black
Poplar: the catkins or blowings be also lesser and shorter than
those of the Birch tree, and yellow: the fruit or mast is contained
in a husk or cup that is prickly, and rough bristled, yet not so
much as that of the Chestnut: which fruit being taken forth of the
shells or urchin husks, be covered with a soft and smooth skin like
in colour and smoothness to the chestnuts, but they be much lesser,
and of another form, that is to say, triangled or three-cornered:
the kernel within is sweet, with a certain astriction or binding
quality: the roots be few, and grow not deep, and little lower than
under the turf.

The Place.

The Beech tree loveth a plain and open country, and groweth very
plentifully in many forests and desert places of Sussex, Kent, and
sundry other countries.
The Time.

The Beech flowereth in April and May, and the fruit is ripe in
September, at what time the deer do eat the same very greedily, as
greatly delighting therein; which hath caused foresters and huntsmen
to call it Buck-mast.

The Names.

The tree is called in Latin, Fagus: in High Dutch, Buchbaum, or
Buch: in Low Dutch, Bukenboom: in Italian, Faggi: in Spanish, Haia,
Faia, and Fax: in French, Fau, or Hestre: in English, Beech tree,
Beech-mast, and Buck-mast.

The fruit is called in Latin, Nuces Fagi: in Low Dutch, Bueken
nootkens: in French, Faine: in English, Beech-mast. Dioscorides
reckons the Beech among the acorn trees; and yet is the mast nothing
at all like to an acorn. Of Theophrastus it is called Oxya: of Gala,
Siscina.

Pliny also makes mention of this tree, but under the name of Ostrya
(if so be instead of Ostrya we must not read Oxya) lib. 13 cap. 21.
It bringeth forth (saith he, meaning Greece) the tree Ostrys, which
they likewise call Ostrya, firm, growing alone among watery stones,
like to the Ash tree in bark and boughs, with leaves like those of
the Pear tree, but some what longer and thicker, and with wrinkled
cuts which run quite through, with a seed like in colour to a
Chestnut, and not unto barley: the wood is hard and firm, which
being brought into the house there follows hard travail of child,
and miserable deaths; as it is reported; and therefore it is to be
forborne, and not used as firewood, if Pliny's copies be not
corrupted.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Beech do cool: the kernel of the nut is somewhat
moist.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Beech are very profitably applied unto hot
swellings, blisters, and excoriations; and being chewed they are
good for chapped lips, and pain of the gums.

B. The kernels or mast within are reported to ease the pain of the
kidneys proceeding of the stone, if they be eaten, and to cause the
gravel and sand the easier to come forth. With these, mice and
squirrels are greatly delighted, who do mightily increase by feeding
thereon: swine also be fattened herewith, and certain other beasts
also. Deer do feed thereon very greedily: they be likewise pleasant
to thrushes and pigeons.

C. Petrus Crescentius writeth, That the ashes of the wood is good to
make glass with.

D. The water that is found in the hollowness of Beeches cureth the
naughty scurf, tetters, and scabs of men, horses, kine, and sheep,
if they be wasled therewith.

CHAP. 93. Of the Almond Tree.

Fig. 2031. The Almond Tree

The Description.

The Almond tree is like to the Peach tree, yet is it higher, bigger,
of longer continuance: the leaves be very long, sharp pointed,
snipped about the edges like those of the Peach tree: the flowers be
alike: the fruit is also like a peach, having on one side a cleft,
with a soft skin without, and covered with a thin cotton; but under
this there is none, or very little pulp, which is hard like a
gristle not eaten: the nut or stone within is longer than that of
the peach, not so rugged, but smooth; in which is contained the
kernel, in taste sweet, and many times bitter: the root of the tree
groweth deep: the gum which soaketh out hereof is like that of the
Peach tree.

There are divers sorts of Almonds, differing in largeness and taste:
we commonly have three or four sorts brought to us, a large sweet
Almond, vulgarly termed a Jordan almond and a lesser, called a
Valence almond: a bitter almond of the bigness of the Valence
almond, and sometimes, another bitter one less than it.

The Place.

The natural place of the Almond is in the hot regions, yet we have
them in our London gardens and orchards in great plenty.

The Time

The Almond flowereth betimes with the Peach: the fruit is ripe in
August.

The Names.

 The tree is called in Latin, Amygdalus: in French, Amandier: in
English, Almond tree.

The fruit is called in Latin, Amygdalum: in shops, Amygdala: in High
Dutch, Mandel: in Low Dutch, Amandelen: in Italian, Mandole: in
Spanish, Almendras, Amelles, and Amendoas: in French, Amandes: in
English, Almond.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Sweet almonds when they be dry be moderately hot; but the bitter
ones are hot and dry in the second degree. There is in both of them
a certain fat and oily substance, which is drawn out by pressing.

B. Sweet almonds being new gathered are pleasant to the taste, they
yield some kind of nourishment, but the same gross and earthy, and
grosser than those that be dry, and not as yet withered. These do
likewise slowly descend, especially being eaten without their skins;
for even as the husks or branny parts of corn do serve to drive down
the gross excrements of the belly, so do likewise the skins or husks
of the almonds: therefore those that be blanched do so slowly
descend, as that they do withal bind the belly; whereupon they are
given with good success to those that have the lask or the bloody
flux.

C. There is drawn out of sweet almonds, with liquor added, a white
juice like milk, which over and besides that it nourisheth, and is
good for those that are troubled with the lask and bloody flux, it
is profitable for those that have the pleurisy and spit up filthy
matter, as Alexander Trallianus witnesseth: for there is likewise in
the almonds an opening and concocting quality, with a certain
cleansing faculty, by which they are medicinable to the chest and
lungs, or lights, and serve for the raising up of phlegm and rotten
humours.

D. Almonds taken before meat do stop the belly, and nourish but
little; notwithstanding many excellent meats and medicines are
therewith made for sundry griefs, yea very delicate and wholesome
meats, as almond butter, cream of almonds, marchpane, and such like,
which dry and stay the belly more than the extracted juice or milk;
and they are also as good for the chest and lungs.

E. They do serve also to make the physical barley water, and barley
cream, which are given in hot fevers, as also for other sick and
feeble persons, for their further refreshing and nourishments.

F. The oil which is newly pressed out of the sweet almonds is a
mitigator of pain and all manner of aches. It is given to those that
have the pleurisy, being first let blood; but especially to those
that are troubled with the stone of the kidneys; it slackens the
passages of the urine, and maketh them glib or slippery, and more
ready to suffer the stone to have free passage: it maketh the belly
soluble, and therefore it is likewise used for the colic.

G. It is good for women that are newly delivered; for it quickly
removeth the throes which remain after their delivery.

H. The oil of almonds makes smooth the hands and face of delicate
persons, and cleanseth the skin from all spots, pimples, and
lentils.

I. Bitter Almonds do make thin and open, they remove stoppings out
of the liver and spleen, therefore they be good against pain in the
sides: they make the body soluble, provoke urine, bring down the
menses, help the strangury, and cleanse forth of the chest and lungs
clammy humours: if they be mixed with some kind of lohoch or
medicine to lick on: with starch they stay the spitting of blood.

L. And it is reported that five or six being taken fasting do keep a
man from being drunk.

M. These also cleanse and take away spots and blemishes in the face,
and in other parts of the body; they mundify and make clean foul
eating ulcers.

N. With honey they are laid upon the biting of mad dogs; being
applied to the temples with vinegar or oil of roses, they take away
the headache, as Dioscorides writeth.

O. They are also good against the cough and shortness of wind.

P. They are likewise good for those that spit blood, if they be
taken with the fine flour of Amylum.

Q. There is also pressed out of these an oil which provoketh urine,
but especially if a few scorpions be drowned, and steeped therein.

R. With oil it it singular good for those that have the stone, and
cannot easily make water: but with extremity of pain, if the share
and place between the cods and fundament be anointed therewith.

S. Dioscorides saith, that the gum doth heat and bind, which
qualities notwithstanding are not perceived in it.

T. It helpeth them that spit blood, not by a binding faculty, but
through the clamminess of his substance, and that is by closing up
of the passages and pores, and so may it also cure old coughs, and
mitigate extreme pains that proceed of the stone, and especially
take away the sharpness of urine, if it be drunk with bastard, or
with any other sweet potion, as with the decoction of Liquorice, or
of raisins of the sun. The same doth likewise kill tetters in the
outward parts of the body (as Dioscorides addeth) if it be dissolved
in vinegar.


CHAP. 94. Of the Peach Tree.

The Kinds.

There are divers sorts of Peaches besides the four here set forth by
our author, but the trees do not much differ in shape, but the
difference chiefly consists in the fruit, whereof I will give you
the names of the choice ones and such as are to be had from my
friend Mr. Millen in Old Street, which are these; two sorts of
nutmeg Peaches; The Queen's Peach; The Newington Peach; The grand
Carnation Peach; The Carnation Peach; The Black Peach; the
Melocotone; the White; The Romane; The Alberza; The Island Peach;
Peach du Troy. These are all good ones. He hath also of that kind of
Peach which same call Nucipersica or Nectarines, these following
kinds; the Roman red, the best of fruits; the bastard Red; the
little dainty green; the yellow; the white; the russet, which is not
so good as the rest. Those that would see any fuller discourse of
these may have recourse to the late work of Mr. John Parkinson,
where they may find more varieties, and more largely handled, and
therefore not necessary for me in this place to insist upon them.

Fig. 2032. The Peach Tree (1)

The Description.

1. The Peach tree is a tree of no great bigness: it sendeth forth
divers boughs, which be so brittle, as oftentimes they are broken
with the weight of the fruit or with the wind. The leaves be long,
nicked in the edges, like almost to those of the Walnut tree, and in
taste bitter: the flowers be of a light purple colour. The fruit or
peaches be round, and have as it were a chink or cleft on the one
side; they are covered with a soft and thin down or hairy cotton,
being white without, and of a pleasant taste; in the middle whereof
is a rough or rugged stone, wherein is contained a kernel like unto
the Almond; the meat about the stone is of a white colour. The root
is tough and yellowish.

2. The Red Peach tree is likewise a tree of no great bigness: it
also sendeth forth divers boughs or branches, which be very brittle.
The leaves be long, and nicked in the edges like to the precedent.
The flowers be also like unto the former; the fruit or peaches be
round, of a red colour on the outside; the meat likewise about the
stone is of a gallant red colour. These kinds of peaches are very
like to wine in taste, and therefore marvellous pleasant.

3. Persica præcocia, or the Avant-Peach tree is like unto the
former, but his leaves are greater and larger. The fruit or peaches
be of a russet colour on the one side, and on the other side next
unto the sun of a red colour, but much greater than the Red Peach:
the stones whereof are like unto the former: the pulp or meat within
is of a golden yellow colour, and of a pleasant taste.

4. Persica lutea, or the Yellow Peach tree, is like unto the former
in leaves and flowers: his fruit is of a yellow colour on the
outside, and likewise on the inside, harder than the rest: in the
middle of the peach is a woody, hard, and rough stone, full of
crests and gutters, in which doth lie a kernel much like to that of
the Almond, and with such a like skin: the substance within is
white, and in taste something bitter. The fruit hereof is of
greatest pleasure, and best taste of all the other of his kind;
although there be found at this day divers other sorts that are of
very good taste, not remembered of the ancients, or set down by the
later writers, whereof to speak particularly, would not be greatly
to our pretended purpose, considering we hasten to an end.

5. There is also kept in some of our choice gardens a kind of Peach
which hath a very double and beautiful flower, but it is seldom
succeeded by any fruit; they call this, Persica flore pleno, The
Double-Blossomed Peach.

The Place.

They are set and planted in gardens and vineyards: I have them all
in my garden, with many other sorts.

The Time.

The Peach tree soon cometh up: it bears fruit the third or fourth
year after it is planted, and it soon decayeth, and is not of long
continuance; it flowereth in April, or a little while after that the
leaves appear, and hath his fruit ripe in September.
The Names.

The Peach tree is called in Latin, Malus persica, and Persica: in
High Dutch, Persichboum: In Low Dutch, Perse boom: in French,
Perscher: in English, Peach tree.

The fruit, is named in Latin, Malum persicum, and Persicum: in High
Dutch, Pfersing: in Low Dutch, Persen: in Italy, Pesche: in Spanish,
Pexegos: in French, Pisches: in English, Peach.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Peaches be cold and moist, and that in the second degree, they
have a juice and also a substance, that doth easily putrefy, which
yieldeth no nourishment, but bringeth hurt, especially if they be
eaten after other meats; for then they cause the other meats to
putrefy. But they are less hurtful if they be taken first; for by
reason that they are moist and slippery, they easily and quickly
descend; and by making the belly slippery, they cause other meats to
slip down the sooner.

B. The kernels of the peaches be hot and dry, they open and cleanse;
they are good for the stopB pings of the liver and spleen.

C. Peaches before they be ripe do stop the lask, but being ripe they
loose the belly, and engender naughty humour, for they are soon
corrupted in the stomach.

D. The leaves of the Peach tree do open the stopping of the liver,
and do gently loosen the belly: and being applied plasterwise unto
the navel of young children, they kill the worms, and drive them
forth.

E. The same leaves boiled in milk, do kill the worms in children
very speedily.

F. The same being dried, and cast upon green wounds, cure them.

G. The flowers of the Peach tree infused in warm water for the space
of ten or twelve hours, and strained, and more flowers put to the
said liquor to infuse after the same manner, and so iterated six or
eight times, and strained again, then as much sugar as it will
require added to the same liquor and boiled unto the consistence or
thickness of a syrup, and two spoonfuls hereof taken, doth so
singularly well purge the belly, that there is neither Rhubarb,
Agaric, nor any other purger comparable unto it; for this purgeth
down waterish humours mightily, and yet without grief or trouble,
either to the stomach, or lower parts of the body.

H. The kernel within the peach stone stamped small, and boiled with
vinegar until it be brought to the form of an ointment, is good to
restore and bring again the hair of such as be troubled with the
alopecia.

I. There is drawn forth of the kernels of peaches with Pennyroyal
water, a juice like unto milk; which is good for those that have the
apoplexy: if the same be oftentimes held in the mouth it draweth
forth water and recovereth the speech.

K. The gum is of a mean temperature, but the substance thereof is
tough and clammy, by reason whereof it dulleth the sharpness of thin
humours: it serveth in a lohoch or licking medicine for those that
be troubled with the cough, and have rotten lungs, and stoppeth the
spitting and raising up of blood, and also stayeth other fluxes.

CHAP. 95. Of the Apricot Tree.


Fig. 2033. Greater Apricot Tree (1)
Fig. 2034. Lesser Apricot Tree (2)

The Description.

1. This tree is greater than the Peach tree, and hath a bigger body,
it lasteth longer, especially if it be grafted or inoculated: the
leaves hereof are broad, and sharp pointed, like those of black
Poplar, but lesser, and coming more near to the leaves of birch,
nicked in the edges: the flowers are somewhat white: the fruit round
like a peach, yellow within and without, in which doth lie a brown
stone, nothing rough at all as is that of the Peach, shorter also,
and lesser, in which is included a sweet kernel.

2. We have another sort of Apricot, whose trunk or body is equal
with the other in greatness, it is like also in leaves and brittle
branches: his time of flowering, flourishing, and manner of growing
accordeth: the only point wherein they differ is, that this tree
bringeth forth less fruit, and not so good in taste; in every other
respect it is like.

Of this also Mr Parkinson hath set forth divers varieties; and my
forementioned friend Mr Millen hath these five sorts; the common,
the long and great, the Musk, the Barbary and the early Apricot.
The Place.

These trees do grow in my garden, and nowadays in many other
gentlemen's gardens throughout all England.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in April, and their fruit is ripe in July.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek, Melea Armeniake: in Latin, Malus
Armeniaca: in English, Apricot, Aprecock tree.

The fruit is named, Melon Armeniakon, and of divers Prekokkia or
Berikokkia, which be words corrupted from the Latin; for Præcox in
Latin is divers times called Præcoquum: it is named Malum
Armeniacum, and commonly Armeniacum: it is called in High Dutch,
Molletteu Mollelin, S. Johans Pfersing: in Low Dutch, Vroege Person,
Avnt Persen: in Italian, Armeniache, Bacoche, Grifomele, Moniache:
in French, Abricoz: in Spanish, Alvarcoques, Alvarchigas, and
Albercocs: in English, Apricot, Abrecock, and of some, Aprecox.

Galen seemeth to make a difference between Precocia and Armeniaca,
in his book Of the Faculties of Nourishments, preferring Præcocia
before Armeniaca; yet he doth confess that both of them be called
Armeniaca: others pronounce them Armenia with four syllables. And in
his book Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines he affirmeth, that
both the fruit and the tree are called prekokkion: divers of the
later physicians do between these also make a difference, saying,
that the greater ones and those that are grafted be Armeniaca (which
the French men call Avant Perses) and the lesser Præcocia: in
French, Abricoz.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Aprecocks are cold and moist in the second degree, but yet not so
moist as peaches, for which cause they do not so soon or easily
putrefy; and they are also more wholesome for the stomach, and
pleasant to the taste; yet do they likewise putrefy, and yield but
little nourishment, and the same cold, moist, and full of
excrements: being taken after meat they corrupt and putrefy in the
stomach; being first eaten before other meat they easily descend,
and cause the other meats to pass down the sooner, like as also the
peaches do.

B. The kernel within the same is sweet, and nothing at all like in
faculty to that of the Peach.

C. The virtues of the leaves of this tree are not as yet found out.

CHAP. 96. Of the Pomegranate Tree.

The Kinds.

As there be sundry sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, and such like 
fruits; so there are two sorts of Pomegranates, the garden and the
wild, and a third sort which is barren and fruitless: the fruit of
the garden Pomegranate is of three sorts; one having a sour juice or
liquor; another having a very sweet and pleasant liquor, and the
third the taste of wine: of the wild also there be two sorts, and
the difference between them is no more than betwixt crabs and
wildings, which are both wild kinds of Apples: therefore the
description of the garden Pomegranate shall suffice for the rest.

Fig. 2035. Pomegranate (1)

The Description.

1. The manured Pomegranate tree groweth up to the height of a hedge
tree, being seven or eight cubits high, having many pliant and
twiggy branches, very limber, tough, and of a brown colour: whereon
are set very many leaves in shape like those of the Privet, but more
like those of the Myrtle tree, of a bright shining green colour
tending to yellowness: amongst which there stand certain sharp
thorns confusedly set, and likewise hollow flowers like unto the
hedge Rose, indented on the edges like a star, of a carnation
colour, and very single: after which cometh the fruit, covered with
a hard bark, of an overworn purplish colour, full of grains and
kernels, which after they be ripe are of a gallant crimson colour,
and full of juice, which differereth in taste according to the soil,
climate, and country where they grow; some be sweet, others sour,
and the third are in a middle between them both, having the taste of
wine.


Fog. 2036. Wild Pomegranate (2)
Fig. 2037. Double Flowers of Wild Pomegranate.

2. The wild Pomegranate tree is like the other in leaves and twiggy
branches, but it is more prickly and horrid: of this there are two
sorts, the one having such flowers & fruit as the tame Pomegranate;
the other bearing flowers very double, as may appear by the figure,
which wither and fall away, leaving no fruit behind them, as the
double flowered Cherry doth, and divers other herbs and trees also;
& it is altogether barren of fruit: of this Dioscorides makes sundry
sorts, differing in colour: one is white, saith he; another
yellowish red, and a third sort of the colour of the Rose: this with
red flowers is best known among the apothecaries.

The Place.

Pomegranates grow in hot countries toward the South, in Italy,
Spain, and chiefly in the kingdom of Granada, which is thought to be
so named of the great multitude of Pomegranates, which be commonly
called Granata: they grow in a number of places also without
manuring: yet being manured they prosper better; for in gardens,
vineyards, orchards, and other like husbanded grounds they come up
more cheerfully: I have recovered divers young trees hereof, by
sowing of the seed or grains, of the height of three or four cubits,
attending God's leisure for flowers and fruit.

The Time.

The Pomegranate flowereth in the months of May and June: the fruit
is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.

The Pomegranate tree is called in Latin, Malus punica: in Greek, of
the Athenians, Roa, and Roia, as Galen saith: in English,
Pomegranate tree: the fruit is also named Roa, or Roia, in Latin,
Malum Punicum; in shops, Malum, or Pomum Granatum; in High Dutch,
Granatopffel: in Low Dutch Gratappel: in Italian, Melagrano, and
Pomo Granato: in Spanish, Granadas, and Romanas: in French, Pommes
Granades: in English, Pomegranate.

The flower of the fruitful Pomegranate tree is called of the
Grecians, Kytinos: which is notwithstanding properly the cup of the
flower: the Latins name it also Cytinus.

The flower of the wild and barren Pomegranate tree is called
Balaystion: the apothecaries do likewise term it Balaustium.

The peel or rind of the Pomegranate which is so much in use, is
named in Greek Sidion: in Latin; Malicorium, and Sidium: in shops it
is called Cortex granatorum, or Pomegranate Peel.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The juicy grains of the Pomegranate are good to be eaten, having
in them a meetly good juice: they are wholesome for the stomach, but
they all contain in them a thin and small nourishment, or none at
all.

B. The sweet ones be not so cold as the rest, but they easily cause
hot swellings to arise, and they are not so much commended for
agues..

C. The sour ones, and especially if they be withal something harsh,
do evidently cool, dry, and something bind.

D. They are good for the heartburn, they repress and stay the
overmuch vomiting of choler, called the felony: they are a remedy
against the bloody flux, aptness to vomit, and vomit itself.

E. There is made of the juice of these sour Pomegranates a syrup,
which serveth for the same purposes, and is also many times very
profitable against the longing of women with child, unless the
coldness of the stomach be a hindrance thereunto.

F. The seeds of the grains, and especially of the sour Pomegranate,
being dried, do likewise cool and bind.

G. They stop the flux, stay vomiting, and stanch the spitting up of
blood, they strengthen the stomach.

H. Of the same effect be the flowers, both of the tame and wild
Pomegranate tree, being like to the seeds in temperature and
virtues.

I. They fasten the teeth, and strengthen the gums, if the same be
washed therewith.

K. They are good against burstings that come by falling down of the
guts, if they be used in plasters and applied.

L. The rind or peel is not only like in faculty to the seeds, and
both the sorts of flowers, but also more available; for it cooleth
and bindeth more forceably; it bringeth down the hot swellings of
the almonds in the throat, being used in a gargarism or a lotion for
the throat, and it is a singular remedy for all things that need
cooling and binding.

M. Dioscorides writeth, that there is also gathered a juice out of
both those sorts of flowers, which is very like in faculty and
virtue to Hypocistis, as the same author affirmeth.

N. The blossoms of the tame and wild Pomegranates, as also the rind
or shell thereof made into powder, and drunk in red wine, or boiled
in red wine, and the decoction drunk, is good against the bloody
flux, and all other issues of blood; yea it is good for women to sit
over, & bathe themselves in the decoction hereof: these foresaid
blossoms and shells are good also to put into restraining powders,
for the stanching of blood in wounds.

O. The seeds or stones of pomegranates dried in the sun, and beaten
to powder, are of like operation with the flowers: they stop the
lask and all issues of blood in man or woman, being taken in the
manner aforesaid.

CHAP. 97. Of the Quince Tree.

The Kinds

Columella maketh three kinds of Quinces, Struthia, Chrysomeliana,
and Mustela, but what manner ones they be he doth not declare,
notwithstanding we find divers sorts differing as well in form, as
taste and substance of the fruit, whereof some have much core and
many kernels, and others fewer.

Fig. 2038. Quince

The Description.

The Quince tree is not great, but groweth low, and many times in
manner of a shrub: it is covered with a rugged bark, which hath on
it now and then certain scales: it spreadeth his boughs in compass
like other trees; about which stand leaves somewhat round, like
those of the common Apple tree, green and smooth above, and
underneath soft and white: the flowers be of a white purple colour:
the fruit is like an apple, save that many times it hath certain
embowed and dwelling divisions: it differeth in fashion and bigness; 
for some quinces are lesser and round thrust up together at the top
with wrinkles, others longer and greater: the third sort be after a
middle manner between both; they are all of them set with a thin
cotton or frieze, and be of the colour of gold, and hurtful to the
head by reason of their strong smell; they all likewise have a kind
of choking taste: the pulp within is yellow, and the seed blackish,
lying in hard skins, as do the kernels of other apples.

The Place.

The Quince tree groweth in gardens and orchards, and is planted
oftentimes in hedges and fences belonging to gardens & vineyards: it
delighteth to grow on plain and even grounds, and somewhat moist
withal.

The Time.

These apples be ripe in the fall of the leaf, and chiefly in
October.

The Names.

The tree is called in Latin, Malus cotonea: in English, Quince tree.

The fruit is named Malum cotoneum, Pomum cydonium, and many times
Cydonium, without any addition; by which name it is made known to
the apothecaries: it is called in High Dutch, Quitten,
Quittenopfell, or Kuttenopffel: in Low Dutch, Queappel: in Italian,
Mele cotogne: in Spanish, Codoyons, Miembrilhos, and Marmellos: in
French, Pomme de coing, in English, Quince.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Quinces be cold and dry in the second degree, and also very much
binding, especially when they be raw: they have likewise in them a
certain superfluous and excremental moisture, which will not suffer
them to lie long without rotting: they are seldom eaten raw: being
roasted or baked they be more pleasant.

B. They strengthen the stomach, stay vomiting, stop lasks, and also
the bloody flux.

C. They are good for those that spit up blood, or that vomit blood;
and for women also that have too great plenty of their monthly
courses.

D. Simeon Sethi writeth, that the woman with child, which eateth
many quinces during the time of her breeding, shall bring forth wise
children, and of good understanding.

E. The marmalade, or cotiniate, made of quinces and sugar, is good
and profitable for the strengthening of the stomach, that it may
retain and keep the meat therein until it be perfectly digested: it
likewise stayeth all kinds of fluxes, both of the belly and other
parts, and also of blood: which cotiniate is made in this manner:

F. Take fair quinces, pare them, cut them in pieces, and cast away
the core, then put unto every pound of quinces a pound of sugar, and
to every pound of sugar a pint of water: these must be boiled
together over a still fire till they be very soft, then let it be
strained or rather rubbed through a strainer, or an hairy sieve,
which is better, and then set it over the fire to boil again, until
it be stiff, and so box it up, and as it cooleth put thereto a
little Rose water, and a few grains of Musk, well mingled together,
which will give a goodly taste unto the cotiniate. This is the way
to make marmalade:

G. Take whole quinces and boil them in water until they be as soft 
as a scalded codling or apple, then peel off the skin, and cut off
the flesh, and stamp it in a stone mortar; then strain it as you did
the cotiniate; afterward put it into a pan to dry, but not to seethe
at all: and unto every pound of the flesh of quinces, put three
quarters of a pound of sugar, and in the cooling you may put in rose
water and a little Musk, as was said before.

H. There is boiled with quinces oil which therefore is called in
Greek melinon, or oil of quinces, which we use, saith Dioscorides,
so oft as we have need of a binding thing.

I. The seed of quinces tempered with water, doth make a mucilage, or
a thing like jelly, which being held in the mouth, is marvellous
good to takeaway the roughness of the tongue in hot burning fevers.

K. The same is good to be laid upon burnings or scaldings, and to be
put into clysters against the bloody flux; for it easeth the pain of
the guts, and allayeth the sharpness of biting humours.

L. Many other excellent, dainty and wholesome confections are to be
made of quinces, as jelly of quinces, and such odd conceits, which
for brevity sake I do now let pass.

CHAP. 98. Of the Medlar Tree.

The Kinds.

There are divers sorts of Medlars, some greater, others lesser: some
sweet, and others of a more harsh taste: some with much core, and
many great stony kernels, others fewer: and likewise one of Naples
called Aronia.


Fig. 2039. Garden Medlar (1)
Fig. 2040. The other Garden Medlar (2)

The Description.

The manured Medlar tree is not great, the body whereof is writhed,
the boughs hard, not easy to be broken: the leaves be longer, yet
narrower than those of the apple tree, dark green above, and
somewhat whiter and hairy below: the flowers are white and great,
having five leaves apiece: the fruit is small, round, and hath a
broad compassed navel or crown at the top: the pulp or meat is at
the first white, and so harsh or choking, that it cannot be eaten
before it become soft; in which are contained five seeds or stones,
which be flat and hard.

2. There is another which differeth from the last described, in that
the leaves are longer and narrower, the stock hath no prickles upon
it: the fruit also is larger and better tasted: in other respects it
is like to the last described. This is the Mespilus fructu
prestantiore of Tragus, and Mespilus domestica of Lobel.


Fig. 2041. Neapolitan Medlar (3)
Fig. 2042. Dwarf Medlar (4)

3. The Neapolitan Medlar tree groweth to the height and greatness of
an Apple tree, having many tough and hard boughs or branches, set
with sharp thorns like the Whitethorn, or Hawthorn: the leaves are
very much cut or jagged like the Hawthorn leaves, but greater, and
more like Smallage or Parsley, which leaves before they fall from
the tree do wax red: among these leaves come forth great tufts of
flowers of a pale herby colour: which being past, there succeed
small long fruit, lesser than the smallest Medlar, which at the
first are hard, and green of colour, but when they be ripe, they are
both soft and red, of a sweet and pleasant taste: wherein is
contained three small hard stones, as in the former, which be the
kernels or seeds thereof.

4. There is a dwarf kind of Medlar growing naturally upon the Alps,
and hills of Narbonne, and on the rocks of Mount Baldus nigh Verona,
which hath been by some of the best learned esteemed for a kind of
Medlar: others, whose judgements cannot stand with truth or
probability, have supposed it to be Euonymus, of the Alps: this
dwarf Medlar groweth like a small hedge tree, of four or five cubits
high, bearing many small twiggy wands or crops, beset with many
slender leaves green above, and of a sky colour underneath, in show
like to a dwarf Apple tree, but the fruit is very like the Haw, or
fruit of the Whitethorn, and of a red colour. The flowers come forth
in the spring three or four together, hollow, and of an herby
colour, it grows in divers places of the Alps: it is the
Chamæmespilum of the Adversaria and the Chamæmespilus gesneri, of
Clusius.

The Place.

The Medlar trees do grow in orchards, and oftentimes in hedges among
Briers and Brambles; being grafted in a Whitethorn it prospereth
wonderful well, and bringeth forth fruit twice or thrice bigger than
those that are not grafted at all, almost as great as little apples:
we have divers sorts of them in our orchards.

The Time.

It is very late before Medlars be ripe, which is in the end of
October, but the flowers come forth timely enough.

The Names.

The first is called in Greek by Theophrastus Mespile, in Latin,
Mespilus: in High Dutch, Nespelbaum: in Low Dutch, Mispelboome: in
French, Nefflier: in English, Medlar tree.

The apple or fruit is named in Greek, Mespilon: in Latin, Mespilum:
in High Dutch, Nespel, in Low Dutch, Mispele: in Italian, Nespolo:
in French, Neffle: in Spanish, Nesperas: in English, Medlar.

Dioscorides affirmeth, that this Medlar tree is called Epimelis, and
of divers, Sitanion: Galen also in his book Of the Faculties of
Simple Medicines nameth this Epimelis, which is called, as he saith,
by the country men in Italy, Unedo, and groweth plentifully in
Calabria; for under the name of Mespilus, or Medlar tree, he meaneth
no other than Tricoccus, which is also named Aronia.

The Neapolitans' Medlar tree is called by Galen Epimelis.

The fruit hereof is called Tricoccos, of the three grains or stones
that it hath: they of Naples call it Azarolo: and we may name it in
English, three grain Medlar, or Neapolitan Medlar, or Medlar of
Naples.

The Temperature.

The Medlars are cold, dry, and astringent; the leaves are of the
same nature: the dwarf Medlar is dry, sharp, and astringent.

The Virtues.

A. Medlars do stop the belly, especially when they be green and
hard, for after that they have been kept a while, so that they
become soft and tender, they do not bind or stop so much, but are
then more fit to be eaten.

B. The fruit of the three grain Medlar, is eaten both raw and
boiled, and is more wholesome for the stomach.

C. These Medlars be oftentimes preserved with sugar or honey: and
being so prepared they are pleasant and delightful to the taste.

D. Moreover, they are singular good for women with child: for they
strengthen the stomach, and stay the loathsomeness thereof.

E. The stones or kernels of the medlars, made into powder and drunk,
do break the stone, expel gravel, and procure urine.

CHAP. 99. Of the Pear Tree.


Fig. 2043. The Pear Tree
Fig. 2044. Kinds of Pear(1-7)

The Description.

To write of Pears and Apples in particular, would require a
particular volume: the stock or kindred of Pears are not to be
numbered: every country hath his peculiar fruit: myself knows one
curious in grafting and planting of fruits who hath in one piece of
ground, at the point of three score sundry sorts of Pears, and those
exceeding good, not doubting but if his mind had been to seek after
multitudes, he might have gotten together the like number of those
of worse kinds: besides the diversities of those that be wild,
experience showeth sundry sorts: and therefore I think it not amiss
to set down the figures of some few with their several titles, as
well in Latin as English, and one general description for that, that
might be said of many, which to describe apart, were to send an owl
to Athens, or to number those things that are without number.

The General Description.

The Pear tree is for the most part higher than the Apple tree,
having boughs not spread abroad, but growing up in height: the body
is many times great: the timber or wood itself is very tractable or
easy to be wrought upon, exceeding fit to make moulds or prints to
be graven on, of colour tending to yellowness: the leaf is somewhat
broad, finely nicked in the edges, green above, and somewhat whiter
underneath: the flowers are white: the Pears, that is to say, the
fruit, are for the most part long, and in form like a top; but in
greatness, colour, form, and taste very much differing among
themselves; they be also covered with skins or coats of sundry
colours: the pulp or meat differeth, as well in colour as taste:
there is contained in them kernels, black when they be ripe: the
root groweth straight down with some branches running aslope.

The Place.

The tame Pear trees are planted in orchards, as be the Apple trees,
and by grafting, though upon wild stocks, come much variety of good
and pleasant fruits. All these before specified, and many sorts
more, and those most rare and good, are growing in the ground of
Master Richard Pointer, a most cunning and curious grafter and
planter of all manner of rare fruits, dwelling in a small village
near London called Twickenham; and also in the ground of an
excellent grafter and painful planter, Mr Henry Banbury, of Tothill
Street near Westminster, and likewise in the ground of a diligent
and most affectionate lover of plants Mr Warner near Hornsey down by
London, and in divers other grounds about London. Most of the best
Pears are at this time to be had with Mr John Millen in Old Street,
in whose nursery are to be found the choicest fruits this kingdom
yields.

The Time.

The flowers do for the most part come forth in April, the leaves
afterward: all pears are not ripe at one time: some be ripe in July,
others in August, and divers in September and later.

The Names.

The tame or orchard Pear tree is called in Latin, Pyrus urbana, or
cultiva: in High Dutch, Bijrbaum, in Low Dutch, Peerboom: in French,
Porrier.

The pear or fruit itself is called in Latin, Pyrum: in High Dutch,
Birn: in Low Dutch, Peere: in Italian, Pere: in French, Poyre: in
Spanish, Peras: in English, Pear.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Leaving the divers and sundry surnames of pears, let us come to
the faculties which the physicians ought to know; which also vary
according to the differences of their uses: for some pears are
sweet, divers fat and unctuous, others sour, and most are harsh,
especially the wild pears, and some consist of divers mixtures of
tastes, and some having no taste at all, but as it were a waterish
taste.

B. All pears are cold, and all have a binding quality and an earthy 
substance: but the choke pears and those that are harsh be more
earthy, and the sweet ones less: which substance is so full of
superfluous moisture in some, as that they cannot be eaten raw. All
manner of pears do bind and stop the belly, especially the choke and
harsh ones, which are good to be eaten of those that have the lask
and the bloody flux.

C. The harsh and austere pears may with good success be laid upon
hot swellings in the beginning, as may be the leaves of the tree,
which do both bind and cool.

D. Wine made of the juice of pears called in English, perry, is
soluble, purgeth those that are not accustomed to drink thereof,
especially when it is new; notwithstanding it is as wholesome a
drink being taken in small quantity as wine; it comforteth and
warmeth the stomach, and causeth good digestion.

CHAP. 100. Of the Wild Pear Tree.

The Kinds.

As there be sundry kinds of the manured Pears, so are there sundry
wild; whereof to write apart were to small purpose: therefore one
description with their several titles shall be sufficient for their
distinctions.


Fig. 2045. The Wild or Choke Pear (1)
Fig. 2046. Kinds of Wild Pear (2-6)

The General Description

The Wild Pear tree grows likewise great, upright, full of branches,
for the most part pyramid-like, or of the fashion of a steeple, not
spread abroad as is the Apple or Crab tree: the timber of the trunk
or body of the tree is very firm and solid, and likewise smooth, a
wood very fit to make divers sorts of instruments of, as also the
hafts of sundry tools to work withal; and likewise serveth to be cut
into many kinds of moulds, not only such prints as these figures are
made of, but also many sorts of pretty toys, for coifs, breast-
plates, and such like, used among our English gentlewomen: the
branches are smooth, covered with a blackish bark, very fragile or
easy to break, whereon do grow leaves, in some greater, in other
lesser; the flowers are like those of the manured Pear tree, yet
some whiter than others: the fruit differ not in shape, yet some
greater than others; but in taste they differ among themselves in
divers points, some are sharp, sour, and of an austere taste; some
more pleasant, others harsh and bitter, and some of such a choking
taste, that they are not to be eaten of hogs & wild beasts, much
less of men: they also differ in colour, every circumstance whereof
to distinguish apart would greatly enlarge our volume, and bring to
the reader small profit or commodity.

2. The Small Choke Pear; Pyrus strangulatorum minus.

3. The Wild Hedge Pear; Pyrus sylvestris.

4. The Wild Crab Pear Tree; Pyrus sylvestris minima.

5. The Lousy Wild Pear; Pyrus pedicularia.

6. The Crow Pear Tree; Pyrus corvina.

The Place.

The wild Pears grow of themselves without manuring in most places,
as woods, or in the borders of fields, and near to highways.

The Time.

The time of wild Pears answereth the tame or manured Pear,
notwithstanding for the most part they are not ripe much before
winter.

The Names.

The wild Pear tree is called in Latin, Pyrus sylvestris and
Pyraster; by which name both the fruit and tree are known. Pears
have divers surnames among the ancient writers, and especially in
Pliny, in his 15th book, 15th chapter, none of which are known to
the later writers (or not desired:) every city or every country have
names of themselves, and Pears have also divers names according to
to the places.

The Temperature

All pears are of a cold temperature, and the moist part of them of a
binding quality and an earthy substance.

The Virtues.

The virtues of the wild pears are referred unto the garden pears as
touching their binding faculty, but are not to be eaten, because
their nourishment is little and bad.

CHAP. 101. Of the Apple Tree.

The Kinds.

The Latin name Malus reacheth far among the old writers, and is
common to many trees, but we will briefly first entreat of Mali,
properly called Apple trees, whose stock or kindred is so infinite,
that we have thought it not amiss, to use the same order or method
with Apples that we have done with Pears. that is, to give them
several titles in Latin and English, and one general description for
the whole.


Fig. 2047. Pome Water Apple Tree (1)
Fig. 2048. Bakers' Ditch Apple Tree (2)

The Description.

1, 2. The Apple tree hath a body or trunk commonly of a mean
bigness, not very high, having long arms or branches, and the same
disordered: the bark somewhat plain, and not very rugged: the leaves
tbe also broad, more long than round, and finely nicked in the
edges. The flowers are whitish tending unto a blush colour. The
fruit or Apples do differ in greatness, form, colour, and taste;
same covered with a red skin, others yellow or green, varying
infinitely according to the soil and climate, some very great, some
little, and many of a middle sort; some are sweet of taste, or
something sour; most be of a middle taste between sweet and sour,
the which to distinguish I think it impossible; notwithstanding I
hear of one that intendeth to write a peculiar volume of Apples, and
the use of them; yet when he hath done what he can do, he hath done
nothing touching their several kinds to distinguish them. This that
hath been said shall suffice for our History.

Our author gave four figures more out of Tabernamontanus, with these
titles.

3. Malum reginale: the Queening or Queen of Apples.

5. Platomela sive pyra æstiua: The Summer Pearmain.

6 .Platurchapia sive pyra hyemalia: The Winter Pearmain.

The Place.

The tame and grafted Apple trees are planted and set in gardens and
orchards made for that purpose: they delight to grow in good and
fertile grounds: Kent doth abound with Apples of most sorts. But I
have seen in the pastures and hedgerows about the grounds of a
worshipful gentleman dwelling two miles from Hereford called Master
Roger Bodnome, so many trees of all sorts, that the servants drink
for the most part no other drink but that which is made of apples;
The quantity is such, that by the report of the gentleman himself,
the parson hath for tithe many hogsheads of cider. The hogs are fed
with the fallings of them, which are so many, that they make choice
of those apples they do eat, who will not taste of any but of the
best. An example doubtless to be followed of gentlemen that have
land and living: but envy saith, the poor will break down our hedges
and we shall have the least part of the fruit. But forward in the
name of God, graft, set, plant and nourish up trees in every corner
of your grounds, the labour is small, the cost is nothing, the
commodity is great, yourselves shall have plenty, the poor shall
have somewhat in time of want to relieve their necessity, and God
shall reward your good minds and diligence.

The Time.

They bloom about the end of April, or in the beginning of May. The
forward apples be ripe about the Calends of July, others in
September.

The Names.

The Apple tree is called in Latin, Malus and Pomus: in High Dutch,
Opffelbaum: in Low Dutcha, Appelboom: in French, Pommier: in
English, Apple tree.

The Latins name the fruit, Malum or Pomum: in High Dutch, Opfell: in
Low Dutch, Appel: in French and Spanish, Mansanas, in English,
Apple.

The Temperature.

All apples be of temperature cold and moist, and have joined with
them a certain excremental or superfluous moisture: but as they be
not all of like coldness, so neither have they like quantity of
superfluous moisture. They are soonest rotten that have greatest
store of moisture, and they may be longer kept in which there is
less store: for the abundance of excremental moisture is the cause
why they rot.

Sweet apples are not so cold and moist, which being roasted or
boiled, or otherwise kept, retain or keep the soundness of their
pulp.

They yield more nourishment and not so moist a nourishment as do the
other apples, and do not so easily pass through the belly.

Sour apples are colder and also moister: the substance or pulp of
these when they be boiled doth run abroad, and retaineth not his
soundness: they yield a lesser nourishment, and the same raw and
cold.

They do easily and speedily pass through the belly, and therefore
they do mollify the belly, especially being taken before meat.

Harsh or austere apples being unripe, are cold; they engender gross
blood, and great store of wind, and often bring the colic.

Those apples which be of a middle taste contain in them oftentimes
two or three sorts of tastes, and yet do they retain the faculties
of the other.

The Virtues.

A. Roasted apples are always better than the raw, the harm whereof
is both mended by the fire, and may also be corrected by adding unto
them seeds or spices.

B. Apples be good for an hot stomach: those that are austere or
somewhat harsh do strengthen a weak and feeble stomach proceeding of
heat.

C. Apples are also good for all inflammations or hot swellings, but
especially for such as are in their beginning, if the same be
outwardly applied.

D. The juice of apples which be sweet and of a middle taste, is
mixed in compositions of divers medicines, and also for the
tempering of melancholy humours, and likewise to mend the qualities
of medicines that are dry: as are Serapium ex pomis Regis Saporis,
Confectio Alkermes, and such like compositions

E. There is likewise made an ointment with the pulp of apples and
swines' grease and Rose-water, which is used to beautify the face,
and to take away the roughness of the skin, which is called in shops
Pomatum: of the apples whereof it is made.

F. The pulp of the roasted apples, in number four or five, according
to the greatness of the apples, especially of the Pome Water, mixed
in a wine quart of fair water, laboured together until it come to be
as apples and ale, which we call lambs' wool, and the whole quart
drunk last at night within the space of an hour, doth in one night
cure those that piss by drops with great anguish and dolour; the
strangury, and all other diseases proceeding of the difficulty of
making water; but in twice taking it, it never faileth in any:
oftentimes there happeneth with the foresaid diseases the gonorrhæa,
or running of the reins, which it likewise healeth in those persons,
but not generally in all; which myself have often proved, and gained
thereby both crowns and credit.

G. The leaves of the tree do cool and bind, and be also counted good
for inflammations, in the beginning.

H. Apples cut in pieces, and distilled with a quantity of camphor
and buttermilk, take away the marks and scars gotten by the
smallpox, being washed therewith when they grow unto their state and
ripeness: provided that you give unto the patient a little milk and
saffron, or milk and mithridate to drink, to expel to the extreme
parts that venom which may lie hid, and as yet not seen.

CHAP. 102. Of the Wilding or Crab Tree.

The Kinds.

Like as there be divers manured Apples, so are there sundry wild
Apples, or Crabs, whereof to write apart were to small purpose, and
therefore one description shall suffice for the rest.

Fig. 2049. Crab Apple (1)

The General Description

There be divers wild Apple trees not husbanded, that is to say, not
grafted; the fruit whereof is harsh and binding: for by grafting
both Apples and Pears become more mild and pleasant. The Crab or
Wilding Tree grows oftentimes to a reasonable greatness, equal with
the Apple tree: the wood is hard, firm, and solid; the bark rough;
the branches or boughs many; the flowers and fruit like those of the
Apple tree, some red, others white: some greater, others lesser: the
difference is known to all, therefore it shall suffice what hath
been said for their several distinctions: we have in our London
gardens a dwarf kind of sweet Apple, called Chamæmalus, the Dwarf
Apple Tree, or Paradise Apple, which beareth apples very timely
without grafting.

1. Malus sylvestris rubens: The great wilding or red Crab tree.

2. Malus sylvestris alba: The white wilding or Crab tree.

3. Malus sylvestris minor: The smaller Crab tree.

4. Malus duracina sylvestris: The choking lean Crab tree.

The Place.

The Crab tree groweth wild in woods and hedgerows almost everywhere.

The Time.

The time answereth those of the garden.

The Names.

Their titles doth set forth their names in Latin and English.

The Temperature.

Of the temperature of wild apples hath been sufficiently spoken in
the former Chapter.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of wild Apples or crabs taketh away the heat of
burnings, scaldings, and all inflammations: and being laid on in
short time after it is scalded, it keepeth it from blistering.

B. The juice of crabs or verjuice is astringent or binding, and hath
withal an abstersive or cleansing quality, being mixed with hard
yeast of ale or beer, and applied in manner of a cold ointment, that
is, spread upon a cloth first wet in the verjuice and wrung out, and
then laid to, taketh away the heat of Saint Anthony's fire, all
inflammations whatsoever, healeth scabbed legs, burnings and
scaldings wheresoever it be.

CHAP. 103. Of the Citron, Lemon, Orange, and Assyrian Apple trees.

The Kinds.

The Citron tree is of kindred with the Lemon tree, the Orange is of
the same house or stock, and the Assyrian Apple tree claimeth a
place as nearest in kindred and neighbourhood: wherefore I intend to
comprehend them all in this one chapter.


Fig. 2050. The Citron Tree (1)
Fig. 2051. The Lemon Tree (2)

The Description.

1. The Citron tree is not very great, having many boughs or
branches, tough and pliable, covered with a green bark: whereon do
grow green leaves, long, somewhat broad, very smooth, and sweet of
smell like those of the Bay tree: among which come forth here and
there certain prickles, set far in sunder: from the bosom whereof
come forth small flowers, consisting of five little leaves, of a
white colour tending to purple, with certain threads like hairs
growing in the middle: the fruit is long, greater many times than
the Cucumber, often lesser, and not much greater than the Lemon: the
bark or rind is of a light golden colour, set with divers knobs or
bumps, and of a very pleasant smell: the pulp or substance next unto
it is thick, white, hard, having a kind of aromatical or spicy
smell, almost without any taste at all: the softer pulp within that
is not so firm or solid, but more spongy, and full of a sour juice,
in which the seed lieth hid, greater and thicker than a grain of
Barley.

2. The Lemon tree is like unto the Pome Citron tree in growth,
thorny branches, and leaves of a pleasant sweet smell, like those of
the Bay tree: the flowers hereof are whiter than those of the Citron
tree, and of a most sweet smell: the fruit is long and thick, lesser
than the Pome Citron: the rind is yellow, somewhat bitter in taste,
and sweet of smell: the pulp is white, more in quantity than that of
the Citron, respecting the bigness; in the middle part whereof is
contained more soft spongy pulp; and fuller of sour juice: the seeds
are like those of the Pome Citron.


Fig. 2052. The Orange Tree (3)
Fig. 2053. The Assyrian Apple Tree (4)

3. The Orange tree groweth up to the height of a small Pear tree,
having many thorny boughs or branches, like those of the Citron
tree: the leaves are also like those of the Bay tree, but that they
differ in this, that at the lower end next the stalk there is a
lesser leaf made almost after the vulgar figure of an heart, whereon
the bigger leaf doth stand, or is fastened: & they are of a sweet
smell: the flowers are white, of a most pleasant sweet smell also:
the fruit is round like a ball, every circumstance belonging to the
form is very well known to all; the taste is sour, sometimes sweet,
and often of a taste between both: the seeds are like those of the
Lemon.

4. The Assyrian Apple tree is like unto the Orange tree: the
branches are like: the leaves are greater: the flowers are like
those of the Citron tree: the fruit is round, three times as big as
the orange: the bark or peeling is thick, rough, and of a pale
yellow colout, wherein appear often as it were small clefts or
cracks: the pulp or inner substance is full ojuice, in taste sharp,
as that of the Lemon, but not so pleasant: the seeds are like those
of the Citron.

The Place.

The Citron, Lemon, and Orange trees do grow especially on the sea
coasts of Italy, and on the islands of the Adriatic, Tyrrhenian, and
also Ægæan Seas, & likewise on the mainland, near unto meres and
great lakes: there is also great store of them in Spain, but in
places especially joining to the sea, or not far off: they are also 
found in certain provinces of France which lie upon the Midland Sea.
They were first brought out of Media, as not only Pliny writeth, but
also the poet Virgil affirmeth in the second book of his Georgics,
writing of the Citron tree after this manner:

Media fert tristis sucos, tardumque saporem
Felicis mali, quo non præsentius ullum,
Pocula si quando sævæ infecere novercæ,
Miscueruntque herbas & non innoxia verba,
Auxilium venit ac membris agit atra venena.
Ipsa ingens arbos faciemque simillima lauro;
Et, si non alium late iactaret odorem,
Laurus erit; folia haud ullis labentia ventis;
Flos ad prima tenax; animas & olentia Medi
Ora fovent illo, & senibus medicantur anhelis.
[Virgil, Georgics, Book II l.126-135.]

The Country Media beareth juices sad,
And dulling talks of happy citron fruit,
Than which, no help more present can be had,
If any time stepmothers worse than brute
Have poison'd pots, and mingled herbs of suit
With hurtful charms: this Citron fruit doth chase
Black venom from the body in every place.
The tree itself in growth is large and big,
And very like in show to the Laurel tree;
And would be thought a Laurel, leaf and twig,
But that the smell it casts doth disagree:
The flower it holds as fast as flower may be:
Therewith the Medes a remedy do find
For stinking breaths and mouths a cure most kind,
And help old men which hardly fetch their wind.

The Time.

These trees be always green, and do, as Pliny saith, bear fruit at
all times of the year, some falling off, others waxing ripe, and
others newly coming forth.

The Names.

The first is called in Latin, Malus medica, and Malus citria: in
English, Citron tree, and Pomecitron tree.

The fruit is named in Latin, Malum medicum, and Malum citrium: and
Citromalum. Æmilianus in Athenæus showeth, that Iuba, King of
Mauretania, hath made mention of the Citron, who saith that this
Apple is named among them, Malum hespericum: Galen denieth it to be
called any longer Malum medicum, but citrium; and saith, that they
who call it medicum do it to the end that no man should understand
what they say: the apothecaries call these apples Citrones: in High
Dutch, Citrinopfell, Citrinaten: in Low Dutch, Citroenen: in
Italian, Citroni, and Cedri: in Spanish, Cidras: in French, Citrons:
in English, Citron Apple, and Citron.

The second kind of Citron is called in Latin, Limonium malum; in
shops, Limones: in French, Limons: in Low Dutch, Limonen: in
English, Lemon, and Limon.

The third is named in Latin, Malum anerantium or anerantium: and of
some aurantium: of others, aurengium, of the yellow colour of gold:
some would have them called arantia, of Arantium, a town in Achaia
or arania, of a country bearing that name in Persia: it is termed in
Italian Arancio: in High Dutch, Pomeranken: in Low Dutch, Araengie
Appelen: in French, Pommes d'Oranges: in Spanish, Naransas: in
English, Oranges.

The fourth is named of divers, Pomum assyrium, or the Citron of
Assyria, and may be Englished Adam's Apple, after the Italian name;
and among the vulgar sort of Italians, Lomie, of whom it is at so
called Pomum Adami, or Adam's Apple; and that came by the opinion of
the common rude people, who think it to be the same apple which Adam
did eat of in Paradise, when he transgressed God's commandment;
whereupon also the prints of the biting appear therein, as they say:
but others say that this is nor the apple, but that which the
Arabians do call Musa or Mosa, whereof Avicenna, cap. 39, maketh
mention: for divers of the Jews take this for that through which by
eating, Adam offended, as Andrew Thevet showeth.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. All these fruits consist of unlike parts, and much differing in
faculty.

B. The rinds are sweet of smell, bitter, hot, and dry.

C. The white pulp is cold, and containeth in it a gross juice,
especially the citron.

D. The inner substance or pap is sour, as of the citrons and lemons,
cold and dry, with thinness of parts.

E. The seed because it is bitter is hot and dry.

F. The rind of the pomecitron is good against all poisons, for which
cause it is put into treacles and such like confections.

G. It is good to be eaten against a stinking breath, for it maketh
the breath sweet; and being so taken it comforteth the cold stomach
exceedingly.

H. The white, sound, and hard pulp is now and then eaten, but very
hardly concocted, and engendereth a gross, cold, and phlegmatic
juice; but being condite with sugar, it is both pleasant in taste
and easy to be digested, more nourishing, and less apt to
obstruction and binding or stopping.

I. Galen reporteth, that the inner juice of the Pomecitron was not
wont to be eaten, but it is now used for sauce; and being often
used, it represseth choler which is in the stomach, and procures
appetite: it is excellent good also to be given in vehement and
burning fevers, and against all pestilent and venomous or infectious
diseases: it comforteth the heart, cooleth the inward parts,
cutteth, divideth, and maketh thin, gross, tough, and slimy humours.
Of this foresaid sharp juice there is a syrup prepared, which is
called in shops, Syrupus de acetositate citri, very good against the
foresaid infirmities.

L. Such a syrup is also prepared of the sharp juice of lemons, of
the same quality and operation, so that instead of the one, the
other will serve very well.

M. A dozen of oranges cut in slices and put into a gallon of water,
adding thereto an ounce of mercury sublimate, and boiled to the
consumption of the half, cureth the itch and manginess of the body.

N. Men in old time (as Theophrastus writeth in his fourth book) did
not eat citrons, but were contented with the smell, and to lay them
amongst clothes, to preserve them from moths.

O. As often as need required they used them against deadly poisons;
for which thing they were especially commended even by Virgil's
verses, which we have before alleged.

P. Athenæus, lib. 3. hath extant a story of some that for certain
notorious offences were condemned to be destroyed of serpents, who
were preserved and kept in health and safety by the eating of
citrons.

Q. The distilled water of the whole lemons, rind and all, drawn out
by a glass still, takes away tetters and blemishes of the skin, and
maketh the face fair and smooth.

R. The same being drunk provoketh urine, dissolveth the stone,
breaketh and expelleth it.

S. The rind of oranges is much like in faculty to that of the
citrons and lemons, yet it is so much the more hot as it is more
biting and bitter.

T. The inner substance or sour pap which is full of juice is of like
faculty, or not much inferior to the faculty of the pap of citrons
or lemons; but the sweet pap doth not much cool or dry, but doth
temperately heat and moisten, being pleasant to the taste: it also
nourisheth more than doth the sour pap, but the same nourishment is
thin and little; and that which is of a middle taste, having the
smack of wine, is after a middle sort more cold than sweet, and
lesser cold than sour: the sweet and odoriferous flowers of oranges
be used of the perfumers in their sweet smelling ointments.

V. Two ounces of the juice of lemons, mixed with the like quantity
of the spirit of wine, or the best Aqua vitæ (but the spirit of wine
rectified is much better) and drunk at the first approch of the fit
of an ague, taketh away the shaking presently: the medicine seldom
faileth at the second time of the taking thereof perfectly to cure
the same; but never at the third time, provided that the patient be
covered warm in a bed, and caused to sweat.

X. There is also distilled out of them in a glass still, a water of
a marvellous sweet smell, which being inwardly taken in the weight
of an ounce and a half, moveth sweat, and healeth the ague.

Y. The seed of all these doth kill worms in the belly, and driveth
them forth: it doth also mightily resist poison, and is good for the
stinging of scorpions, if it be inwardly taken.

Z. Those which be called Adam's apples are thought to be like in
faculties to the sour juice, especially of the lemons, but yet they
be not so effectual.

CHAP. 104. Of the Cornel Tree.

Fig. 2054. The Cornel Tree

The Description.

The tame Cornel tree groweth sometime of the height and bigness of a
small tree, with a great number of springs: it is covered with a
rugged bark: the wood or timber is very hard and dry, without any
great quantity of sap therein: the leaves are like unto the Dogberry
leaves, crumpled, rugged, and of an overworn colour: the flowers
grow in small bunches before any leaves do appear, of colour yellow,
and of no great value (they are so small) in show like the flowers
of the Olive tree: which being faded, there come small long berries,
which at the first be green, and red when they be ripe; of an
austere and harsh taste, with a certain sourness: within this berry
is a small stone, exceeding hard, white within like that of the
Olive, wherunto it is like both in the fashion and oftentimes in the
bigness of the fruit.

The Place.

This groweth in most places of Germany without manuring: it grows
not wild in England. But yet there be sundry trees of them growing
in the gardens of such as love rare and dainty plants, whereof I
have a tree or two in my garden.

The Time.

The tame Cornel tree flowereth sometime in February, & commonly in
March, and afterwards the leaves come forth as an untimely birth:
the berries or fruit are ripe in Angust.

The Names.

The Latins call it Cornus: in High Dutch, Cornelbaum: in Low Dutch,
Cornoele boom: the Italians, Corniolo: in French, Cornillier: in
Spanish, Cornizolos: in English, the Cornel tree, and the Cornelia
tree; of some, long Cherry tree.

The fruit is named in Latin, Cornum: in High Dutch, Cornel: in Low
Dutch, Cornoele: in Italian, Cornole: in English, Cornel berries and
Cornelian cherries.

This is Cornus mas theophrasti, or Theophrastus his male Cornel
tree; for he setteth down two sorts of the Cornel trees, the male
and the female: he maketh the wood of the male to be sound, as in
this Cornel tree; which we both for this cause and for others also
have made to be the male. The female is that which is commonly
called Virga sanguinea, or Dogberry tree, and Cornus sylvestris, or
the wild Cornel tree, of which we will treat in the next chapter
following.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The fruit of the Cornel tree hath a very harsh or choking taste:
it cooleth, drieth, and bindeth, yet may it also be eaten, as it is
oftentimes.

B. It is a remedy against the lask and bloody flux, it is hurtful to
a cold stomach and increaseth the rawness thereof: the leaves and
tender crops of the tree are likewise of an harsh and choking taste,
and do mightily dry.

C. They heal green wounds that are great and deep, especially in
hard bodies, but they are not so good for small wounds and tender
bodies, as Galen writeth.

CHAP. 105. Of the Female Cornel or Dogberry Tree.

Fig. 2055. The Dogberry Tree

The Description.

That which the Italians call Virga sanguinea, or the Bloody Rod, is
like to the Cornel tree, yet it groweth not into a tree, but
remaineth a shrub: the young branches thereof are jointed, and be of
an obscure red purple: they have within a white spongy pith like
that of Elder, but the old stalks are hard and stiff, the substance
of the which is also white, and answerable to those of the Cornel
tree: the leaves are also like, the middle rib whereof as also the
brittle footstalks are somewhat reddish: at the top whereof stand
white flowers in spoky roundels, which turn into berries, green at
the first, and of a shining black colour when they be ripe, in taste
unpleasant, and not cared for of the birds.

The Place.

This shrub groweth in hedges and bushes in every country of England.

The Time.

The flowers come forth in the spring in the month of April: the
berries are ripe in autumn.

The Names.

The Italians do commonly call it Sanguino, and Sanguinello; Petrus
Crescentius terms it Sanguinus; and Matthiolus, Virga sanguinea:
Pliny, lib. 24. cap. 10, hath written a little of Virga sanguinea:
Neither is Virga sanguinea, saith he, counted more happy; the inner
bark whereof doth break open the scars which they before have
healed. It is an hard thing, or peradventure a rash part, to affirm
by these few words, that Pliny his Virga sanguinea is the same that
the Italian Sanguino is. This is called in High Dutch, Hartriegel:
in Low Dutch, Wilde Cornoelle, that is to say, Cornus sylvestris, or
wild Cornel tree: and in French, Cornellier sauvage: in English,
Hound's tree, Hound's berry, Dogberry tree, Prick-Timber: in the
North country they call it Gaten tree, or Gater tree; the berries
whereof seem to be those which Chaucer calleth Gater berries:
Valerius Cordus nameth it Pseudokrania; that is to say, Falsa or
Spuria Cornus, false or bastard Cornel tree: this seemeth also to be
Theophrastus his Cornus fmina, female Cornel tree. This hath little
branches having pith within, neither be they hard nor sound, like
those of the male: the fruit is not fit to be eaten, and a late
fruit which is not ripe till after the autumn equinoctial; and such
is the wild Cornel tree or Gater tree, the young and tender branches
whereof be red, and have (as we have written) a pith within: the
fruit or berries be unpleasant, and require a long time before they
can be ripe.

The Temperature.

The berries hereof are of unlike parts; for they have some hot,
bitter, and cleansing, and very many cold, dry, harsh, and binding,
yet they have no use in medicine.

The Virtues.

A. Matthiolus writeth, that out of the berries first boiled, and
afterwards pressed, there issueth an oil which the Anagnian country
people do use in lamps: but it is not certain, nor very like, that
the bark of this wild Cornel tree hath that operation which Pliny
reporteth of Virga sanguinea for he saith, as we have already set
down, that the inner bark thereof doth break and lay open the scars
which they before have healed.

CHAP. 106. Of Spindle Tree or Prickwood.


Fig. 2056. Spindle Tree (1)
Fig. 2057. Broad-Leaved Spindle tree (2)

The Description.

1. Prickwood is no high shrub, of the bigness of the Pomegranate
tree: it spreadeth far with his branches: the old stalks have their
bark somewhat white; the new and those that be lately grown be
green, and four-square: the substance of the wood is hard, and mixed
with a light yellow: the leaves be long, broad, slender, and soft:
the flowers be white, many standing upon one footstalk, like almost
to a spoked roundel: the fruit is four-square, red, and containing
four white seeds, every one whereof is covered with a yellow coat,
which being taken off giveth a yellow dye.

2. This other sort of Euonymus groweth to the form of an hedge tree,
of a mean bigness; the trunk or body whereof is of the thickness of
a man's leg, covered with a rough or scabbed bark of an overworn
russet colour. The branches thereof are many, slender, and very
even, covered with a green bark whilst they be yet young and tender;
they are also very brittle, with sour pith in the middle like that
of the Elder. The leaves are few in number, full of nerves or sinews
dispersed like those of Plantain, in shape like those of the Pome
Citron tree, of a loathsome smell and bitter taste: amongst which
come forth slender footstalks very long and naked, whereon do grow
small flowers consisting of four small leaves like those of the
Cherry tree, but lesser, of a white colour tending to a blush, with
some yellowness in the middle: after cometh the fruit, which is
larger than the former, and as it were winged, parted commonly into
four, yet sometimes into five parts; and opening when it is ripe, it
showeth the white grains filled with a yellow pulp. The root is
tough and woody, dispersing itself far abroad under the upper crust
of the earth.

Fig. 2058. Hungarian Spindle Tree (3)

3. The same author setteth forth another sort which he found in the
mountains of Moravia and Hungary, having a trunk or stock of the
height of three or four cubits, covered with a bark green at the
first, afterward sprinkled over with many black spots: the boughs
are divided toward the top into divers small branches, very brittle
and easy to break, whereon are placed leaves by couples also, one
opposite to another, somewhat snipped about the edges, in shape like
those of the great Myrtle, of an astringent taste at the beginning,
after somewhat hot and bitter: amongst which come forth small
flowers standing upon long naked footstalks consisting of four
little leaves of a bright shining purple colour, having in the
middle some few spots of yellow: after cometh the fruit, four-
cornered, not unlike to the common kind, of a spongeous substance,
and a gold yellow colour: wherein is contained not red berries like
the other, but black, very like to those of Fraxinella, of a shining
black colour like unto burnished horn; which are devoured of birds
when they be ripe, and the rather because they fall of themselves
out of their husks, otherwise the bitterness of the husks would take
away the delight.

The Place.

The first cometh up in untoiled places, and among shrubs, upon rough
banks and heaps of earth. It serveth also oftentimes for hedges in
fields, growing amongst brambles and such other thorns.

The other sorts Carolus Clusius found in a wood of Hungary beyond
the river Dravus, and also upon the mountains of Moravia and other
places adjacent.

The Time.

 The flowers appear in April: the fruit is ripe in the end of
August, or in the month of September.

The Names.

Theophrastus calleth this shrub Euonymos, and describeth it in his
third book Of the History of Plants: divers also falsly read it
Anonymos: Petrus Crescentius calleth it Fusanum, because spindles be
made of the wood hereof and for that cause it is called in High
Dutch, Spindelbaum, yet most of them Hanhodlin: in Low Dutch,
Papenhout: in Italian, Fusano: in French, Fusin, and Bonnet de
prestre: in English, Spindle tree, Prickwood, and Prick-timber.

The Temperature and Virtues.

This shrub is hurtful to all things, as Theophrastus writeth, and
namely to goats: he saith the fruit hereof killeth; so doth the
leaves and fruit destroy goats especially, unless they scour as well
upwards as downwards: if three or four of these fruits be given to a
man they purge both by vomit and stool.

CHAP. 107. Of the Black Alder Tree.

Fig. 2059. Black Alder

The Description.

The Black Alder tree bringeth forth from the root straight stalks
divided into divers branches: the outward bark whereof is black, and
that next to the wood yellow, and giveth a colour as yellow as
saffron: the substance of the wood is white and brittle, with a
reddish pith in the midst: the leaves be like those of the Alder
tree, or of the Cherry tree, yet blacker, and a little rounder: the
flowers be somewhat white: the fruit are round berries, in which
appear a certain rift or chink, as though two were joined together,
at the first green, afterwards red, and last of all black: in this
there be two little stones: the root runneth along in the earth.

The Place.

The Alder tree groweth in moist woods and copses: I found great
plenty of it in a wood a mile from Islington, in the way from thence
toward a small village called Hornsey, lying upon the right hand of
the way; and in the woods at Hampstead near London, and in most
woods in the parts about London.

The Time.

The leaves and flowers appear in the beginning of the spring; and
the berries in autumn.

The Names.

This shrub is called Alnus nigra, or black Alder: and by others,
Frangula: Petrus Crescentius nameth it Avornus: in Low Dutch,
Sparkenhout, and oftentimes Pijlhout, because boys make for
themselves arrows hereof: in High Dutch, Faulbaum; it is called in
English, Black Alder tree; and of divers Butchers' Prick tree.

The Temperature.

The inner bark of the black Alder tree is of a purging and dry
quality.

The Virtues.

A. The inner bark hereof is used of divers countrymen, who drink the
infusion thereof when they would be purged: it purgeth thick
phlegmatic humours, and also choleric, and not only by the stool,
but many times also by vomit, not without great trouble and pain to
the stomach: it is therefore a medicine more fit for clowns than for
civil people, and rather for those that feed grossly, than for
dainty people.

B. There be others who affirm that the dried bark is more gentle,
and causeth lesser pain: for the green bark (say they) which is not
yet dried containeth in it a certain superfluous moisture which
causeth gripings and vomitings, and troubles the stomach.

C. The same bark being boiled in wine or vinegar makes a lotion for
the toothache; and is commended against scabs and filthiness of the
skin.

D. The leaves are reported to be good fodder for cattle, especially
for kine, and to cause them to yield good store of milk.

CHAP. 108. Of the Service Tree.


Fig. 2060. Service Tree (1)
Fig.2061. Common Service Tree (2)

The Description.

1. The Service tree groweth to the height and bigness of a great
tree, charged with many great arms or boughs which are set with
sundry small branches, garnished with many great leaves somewhat
long like those of the Ash: the flowers are white, and stand in
clusters, which turn into small brown berries somewhat long, which
are not good to be eaten until they have lain a while, and until
they be soft like the Medlar, whereto it is like in taste and
operation.

2. The Common Service tree groweth likewise to the height of a great
tree, with a straight body of a brownish colour, full of branches,
set with large displayed leaves like the Maple or the Whitethorn,
saving that they are broader and longer: the flowers are white, and
grow in tufts; which being fallen, there come in place thereof small
round berries, brown upon one side and reddish toward the sun, of an
unpleasant taste in respect of the former: in which are contained
little blackish kernels.

The Place.

These trees are found in woods and groves in most places of England:
there be many small trees thereof in a little wood a mile beyond
Islington from London: in Kent it groweth in great abundance,
especially about Southfleet and Gravesend. Thus our author: the
latter of these I have seen growing wild in divers places, but not
the former in any place as yet.

The Time.

They flower in March, and their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

The first is called in On, and Oin: in Latin, Sorbus: in High Dutch,
Sperwerbaum: in Low Dutch, Sorbedboom: in French, Cormier: in
English, Service tree, and of some after the Latins, Sorbe tree.

The common Service tree is named of Pliny, Sorbus torminalis: in
High Dutch, Aressel, Eschrossel, and Wilder Sperwerbaum: in English,
Common Service tree.

The berries or fruit of the Service tree is called Oin or Oyon: in
Latin, Sorbum: in High Dutch, Speierling, Sporopffel in Low Dutch,
Sorben: in Italian, Sorbe, and Sorbole: in French, Corme: in
Spanish, Servas, and Sorbas: in English, service; of some, sorb-
apple.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Service berries are cold and binding, and much more when they be
hard, than when they are mild and soft: in some places they are
quickly soft, either hanged in a place which is not altogether cold,
or laid in hay or chaff: those services are eaten when the belly is
too soluble, for they stay the same; and if they yield any
nourishment at all, the same is very little, gross, and cold; and
therefore it is not expedient to eat of these or other like fruits,
nor to use them otherwise than in medicines.

B. These do stay all manner of fluxes of the belly, and likewise the
bloody flux; as also vomiting: they stanch bleeding if they be cut
and dried in the sun before they be ripe, and so reserved for use:
these we may use divers ways according to the manner of the grief
and grieved part.

CHAP. 109. Of the Ash Tree.

Fig. 2062. The Ash Tree

The Description.

The Ash also is an high and tall tree: it riseth up with a straight
body, now and then of no small bigness, now and then of a middle
size, and is covered with a smooth bark: the wood is white, smooth,
hard, and somewhat rough grained: the tender branches hereof and
such as be new grown up are set with certain joints, and have within
a white and spongy pith: but the old boughs are woody throughout,
and be without either joints or much pith: the leaves are long and
winged, consisting of many standing by couples, one right against
another upon one rib or stalk, the upermost of all excepted, which
standeth alone; of which every particular one is long, broad, like
to a Bay leaf, but softer, and of a lighter green, without any sweet
smell, and nicked round about the edges: out of the younger sort of
the boughs, hard to the setting on of the leaves, grow forth hanging
together many long narrow and flat cods, as it were like almost to
divers birds' tongues, where the seed is perfected, which is of a
bitter taste: the roots be many, and grow deep in the ground.

The Place.

The Ash doth better prosper in moist places, as about the borders of
meadows and riversides, than in dry grounds.

The Time.

The leaves and keys come forth in April and May, yet is not the seed
ripe before the fall of the leaf.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek, Melia, and of divers, Milea: in Latin,
Fraxinus: in High Dutch, Eschernbaum, Eschernholtz, and Steynschern:
in Low Dutch, Esschen, and Esschenboom: in Italian, Frassino: in
French, Fresne: in Spanish, Fresno, Fraxino, and Freixo: in English,
Ash tree.

The fruit like unto cods is called of the apothecaries, Lingua
Avis,["Bird's tongue"] and Lingua Passerina["Sparrow's tongue"]: it
may be named in Greek, Ornithoglosson: yet some would have it called
Orneoglossum; others make Ornus or the wild Ash to be called
Orneoglossum: it is termed in English, Ash keys, and of some, Kite
keys.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The leaves and bark of the Ash tree are dry and moderately hot:
the seed is hot and dry in the second degree.

B. The juice of the leaves or the leaves themselves being applied,
or taken with wine, cure the bitings of vipers, as Dioscorides
saith.

C. The leaves of this tree are of so great virtue against serpents,
as that they dare not so much as touch the morning and evening
shadows of the tree, but shun them afar off, as Pliny reports, lib.
16. cap. 13. He also affirmeth, that the serpent being penned in
with boughs laid round about, will sooner run into the fire, if any
be there, than come near the boughs of the Ash: and that the Ash
doth flower before the serpents appear, and doth not cast his leaves
before they be gone again.

D. We write (saith he) upon experience, that if the serpent be set
within the circle of a fire and the boughs, the serpent will sooner
run into the fire than into the boughs. It is a wonderful courtesy
in nature, that the Ash should flower before these serpents appear,
and not cast his leaves before they be on again.

E. Both of them, that is to say the leaves and the bark, are
reported to stop the belly: and being boiled with vinegar and water,
do stay vomiting, if they be laid upon the stomach.

F. The leaves and bark of the Ash tree boiled in wine and drunk, do
open the stoppings of the liver and spleen, and do greatly comfort
them.

G. Three or four leaves of the Ash tree taken in wine each morning
from time to time do make those lean that are fat, and keepeth them
from feeding which do begin to wax fat.

H. The seed or kite-keys of the Ash tree provoke urine, increase
natural seed, and stir up bodily lust, especially being powdered
with nutmegs and drunk.

I. The wood is profitable for many things, being exalted by Homer's
commendations, and Achilles' spear, as Pliny writeth. The shavings
or small pieces thereof being drunk are said to be pernicious and
deadly, as Dioscorides affirmeth.

K. The lye which is made with the ashes of the bark cureth the white
scurf, and such other like roughness of the skin, as Pliny
testifieth.

CHAP. 110. Of the Wild Ash, otherwise called Quickbeam or Quicken
Tree.

Fig. 2063. Wild Ash or Quicken Tree

The Description.

The wild Ash or Quicken Tree Pena setteth forth for the wild
Service: this tree groweth seldom or never to the stature and height
of the Ash tree, notwithstanding it grows to the bigness of a large
tree: the leaves be great and long, and scarcely be discerned from
the leaves of the Service tree: the flowers be white, and sweet of
smell, and grow in tufts, which do turn into round berries, green at
the first, but when they be ripe of a deep red colour and of an
unpleasant taste: the branches are as full of juice as the Osier,
which is the cause that boys do make pipes of the bark thereof as
they do of Willows.

The Place.

The wild Ash or Quicken tree groweth on high mountains, and in thick
high woods in most places of England, especially about Nantwich in
Cheshire, in the Wealds of Kent, in Sussex and divers other places.

The Time.

The wild Ash flowers in May, and the berries are ripe in September.

The Names.

The Latins call this tree Ornus, and oftentimes Fraxinus sylvestris,
or wild Ash: and it is also Fraxini species, or a kind of Ash; for
the Grecians (as not only Pliny writeth, but also Theophras tus)
hath made two kinds of Ash, the one high and tall, the other lower:
the high and tall one is Fraxinis vulgaris, or the common Ash; and
the lower Ornus, which also is named Oreinumelia, or Fraxinus
montana, mountain Ash; as the other, Pedeine, or field Ash; which is
also named Buomelia, or as Gaza translateth it, Fraxinus bubula, but
more truly Fraxinus magna, or great Ash; for the syllable Bou is a
sign of bigness: this Ornus or great Ash is named in High Dutch,
Malbaum: in Low Dutch, Haveresschen, or Quereschen, of divers,
Qualster: in French, Fresne Sauvage: in English, Wild Ash, Quicken
tree, Quick-beam tree, and Wicken tree. Matthiolus makes this to be
Sorbus sylvestris, or wild Service tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Touching the faculties of the leaves, bark, or berries, as there
is nothing found among the old, so is there nothing noted among the
later writers: but Pliny seemeth to make this wild Ash like in
faculties to the common Ash; for lib. 16. cap. 13, where he writes
of both the Ashes, he saith, that the common Ash is Crispa,["having
a wavy grain"] and the mountain Ash Spissa["close-grained"]: and
forthwith he addeth this: The Grecians write, that the leaves of
them do kill cattle, and yet hurt not those that chew their cud;
which the old writers have noted of the Yew tree, and not of the Ash
tree. Pliny was deceived by the nearness of the words milos and
melia, for milos is the Yew tree, and melia the Ash tree: so that he
hath falsely attributed that deadly faculty to the Ash tree, which
doth belong to the Yew tree.

B. The leaves of the wild Ash tree boiled in wine are good against
the pain in the sides, and the stopping of the liver, and assuage
the bellies of those that have the tympany and dropsy.

C. Benedictus Curtius Symphoryanus is deceived in the history of
Ornus, when he thinketh out of Virgil's Georgics, that Ornus hath
the flower of the Pear tree; for out of Virgil's verses no such
thing at all can be gathered: for he intreateth not of the forms of
trees, but of the grafting of divers into others, unlike and
differing in nature; as of the grafting of the nut tree into the
Strawberry tree; the Apple into the Plane tree, the Beech into the
Chestnut tree; the Pear into the wild Ash or Quick-beam tree, the
Oak into the Elm tree: and is this respect he writeth, that the
Plane tree bringeth forth an Apple, the Beech tree a Chestnut; the
wild Ash tree bringeth forth the white flower of the Pear tree, as
is most manifest out of Virgil's own words, after this manner, in
the second book of his Georgics:

Inferitur vero ex ftu nucis Arbutus horrida
Et steriles Platani malos gessere valentes,
Castaneæ Fagos: Ornus incanuit albo
Flore Pyri, glandemque sues fregere sub Ulmis.

The Tree Strawb'ry on Walnut's stock doth grow,
And barren Planes fair Apples oft have borne;
Chestnuts, Beech-Mast; the Quicken tree doth show
The Pears white flower; and swine oft-times th' acorn
Have gathered under Elms.
Virgil, Georgics Bk. II l. 69-72.

CHAP. 111. Of Curriers' Sumach.


Fig.2064. Curriers' Sumach (1)
Fig. 2065. Myrtle Sumach (2)

The Description.

1. Curriers' Sumach groweth up unto the height of a hedge tree,
after the manner of the Elder tree, bigger than Dioscorides
reporteth it to be, or others, who affirm that Rhus groweth two
cubits high: whose errors are the greater: but this Rhus is so like
to the Service tree in shape and manner of growing, that it is hard
to know one from the other; but that the leaves are soft and hairy,
having a red sinew or rib through the midst of the leaf: the flowers
grow with the leaves upon long stems clustering together like Cat's
Tail, or the catkins of the nut tree, but greater, and of a whitish
green colour: after which come clusters of round berries, growing in
bunches like grapes.

2. Pliny his Sumach, or the Sumach of Pliny's description, groweth
like a small hedge tree, having many slender twiggy branches,
garnished with little leaves like Myrtus, or rather like the leaves
of the Jujube tree; among which come forth slender mossy flowers, of
no great account or value, which bring forth small seeds, enclosed
within a cornered case or husk, fashioned like a spoon: the trunk or
body of both these kinds of Sumach being wounded with some iron
instrument, yieldeth a gum or liquor.

The Place.

Sumach groweth, as Dioscorides saith, in stony places: it is found
in divers mountains & woods in Spain, and in many places on the
mount Apennine in Italy, and also near unto Pontus. Archigenes in
Galen, in the 8th book Of Medicines According to the Places
Affected, showeth, that it groweth in Syria, making choice of that
of Syria.

The Time.

The flowers of Sumach come forth in July, the seed with the berries
are ripe in autumn.

The Names.

This is called in Greek Rous: Rous, saith Pliny, hath no Latin name;
yet Gaza after the signification of the Greek word, feigneth a name,
calling it Fluida: the Arabians name it Sumach: the Italians,
Sumacho: the Spaniards, Sumagre: in Low Dutch, by contracting of the
word they call it Smack or Sumach: in English, Sumach, Curriers'
Sumach, and Leather Sumach: the leaves of the shrub be called in
Greek Rous burodepsike: in Latin, Rhus coriaria, or Rhoe.

The seed is named Erythros: in Latin, Rhus culinaria, and Rhus
obsoniorum: in English, Meat Sumach, and Sauce Sumach.

The Temperature.

The fruit, leaves, and seed hereof do very much bind, they also cool
and dry; dry they are in the third degree, and cold in the second,
as Galen teacheth.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Sumach boiled in wine and drunken, do stop the
lask, the inordinate course of women's sicknesses, and all other
inordinate issues of blood.

B. The seed of Sumach eaten in sauces with meat, stoppeth all manner
of fluxes of the belly, the bloody flux, and all other issues,
especially the white issues of women.

C. The decotion of the leaves maketh hairs black, and is put into
stools to fume upward into the bodies of those that have the
dysentery, and is to be given them also to drink.

D. The leaves made into an ointment or plaster with honey and
vinegar, stayeth the spreading nature of gangrenes and pterygia.

E. The dry leaves sodden in water until the decoction be as thick as
honey, yield forth a certain oiliness, which performeth all the
effects of Licium.

F. The seed is no less effectual to be strewed in powder upon their
meats which are Cliaci or Dysenterici.[Suffereing from colic or
dysentery]

G. The seeds pounded, mixed with honey and the powder of oaken
coals, healeth the hæmorrhoids.

H. There isseth out of the shrub a gum, which being put into the
hollowness of the teeth, taketh away the pain, as Dioscorides
writeth.

CHAP. 112. Of Red Sumach.


Fig. 2066. Red or Venice Sumach in flower
Fig. 2067. Red or Venice Sumach with fruit

The Description.

These two figures are of one and the selfsame plant; the first
showeth the shrub being in flower: the other when it is full
flowered with the fruit grown to ripeness, notwithstanding some have
deemed them to be of two kinds, wherein they were deceived.

This excellent and most beautiful plant Coggygria (being reputed of
the Italians and the Venetians for a kind of Rhus or Sumach, because
it is used for the same purposes whereto Rhus serveth and therein
doth far excel it) is an hedge plant growing not above the height of
four or five cubits, having tough and pliant stalks and twiggy
branches like to Osiers, of a brown colour. The leaves be round,
thick, and stiff like the leaves of Capparis, in colour and savor of
Pistacia leaves or Terebinthus; among which ariseth a small upright
sprig, bearing many small clustering little greenish yellow flowers,
upon long and red stalks. After which follow small reddish Lentil-
like seeds that carry at the tops a most fine woolly or flocky tuft,
crisped and curled like a curious wrought fleece, which curleth and
foldeth itself abroad like a large bush of hairs.

The Place.

Coggygria groweth in Orleans near Avignon, and in divers places of
Italy, upon the Alps of Styria, and many other places. It groweth on
most of the hills of France, in the high woods of the upper Pannonia
or Austria, and also of Hungary and Bohemia.

The Time.

They flower and flourish for the most part in July.

The Names.

The first is called Coggygria, and Coccygria: in English, Venice
Sumach, or Silken Sumach; of Pliny, Cotinus, in his 16th book, 18th
chapter. There is, saith he, on mount Apennine a shrub which is
called Cotinus, ad lineamenta modo conchylii colore insignis,["which
dyes cloth a colour like that got from shells (i.e.Tyrian purple)"]
and yet Cotinus is Oleaster, or Olea sylvestris, the wild Olive
tree, from which this shrub doth much differ; and therefore it may
rightly be called Cotinus coriaria. Divers would have named it
Scotinus, which name is not found in any of the old writers. The
Pannonians do call it Farblauff: it is also thought that this shrub
is Coggygria plinii, of which in his 13th book, 22nd chapter, he
writeth in these words: Coggygria is also like to Unedo in leaf, not
so great; it hath a property to loose the fruit with down, which
thing happeneth unto no other tree.

The Temperature.

The leaves and slender branches together with the seeds are very
much binding, cold and dry as the other kinds of Sumach are.
The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Coggygria, or Silken Sumach, are sold in the
markets of Spain and Italy for great sums of money, unto those that
dress Spanish skins, for which purpose they are very excellent.

B. The root of Cotinus, as Anguillara noteth, serveth to dye with,
giving to wool and cloth a reddish colour, which Pliny knew, showing
that this shrub (that is to say the root) is ad lineamenta modo
conchylii colore insignis.

CHAP. 113. Of the Alder Tree.


Fig. 2068. Alder (1)
Fig. 2069. Rough-Leaved Alder (2)

The Description.

1. The Alder tree or Aller, is a great high tree having many brittle
branches, the bark is of a brown colour, the wood or timber is not
hard, and yet it will last and endure very long under the water, yea
longer than any other timber whatsoever: wherefore in the fenny and
soft marsh grounds they do use to make piles and posts thereof, for
the strengthening of the walls and such like. This timber doth also
serve very well to make troughs to convey water instead of pipes of
lead. The leaves of this tree are in shape somewhat like the Hazel,
but they are blacker & more wrinkled, very clammy to handle, as
though they were sprinkled with honey. The blossom or flowers are
like the aglets of the Birch tree: which being faded, there
followeth a scaly fruit closely growing together, as big as a
pigeon's egg, which toward autumn doth open, and the seed falleth
out and is lost.

2. Clusius and Bauhine have observed another kind of this which
differs from the ordinary, in that it hath larger and more cut
leaves, and these not shining above, but hoary underneath: the
catkins, as also the rough heads are not so large as those of the
former: the bark also is whiter. Clusius makes it his Alnus altera;
and Bauhine, his Alnus hirsutus, or folio incano.

The Place.

The Alder or Aller tree delighteth to grow in low and moist waterish
places.

The Time.

The Alder bringeth forth new leaves in April, the fruit whereof is
ripe in September.

The Names.

This tree is called in Latin, Alnus: Petrus Crescentius nameth it
Amedanus: it is called in High Dutch, Erlenbaum and Ellernbaum: in
Low Dutch, Elsen and Elsen-boom: in Italian, Alno: in French, Aulne;
in English, Alder and Aller.

The Temperature.

The leaves and bark of the Alder tree are cold, dry, and astringent.
The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Alder are much used against hot swellings, ulcers,
and all inward inflammations, especially of the almonds and kernels
of the throat.

B. The bark is much used of poor country dyers, for the dying of
coarse cloth, caps, hose, and such like into a black colour,
whereunto it serveth very well.

CHAP. 114. Of the Birch Tree.

Fig. 2070. Birch

The Description.

The common Birch tree waxeth likewise a great tree, having many
boughs beset with many small rods or twigs, very limber and pliant:
the bark of the young twigs and branches is plain, smooth, and full
of sap, in colour like the Chestnut; but the rind of the body or
trunk is hard without, white, rough, and uneven, full of chinks or
crevices: under which is found another fine bark, plain, smooth, and
as thin as paper, which heretofore was used instead of paper, to
write upon, before the making of paper was known: in Russia and
these cold regions it serveth instead of tiles and slate to cover
their houses withal: this tree beareth for his flowers certain
aglets like the Hazel tree, but smaller, wherein the seed is
contained.

The Place.

This common Birch tree grows in woods, fenny grounds, and mountains,
in most places of England.

The Time.

The catkins or aglets do first appear, and then the leaves, in April
or a little later.

The Names.

This tree is named in Latin, Betula: divers also write it with a
double ll Betulla, as some of Pliny's copies have it: it is called
in High Dutch, Birkenbaum: in Low Dutch, Berkenboom: in Italian,
Betula: by them of Trent, Bedallo: in French, Bouleau: in English,
Birch tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Concerning the medicinable use of the Birch tree, or his parts,
there is nothing extant either in the old or new writers.

This tree, saith Pliny in his 16th book, 18th chapter, Mirabili
candore & tenuitate terribilis magistratum virgis:["Wonderfully
white, and striking fear as the flogging-canes of the magistrates"]
for in times past the magistrates' rods were made hereof: and in our
time also the schoolmasters and parents do terrify their children
with rods made of Birch.

It serveth well to the decking up of houses, and banquetting rooms,
for places of pleasure, and beautifying of streets in the cross or
gang week, and such like.

CHAP. 115. Of the Hornbeam, or Hardbeam Tree.

Fig. 2071. Hornbeam

The Description.

Betulus, or the Hornbeam tree, grows great, and very like unto the
Elm, or Witch Hazel tree, having a great body: the wood or timber
whereof is better for arrows and shafts, pulleys for mills, and such
like devices, than Elm or Witch Hazel; for in time it waxeth so
hard, that the toughness and hardness of it may be rather compared
unto horn than unto wood, and therefore it was called Hornbeam, or
Hardbeam: the leaves hereof are like the Elm, saving that they be
tenderer: among those hang certain triangled things, upon which be
round knops, or little heads of the bigness of Ciches, in which is
contained the fruit or seed: the root is strong and thick.

The Place.

Betulus or the Hornbeam tree grows plentifully in Northamptonshire,
also in Kent by Gravesend, where it is commonly taken for a kind of
Elm.

The Time.

This tree doth spring in April, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

The Hornbeam tree is called in Greek Zygia, which is as if you
should say Coniugalis, or belonging to the yoke, because it serveth
well to make Zygia of, in Latin, Iuga, yokes wherewith oxen are
yoked together, which are also even at this time made thereof, as
witnesseth Benedictus Curtius Symphorianus, and ourselves have
sufficient knowledge thereof in our own country; and therefore it
may be Englished Yoke Elm. It is called of some, Carpinus and Zugia:
it is also called Betulus, as if it were a kind of Birch, but myself
better like that it should be one of the Elms: in High Dutch,
Ahorne: in French, Carne: in Italian, Carpino: in English, Hornbeam,
Hardbeam, Yoke Elm, and in some places, Witch Hazel.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. This tree is not used in medicine, the virtues are not expressed
of the ancients, neither have we any certain experiments of our own
knowledge more than hath been said for the use of husbandry.

CHAP. 116. Of the Elm Tree.

Our author only described two Elms, and those not so accurately but
that I think I shall give the Reader content, in exchanging them for
better received from Mr Goodyer; which are these.


Fig. 2072. Common Elm (1)
Fig. 2073. Narrow-Leaved Elm (2)

1. Ulmus vulgatissima a folio lato scabro. The common Elm. 

This Elm is a very great high tree, the bark of the young trees, and
boughs of the elder, which are usually lopped or shred, is smooth
and very tough, and will strip or peel from the wood a great length
without breaking: the bark of the body of the old trees as the trees
grow in bigness, tears or rents, which makes it very rough. The
innermost wood of the tree is of reddish yellow or brownish colour,
and curled, and after it is dry, very tough, hard to cleave or rent,
whereof naves of carts are most commonly made: the wood next the
bark, which is called the sap, is white. Before the leaves come
forth the flowers appear, about the end of March, which grow on the
twigs or branches, closely compacted or thrust together, and are
like to the chives growing in the middle of most flowers, of a
reddish colour: after which come flat seed, more long than broad,
not much unlike the garden Arach seed in form and bigness, and do
for the most part fall away before or shortly after the leaves
spring forth, and some hang on a great part of the summer: the
leaves grow on the twigs, of a dark green colour; the middle size
whereof are two inches broad, and three inches long, some are longer
and broader, some narrower and shorter, rough or harsh in handling
on both sides, nicked or indented about the edges, and many times
crumpled, having a nerve in the middle, and many smaller nerves
growing from him: the leaf on one side of the nerve is always longer
than on the other. On these leaves oftentimes grow blisters or small
bladders, in which at the spring are little worms, about the bigness
of bed-fleas. This Elm is common in all parts of England, where I
have travelled.

2. Ulmus minor folio angusto scabro. The Narrow-Leaved Elm.

This tree is like the other, but much lesser and lower, the leaves
are usually about two inches and a half long, and an inch or an inch
and a quarter broad, nicked or indented about the edges, and hath
one side longer than the other, as the first hath, and are also
harsh or rough on both sides, the bark or rind will also strip as
the first doth: hithereto I have not observed either the flowers or
seed, or blisters on the leaves, nor have I had any sight of the
timber, or heard of any use thereof, This kind I have seen growing
but once, and that in the hedges by the highway as I rode between
Christchurch and Lymington in the New Forest in Hampshire, about the
middle of September 1624, from whence I brought some small plants of
it, not a foot in length, which now, 1633, are risen up ten or
twelve foot high, and grow with me by the first kind, but are easily
to be discerned apart, by any that will look on both.


Fig. 2074. Witch Hazel, or Broad-Leaved Elm (3)
Fig. 2075. Wych Elm (4)

3. Ulmus folio latissimo scabro. Witch Hazel, or the Broad-Leaved
Elm.

This groweth to be a very great tree, and also very high, especially
when he groweth in woods amongst other trees: the bark on the
outside is blacker than that of the first, and is also very tough,
so that when there is plenty of sap it will strip or peel from the
wood of the boughs from the one end to the other, a dozen foot in
length or more, without breaking, whereof are often made cords or
ropes: the timber hereof is in colour near like the first; it is
nothing so firm or strong for naves of carts as the first is, but
will more easily cleave; this timber is also covered with a white
sap next the bark: the branches or young boughs are grosser and
bigger, and do spread themselves broader, and hang more downwards
than those of the first; the flowers are nothing but chives, very
like those of the first kind: the seed is also like, but something
bigger: the leaves are much broader and longer than any of the kinds
of Elm, usually three or four inches broad, and five or six inches
long, also rough or harsh in handling on both sides, snipped or
indented about the edges, near resembling the leaves of the Hazel:
the one side of the leaves are also most commonly longer than the
other, also on the leaves of this Elm are sometimes blisters or
bladders like those on the first kind. This prospereth and naturally
groweth in any soil moist or dry, on high hills, and in low valleys
in good plenty in most places in Hampshire, where it is commonly
called Witch Hazel. Old men affirm, that when longbows were in great
use, there were very many made of the wood of this tree, for which
purpose it is mentioned in the statutes of England by the name of 
Witch Hazel, as 8. El. 10. This hath little affinity with Carpinus,
which in Essex is called Witch Hazel.

4. Ulmus folio glabro. Wych Elm, or smooth leaved Elm.

This kind is in bigness and height like the first, the boughs grow
as those of the Witch Hazel do, that is hanged more downwards than
those of the common Elm, the bark is blacker than that of the first
kind, it will also peel from the boughs: the flowers are like the
first, and so are the seeds: the leaves in form are like those of
the first kind, but are smooth in handling on both sides. My worthy
friend and excellent herbarist of happy memory Mr William Coys of
Stubbers in the parish of Northokington in Essex told me, that the
wood of this kind was more desired for naves of carts than the wood
of the first. I observed it growing very plentifully as I rode
between Romford and the said Stubbers, in the year 1620, intermixed
with the first kind; but easily to be discerned apart, and is in
those parts usually called Wych Elm.

The Place.

The first kind of Elm groweth plentifully in all places of England.
The rest are set forth in their descriptions.

The Time.

The seeds of the Elm showeth itself first, and before the leaves; it
falleth in the end of April, at what time the leaves begin to
spring.

The Names.

The first is called in Latin, Ulmus: in High Dutch, Rust holtz,
Rustbaum, Vimbaum: in Low Dutch, Oimen: in French, Orme, and Omeau:
in Italian, Olmo: in Spanish, Ulmo: in English, Elm tree. The seed
is named by Pliny and Columella, Samera. The little worms which are
found with the liquor within the small bladders be named in Latin,
Culices, and Muliones.

The other Elm is called by Gaza Montiulmus or mountain Elm.
Columella nameth it Vernacula, or Ulmus nostras, that is to say,
Italica, or Italian Elm: it is called in Low Dutch, Herseleer; and
in some places, Heerenteer.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The leaves and bark of the Elm be moderately hot, with an evident
cleansing faculty; they have in the chewing a certain clammy and
gluing quality.

B. The leaves of Elm glue and heal up green wounds, so doth the bark
wrapped and swaddled about the wound like a bandage.

C. The leaves being stamped with vinegar do take away scurf.

D. Dioscorides writeth, that one ounce weight of the thicker bark
drunk with wine or water purgeth phlegm.

E. The decoction of Elm leaves, as also of the bark or root, healeth
broken bones very speedily, if they be fomented or bathed therewith.

F. The liquor that is found in the blisters doth beautify the face,
and scoureth away all spots, freckles, pimples, spreading tetters,
and such like, being applied thereto.

G. It healeth green wounds, and cureth ruptures newly made, being
laid on with Spleenwoort and the truss closely set unto it.

CHAP. 117. Of the Lime or Linden Tree.


Fig. 2076. Female Lime (1)
Fig. 2077. Male Lime (2)

The Description.

1. The Female Lime or Linden tree waxeth very great and thick,
spreading forth his branches wide and far abroad, being a tree which
yieldeth a most pleasant shadow, under and within whose boughs may
be made brave summer houses and banqueting arbors, because the more
that it is surcharged with weight of timber and such like, the
better it doth flourish. The bark is brownish, very smooth, and
plain on the outside, but that which is next to the timber is white,
moist and tough, serving very well for ropes, traces, and halters.
The timber is whitish, plain and without knots, yet very soft and
gentle in the cutting or handling. Better gunpowder is made of the
coals of this wood than of Willow coals. The leaves are green,
smooth, shining and large, somewhat snipped or toothed about the
edges: the flowers are little, whitish, of a good savour, and very
many in number, growing clustering together from out of the middle
of the leaf: out of which proceedeth a small whitish long narrow
leaf: after the flowers succeed cornered sharp pointed nuts, of the
bigness of Hazel nuts. This tree seemeth to be a kind of Elm, and
the people of Essex about Hedingham (wheras great plenty groweth by
the waysides) do call it broad-Leaved Elm.

2. The Female Tilia or Lime tree groweth also very great and thick,
spreading itself far abroad like the other Linden tree: his bark is
very tough and pliant, and serveth to make cords and halters of. The
timber of this tree is much harder, more knotty, and more yellow
than the timber of the other, not much differing from the timber of
the Elm tree: the leaves hereof are not much unlike Ivy leaves, not
very green, somewhat snipped about the edges: from the middle
whereof come forth clusters of little white flowers like the former:
which being faded, there succeed small round pellets, growing
clustering together, like Ivy berries, within which is contained a
little round blackish seed, which falleth out when the berry is
ripe.

The Place.

The Female Linden tree groweth in some woods in Northamptonshire; 
also near Colchester, and in many places alongst the high way
leading from London to Hedingham, in the county of Essex.

The male Linden tree groweth in my Lord Treasurer's garden at the
Strand, and in sundry other places, as at Barn Elms, and in a garden
at Saint Katherine's near London. Thus our author: the female grows
in the places here named, but I have not yet observed the male.

The Time

These trees flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.

The Linden tree is called in Greek Philyra: in Latin, Tilia, in High
Dutch, Linden, and Lindenbaum: in Low Dutch, Linde, and Lindenboom:
the Italians, Tilia: the Spaniards, Teia: in French, Tilet and
Tilieul: in English, Linden tree, and Lime tree.

The Temperature.

The bark and leaves of the Linden or Lime tree, are of a temperate
heat, somewhat drying and astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Tilia boiled in smith's water with a piece of alum
and a little honey, cure the sores in children's mouths.

B. The leaves boiled until they be tender, and pounded very small
with hog's grease, and the powder of fenugreek and linseed, take
away hot swellings and bring impostumes to maturation, being applied
thereto very hot.

C. The flowers are commended by divers against pain of the head
proceeding of a cold cause: against dizziness, the apoplexy, and
also the falling sickness, and not only the flowers, but the
distilled water thereof.

D. The leaves of the Linden (saith Theophrastus) are very sweet, and
be a fodder for most kind of cattle: the fruit can be eaten of none.

CHAP. 118. Of the Maple Tree.


Fig. 2078. Great Maple (1)
Fig. 2079. Lesser Maple (2)

The Description.

1. The Great Maple is a beautiful and high tree, with a bark of a
mean smoothness: the substance of the wood is tender and easy to
work on; it sendeth forth on every side very many goodly boughs and
branches, which make an excellent shadow against the heat of the
sun; upon which are great, broad, and cornered leaves, much like to
those of the Vine, hanging by long reddish stalks: the flowers hang
by clusters, of a whitish green colour; after them cometh up long
fruit fastened together by couples, one right against another, with
kernels bumping out near to the place in which they are combined: in
all the other parts flat and thin like unto parchment, or resembling
the innermost wings of grashoppers: the kernels be white and little.

2. There is a small Maple which doth oftentimes come to the bigness
of a tree, but most commonly it groweth low after the manner of a
shrub: the bark of the young shoots hereof is likewise smooth; the
substance of the wood is white, and easy to be wrought on: the
leaves are cornered like those of the former, slippery, and fastened
with a reddish stalk, but much lesser, very like in bigness and
smoothness to the leaf of Sanicle, but that the cuts are deeper: the
flowers be as those of the former, green, yet not growing in
clusters, but upon spoked roundels: the fruit standeth by two and
two upon a stem or footstalk.

The Place

The small or hedge Maple groweth almost everywhere in hedges and low
woods.

The great Maple is a stranger in England, only it groweth in the
walks and places of pleasure of noblemen, where it especially is
planted for the shadow's sake, and under the name of Sycamore tree.

The Time.

These trees flower about the end of March, and their fruit is ripe
in September.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek, Sphendamnos: in Latin, Acer: in
English, Maple, or Maple tree.

The great Maple is called in High Dutch, Ahorne, and Waldescherne:
the French men, Grand Erable, and Plasne abusively, and this is
thought to be properly called Sphendamnos: but they are far deceived
that take this for Platanus, or the Plane tree, being drawn into
this error by the nearness of the French word; for the Plane tree
doth much differ from this. This is now commonly (yet not rightly)
called the Sycamore tree. And seeing use will have it so, I think it
were not unfit to call it the bastard Sycamore.

The other is called in Latin, Acer minor: in High Dutch, Wassholder:
in Low Dutch, Booghout: in French, Erable: in English, small Maple,
and common Maple.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. What use the Maple hath in medicine we find nothing written of
the Grecians, but Pliny in his 14th book, 8th chapter affirmeth,
that the root pounded and applied, is a singular remedy for the pain
of the liver. Serenus Sammonicus writeth, that it is drunk with wine
against the pains of the side:

Si latus immeritum morbo tentatur acuto,
Accensum tinges lapidem stridentibus undis.
Hinc bibis: aut Aceris radicem tundis, & una
Cum vino capis: hoc præsens medicamen habetur.

Thy harmless side if sharp disease invade,
In hissing water quench a heated stone:
This drink. Or Maple root in powder made,
Take off in wine, a present med'cine known.

CHAP. 119. Of the Poplar Tree.

The Kinds.

There be divers trees under the title of Poplar, yet differing yery
notably, as shall be declared in the descriptions, whereof one is
the white, another the black, and a third sort set down by Pliny,
which is the Aspen, named by him Lybica, and by Theophrastus,
Kerkis: likewise there is another of America, or of the Indies,
which is not to be found in these regions of Europe.


Fig. 2080. White Poplar (1)
Fig. 2081. Black Poplar (2)

The Description.

1. The White Poplar tree cometh soon to perfection, and groweth high
in short time, full of boughs at the top: the bark of the body is
smooth, and that of the boughs is likewise white withal: the wood is
white, easy to be cleft: the leaves are broad, deeply gashed, &
cornered like almost to those of the Vine, but much lesser, smooth
on the upper side, glib, and somewhat green; and on the nether side
white and woolly: the catkins are long, downy, at the first of a
purplish colour: the roots spread many ways, lying under the turf,
and not growing deep, and therefore it happeneth that these trees be
oftentimes blown down with the wind.

2. The Black Poplar tree is as high as the white, and now and then
higher, oftentimes fuller of boughs, and with a thicker body: the
bark thereof is likewise smooth, but the substance of the wood is
harder, yellower, and not so white, fuller of veins, and not so
easily cleft: the leaves be somewhat long, and broad below towards
the stem, sharp at the point, and a little snipped about the edges,
neither white nor woolly, like the leaves of the former, but of a
pleasant green colour: amongst which come forth long aglets or
catkins, which do turn into clusters: the buds which show themselves
before the leaves spring out, are of a reasonable good savour, of 
the which is made that profitable ointment called unguentum
populeon.


Fig. 2082. Aspen (3)
Fig. 2083. Indian Poplar (4)

3. The third kind of Poplar is also a great tree: the bark and
substance of the wood is somewhat like that of the former: this tree
is garnished with many brittle and tender branches, set full of
leaves, in a manner round, much blacker and harder than the Black
Poplar, hanging upon long and slender stems, which are for the most
part stll wavering, and make a great noise by being beaten one to
another, yea though the weather be calm, and scarce any wind
blowing; and it is known by the name of the Aspen tree: the roots
hereof are stronger, and grow deeper into the ground than those of
the White Poplar.

4. This strange Poplar, which some do call Populus rotundifolia, in
English, the Round-Leaved Poplar of India, waxeth a great tree,
bedecked with many goodly twiggy branches, tough and limber like the
Willow, full of joints where the leaves do grow, of a perfect
roundness, save where it cleaveth or groweth to the stalk: from the
bosoms or corners of these leaves come forth small aglets, like unto
our Poplar, but smaller: the leaf is thick, and very like the leaves
of Arbor Indæ, but broader, of an astringent taste, somewhat heating
the mouth, and saltish.

Fig. 2085. Small-Leaved White Poplar (5)

5. There is also another sort of Poplar which groweth likewise unto
a great tree, the branches whereof are knotty and bunched forth as
though it were full of scabs or sores: the leaves come forth in
tufts most commonly at the end of the boughs, not cut or jagged, but
resembling the leaves of that Atriplex called Pes Anserinus; in
colour like the former, but the aglets are not so closely packed
together, otherwise it is like.

The Place.

These trees do grow in low moist places, as in meadows near unto
ditches, standing waters and rivers.

The first kind of white Poplar groweth not very common in England,
but in same places here and there a tree: I found many both small &
great growing in a low meadow turning up a lane at the farther end
of a village called Blackwall, from London; and in Essex at a place
called Ovenden, and in divers other places.

The Indian Poplar groweth in most parts of the islands of the West
Indies.

The Time.

These trees do bud forth in the end of March and beginning of April,
at which time the buds must be gathered to serve for unguentum
populeon.

The Names.

The white Poplar is called in Latin, Populus alba: of divers,
Farfarus, as of Plautus in his comedy Penulus, as you may see by his
words set down in the chapter of Coltsfoot.

It is called in High Dutch, Poppelbaum, Weisz Alberbaum: in Low
Dutch, Abeel, of his hoary or aged colour, and also Abeelboome;
which the grammarians do falsely interpret Abies, the Fir tree: in
Italian, Popolo albo: in French, Peuplier blanc, Aubel, Obel, or
Aubeau: in English, White Poplar tree, and Abeell, after the Dutch
name.

The second is called in Latin, Populus nigra: by Petrus Crescentius,
Albarus: in High Dutch, Aspen: in Low Dutch, Populier: in Italian,
Popolo nero: in French, Peuplier noir: in Spanish, Alamo nigailho:
in English, Poplar tree, Black Poplar, and Pepler. The first or new
sprung buds whereof are called of the apothecaries, oculi populi,
Poplar buds: others choose rather to call it gemma populi: some of
the Grecians name it Sperma: whereupon they grounded their error,
who rashly supposed that those resiny or clammy buds are not to be
put or used in the composition of the ointment bearing the name of
the Poplar, and commonly called in English, Popilion and Pompillion,
but the berries that grow in clusters, in which there is no
clamminess at all.

They are also as far deceived, who giving credit to poets' fables,
do believe that amber cometh of the clammy resin falling into the
river Po.

The third is called of divers, Populus tremula, which word is
borrowed of the Frenchmen, who name it Tremble: it also received a
name amongst the Low Country men, from the noise and rattling of the
leaves, viz. Rateeler: this is that which is named of Pliny, Libyca
and by Theophrastus Kerkis, which Gaza calleth Populus montana: in
English, Aspe, and Aspen tree, and may also be called Tremble, after
the French name, considering it is the matter whereof women's
tongues were made, (as the poets and some others report) which
seldom cease wagging.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The White Poplar hath a cleansing faculty, saith Galen, and a
mixed temperature, consisting of a watery warm essence, and also a
thin earthy substance.

B. The bark, as Dioscorides writeth, to the weight of an ounce (or
as others say, and that more truly, of little more than a dram) is a
good remedy for the sciatica or ache in the huckle bones, and for
the strangury.

C. That this bark is good for the sciatica, Serenus Sammonicus doth
also write:

Sæpius occultus victa coxendice morbus
Perfurit, & gressus diro languore moratur:
Populus alba dabit medicos de cortice potus.

An hidden disease doth oft rage and reign,
The hip overcome and vex with the pain,
It makes with vile aching one tread slow and shrink;
The bark of white Poplar is help had in drink.

D. The same bark is also reported to make a woman barren, if it be
drunk with the kidney of a mule, which thing the leaves likewise are
thought to perform, being taken after the flowers or reds be ended.

E. The warm juice of the leaves being dropped into the ears doth
take away the pain thereof.

F. The resin or clammy substance of the black Poplar buds is hot and
dry, and of thin parts, attenuating and mollifying: it is also fitly
mixed acopis & malagmatis ["into a salve used to ease fatigue or
pain, or as a poultice]": the leaves have in a manner the like
operation for all these things, yet weaker, and not so effectual, as
Galen teacheth.

G. The leaves and young buds of black Poplar do assuage the pain of
the gout in the hands or feet, being made into an ointment with May
butter.

H. The ointment made of the buds is good against all inflammations,
bruses, squats, falls, and such like: this ointment is very well
known to the apothecaries.

I. Paulus Ægineta teacheth to make an oil also hereof, called
Ægyrinum, or oil of black Poplar.

CHAP. 120. Of the Plane Tree.

Fig. 2085. Plane

The Description.

The Plane is a great tree, having very long and far spreading boughs
casting a wonderful broad shadow, by reason whereof it was highly
commended and esteemed of among the old Romans: the leaves are
cornered like those of Palma Christi, greater than Vine leaves, and
hanging upon little red footstalks: the flowers are small and mossy,
and of a pale yellowish colour: the fruit is round like a ball,
rugged, and somewhat hairy; but in Asia more hairy and greater,
almost as big as a walnut: the root is great, dispersing itself far
abroad.

The Place.

The Plane tree delighteth to grow by springs or rivers: Pliny
reports that they were wont to be cherished with wine: they grew
afterward(saith he) to be of so great honour (meaning the Plane
trees) as that they were cherished and watered with wine: and it is
found by experience that the same is very comfortable to the roots,
and we have already taught, that trees desire to drink wine. This
tree is stange in Italy, it is nowhere seen in Germany, nor in the
Low Countries: in Asia it groweth plentifully: it is found also in
Candy, growing in valleys, and near unto the hill Athos, as Petrus
Bellonius in his Singularities doth declare: it groweth in many
places of Greece, and is found planted in some places of Italy, for
pleasure rather than for profit. My servant William Marshall (whom I 
sent into the Mediterranean sea as surgeon unto the Hercules of
London) found divers trees hereof growing in Lepanto, hard by the
seaside, at the entrance into the town, a port of Morea, being a
part of Greece, and from thence brought one of those rough buttons,
being the fruit thereof. There are one or two young ones at this
time growing with Mr Tradescant.

The Plane trees cast their leaves in winter, as Bellonius
testifieth, and therefore it is no marvel that they keep away the
sun in summer, and not at all in winter: there is, saith Pliny, no
greater commendation of the tree, than that it keepeth away the sun
in summer, and entertaineth it in winter.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek, Platanos: and likewise in Latin
Platanus: it beareth his name of the breadth: the French men's
Plasne doth far differ from this, which is a kind of Maple: this
tree is named in English, Plane tree.

The Temperature and virtues.

A. The Plane tree is of a cold and moist essence, as Galen saith:
the green leaves are good to be laid upon hot swellings and
inflammations in the beginning.

B. Being boiled in wine they are a remedy for the running and the
watering of the eyes, if they be applied.

C. The bark and balls do dry: the bark boiled in vinegar helpeth the
toothache.

D. The fruit of the Plane tree drunk with wine helpeth the bitings
of mad dogs and serpents, and mixed with hog's grease it maketh a
good ointment against burning and scalding.

E. The burned bark doth mightily dry, and scoureth withal; it
removeth the white scurf, and cureth moist ulcers

F. The dust or down, saith Galen, that lieth on the leaves of the
tree is to be taken heed of, for if it be drawn in with the breath,
it is offensive to the windpipe by his extreme dryness, and making
the same rough, and hurting the voice, as it doth also the sight and
hearing, if it fall into the eyes or ears. Dioscorides doth not
attribute this to the dust or down of the leaves only, but also to
that of the balls.

CHAP. 121. Of the Wayfaring Tree.

Fig. 2086. Wayfaring Tree

The Description.

The Wayfaring man's tree grows up to the height of an hedge tree, of
a mean bigness: the trunk or body thereof is covered with a russet
bark: the branches are long, tough, and easy to be bowed, and hard
to be broken, as are those of the Willow, covered with a soft
whitish bark, whereon are broad leaves thick and rough, slightly
indented about the edges, of a white colour, and somewhat hairy 
whilst they be fresh and green; but when they begin to wither and
fall away, they are reddish, and set together by couples one
opposite to another. The flowers are white, and grow in clusters:
after which come clusters of fruit of the bigness of a pea, somewhat
flat on both sides, at the first green, after red, and black when
they be ripe: the root disperseth itself far abroad under the upper
crust of the earth.

The Place.

This tree groweth in most hedges in rough and stony places, upon 
hills and low woods, especially in the chalky grounds of Kent about
Cobham, Southfleet, and Gravesend, and in all the tract to
Canterbury.

The Time.

The flowers appear in summer: the berries are ripe in the end of
autumn, and new leaves come forth in the spring.

This hedge tree is called Viurna of Ruellius: in French, Viorne, and
Viorna: in Italian, Lantana: it is reputed for the tree Viburnum, of
which Virgil maketh mention in the first Eclogue, where he
commendeth the city Rome for the loftiness and stateliness thereof,
above other cities, saying, that as the tall Cypress trees do show
themselves above the low and shrubby Viorn, so doth Rome above other
cities lift up her head very high; in these verses:

Verum hæc tantum alias inter caput exulit urbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.

But this all other cities so excels,
As Cypress, which 'mongst bending Viornes dwells.
[Virgil, Eclogues I. l. 24-25]

I judge Viburnum not to be a name to any particular plant, but a
general name to all low and bending shrubs; amongst which this here
described may take place as one. I enquired of a countryman in
Essex, if he knew any name of this: he answered, it was called the
Cotton tree, by reason of the softness of the leaves.

The Temperature.

The leaves and berries of Lantana are cold and dry, and of a binding
quality.
The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the leaves of Lantana is very good to be gargled
in the mouth against all swellings and inflammations thereof,
against the scurvy and other diseases of the gums, and fasteneth
loose teeth.

B. The same boiled in lye doth make the hairs black if they be
bathed or washed therewith, and suffered to dry of itself.

C. The berries are of the like faculty, the powder whereof when they
be dried stay the lask, all issues of blood, and also the whites.

D. It is reported, that the bark of the root of the tree buried a
certain time in the earth, and afterwards boiled and stamped
according to art, maketh good bird-lime for fowlers to catch birds
with.

CHAP. 122. Of the Bead Tree.


Fig. 2087. Bead Tree (1)
Fig. 2088. Cappadocian Bead Tree (2)

The Description.

1. This tree was called Zizypha candida by the herbarists of
Montpellier; and by the Venetians and Italians, Sycomorus, but
untruly: the Portugals have termed it Arbor Paradizo: all which and
each whereof have erred together, both in respect of the fruit and
of the whole tree: some have called it Zizypha, though in faculty it
is nothing like; for the taste of this fruit is very unpleasant,
virulent, and bitter. But deciding all controversies, this is the
tree which Avicenna calleth Azederach, which is very great, charged
with many large arms, that are garnished with twiggy branches, set
full of great leaves consisting of sundry small leaves, one growing
right opposite to another like the leaves of the Ash tree or Wicken
tree, but more deeply cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw:
among which come the flowers, consisting of five small blue leaves
laid abroad in manner of a star: from the midst whereof groweth
forth a small hollow cup resembling a chalice: after which
succeedeth the fruit, covered with a brownish yellow shell, very
like unto the fruit of Jujubes (whereof Dodonæus in his last edition
maketh it a kind) of a rank, bitter, and unpleasant taste, with a
six-cornered stone within, which being drawn on a string, serveth to
make beads of, for want of other things.

2. Zizyphus Cappadocica groweth not so great as the former, but is
of a mean stature, and full of boughs: the bark is smooth and even,
and that which groweth upon the trunk and great boughs is of a
shining scarlet colour: out of these great arms or boughs grow
slender twigs, white and soft, which are set full of whitish leaves,
but more white on the contrary or back part, and are like to the
leaves of Willow, but narrower and whiter: amongst these leaves come
forth small hollow yellowish flowers, growing at the joints of the
branches, most commonly three together, and of a pleasant savour,
with some few threads or chives in the middle thereof. After which
succeedeth the fruit, of the bigness and fashion of the smallest
Olive, white both within and without, wherein is contained a small
stone which yieldeth a kernel of a pleasant taste, and very sweet.

The Place.

Matthiolus writeth, that Zizyphus candida is found in the cloisters
of many monasteries in Italy; Lobel saith that it groweth in many
places in Venice and Narbonne; and it is wont now of late to be
planted and cherished in the goodliest orchards of all the Low
Countries.

Zizyphus Cappadocica groweth likewise in many places of Italy, and
specially in Spain: it is also cherished in gardens both in Germany
and in the Low Countries. It groweth also here in the garden of Mr
John Parkinson.

The Time.

These trees flower in June in Italy and Spain; their fruit is ripe
in September; but in Germany and the Low Countries there doth no
fruit follow the flowers.

The Names.

Zizyphus candida Avicenna calleth Azederach, or as divers read it,
Azederaeth: and they name it, saith he, in Rechi, Arbor
mirobalanorum, or the Mirobalan tree, but not properly, and in
Tabrasten, and Kien, and Thihich. The later writers are far deceived
in taking it to be the Sycomore tree; and they as much, that would
have it to be the Lotus or Nettle tree: it may be named in English,
Bead tree, for the cause before alleged.

The other is Zizyphi altera species, or the second kind of Jujube
tree, which Columella in his ninth book and fourth chap. doth call
Zizyphus alba, or white Jujube tree, for difference from the other
that is surnamed rutila, or glittering red. Pliny calleth this
Zizyphus cappadocica, in his 21st book; ninth chapter, where he
entreateth of the honour of garlands, of which he saith there be two
sorts, whereof some be made of flowers, and others of leaves: I
would call the flowers (saith he) brooms, for of those is gathered a
yellow flower, and Rhododendron, also Zizypha, which is called
cappadocica. The flowers of these are sweet of smell, and like to
Olive flowers. Neither doth Columella or Pliny unadvisedly take this
for Zizyphus, for both the leaves and flowers grow out of the tender
and young sprung twigs, as they likewise do out of the former: the
flowers are very sweet of smell, and cast their savour far abroad:
the fruit also is like that of the former.

The Temperature.

Avicenna writing and entreating of Azadaraeth, saith, that the
flowers thereof be hot in the third degree, and dry in the end of
the first.

Zizyphus cappadocica is cold and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.

A. The flowers of Zizyphus, or Azadaraeth open the obstructions of
the brain.

B. The distilled water thereof killeth nits and lice, preserveth the
hair of the head from falling, especially being mixed with white
wine, and the head bathed with it.

C. The fruit is very hurtful to the chest, and a troublesome enemy
to the stomach; it is dangerous, and peradventure deadly.

D. Moreover, it is reported, that the decotion of the bark and of
Fumitory, with mirobalans added, is good for agues proceeding of
phlegm.

E. The juice of the uppermost leaves with honey is a remedy against
poison.

F. The like also hath Rhasis: the Bead tree, saith he, is hot and
dry: it is good for stoppings of the head, it maketh the hair long;
yet is the fruit thereof very offensive to the stomach, and
oftentimes found to be pernicious and deadly.

G. Matthiolus writeth, that the leaves and wood bringeth death even
unto beasts, and that the poison thereof is resisted by the same
remedies that Oleander is.

H. Ziziphus cappadocica prevaileth against the diseases aforesaid,
but the decoction thereof is very good for those whose water
scaldeth them with the continual issuing thereof, as also for such
as have the running of the reins and the exulcerations of the
bladder and privy parts.

I. A lohoch or licking medicine made thereof, or the syrup, is
excellent good against spitting of blood proceeding of the
distillations of sharp or salt humours.

CHAP. 123. Of the Lotus, or Nettle Tree.

Fig. 2089. Lotus or Nettle Tree

The Description.

The Lotus whereof we write is a tree as big as a Pear tree, or
bigger and higher: the body and arms are very thick; the bark
whereof is smooth, of a gallant green colour tending to blueness:
the boughs are long, and spread themselves all about: the leaves be
like those of the Nettle, sharp pointed, and nicked in the edges
like a saw, and dashed here and there with stripes of a yellowish
white colour: the berries be round, and hang upon long stalks like
cherries, of a yellowish white colour at the first, and afterwards
red, but when they be ripe they be somewhat black.

The Place.

This is a rare and strange tree in both the Germanies: it was
brought out of Italy, where there is found store thereof, as
Matthiolus testifieth: I have a small tree thereof in my garden.
There is likewise a tree thereof in the garden under London wall,
sometime belonging to Mr Gray, an apothecary of London; and another
great tree in a garden near Coleman street in London, being the
garden of the Queen's apothecary at the impression hereof, called Mr
Hugh Morgan, a curious conserver of rare simples. The Lotus tree
doth also grow in Africa, but it somewhat differeth from the Italian
Lotus in fruit, as Pliny in plain words doth show in his thirteenth
book, seventeenth chapter. That part of Africa, saith he, that lieth
towards us, bringeth forth the famous Lotus tree, which they call
Celtis, and the same well known in Italy, but altered by the soil:
it is as big as the Pear tree, although Nepos Cornelius reporteth it
to be shorter: the leaves are full of fine cuts, otherwise they be
thought to be like those of the Holm tree. There be many
differences, but the same are made especially by the fruit: the
fruit is as big as a bean, and of the colour of saffron, but before
it is through ripe, it changeth his color as doth the Grape. It
grows thick among the boughs after the manner of the Myrtle, not as
in Italy, after the manner of the Cherry; the fruit of it is there
so sweet, as it hath also given a name to that country and land, too
hospitable to strangers, and forgetful of their own country.

It is reported that they are troubled with no diseases of the belly
that eat it. The better is that which hath no kernel, which in the
other kind is stony: there is also pressed out of it a wine, like to
a sweet wine :which the same Nepos denieth to endure above ten days,
and the berries stamped with Alica are reserved in vessels for food.
Moreover we have heard say, that armies have been fed therewith, as
they have passed to and fro through Africa. The colour of the wood
is black: they use to make flutes and pipes of it: the root serveth
for knives' hafts, and other short works: this is there the nature
of the tree: thus far Pliny. In the same place he saith, that this
renowned tree doth grow about Syrtis and Nasaimonæ: and in his 5th
book, 7th chapter he showeth that there is not far from the lesser
Syrtis, the island Menynx, surnamed Lotophagitis, of the plenty of
Lotus trees.

Strabo in his 17th book affirmeth, that not only Menynx, but also
the lesser Syrtis is said to be Lotophagitis: first, saith he, lieth
Syrtis a certain long island by the name Cercinna, and another
lesser, called Circinnitis; next to this is the lesser Syrtis, which
they call Lotophagitis Syrtis: the compass of this gulf is almost
1600 furlongs; the breadth of the mouth 600. By both the capes there
be islands joined to the mainland, that is, Circinna and Menynx, of
like bigness: they think that Menynx is the country of the
Lotophagi, or those that feed of the Lotus trees; of which country
Homer maketh mention, and there are certain monuments to be seen,
and Ulysses' altar, and the fruit itself; for there be in it great
plenty of Lotus trees, whose fruit is wonderful sweet: thus saith
Strabo.

This Lotus is also described by Theophrastus, in his fourth book he
saith, that there be very many kinds, which be severed by the fruit:
the fruit is of the bigness of a bean, which when it waxeth ripe
doth alter his colour as grapes do: the fruit of which the Lotophagi
do eat is sweet, pleasant, harmless, and wholesome for the belly,
but that is pleasanter which is without kernels, and of this they
make their wine.

This Lotus tree, as the same author affirmeth, is by nature
everlasting: as for example, the Lotus trees whereof Pliny hath
written in his 16th book, 44th chapter. At Rome, saith he, the Lotus
tree in Lucinas court, how much elder it was than the church of the
city, built in the year which was without magistrates, 469, it is
uncertain: there is no doubt but that it was elder; because Lucina
bare the name of that Lucus or grove. This is now about 450 years
old. That is elder which is surnamed Capillata, or hairy; because
the hair of the vestal virgins was brought unto it: but the other
Lotus tree in Vulcan's church, which Romulus built by the victory of
tenths, is taken to be as old as the city, as Massurius witnesseth.

The Time.

They lose their leaves at the first approch of winter and recover
them again in April: the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek, Lotos: in Latin by Pliny, Celtis: in
Italian, Perlaro: by those of Trent, Bagolaro; and in English, Lotus
tree, and Nettle tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Lotus tree is not greatly binding as Galen saith, but of thin
parts, and of a drying nature.

B. The decoction of the wood beaten small, being either drunk or
used clysterwise, is a remedy for the bloody flux; and for the
whites and reds.

C. It stoppeth the lask, and maketh the hair yellow, and as Galen
addeth, keepeth hairs from falling.

D. The shivers or small pieces thereof, as the same author allegeth,
are boiled sometimes in water, sometimes in wine, as need shall
require.

CHAP. 124. Of Italian Wood of Life, or Pockwood, vulgarly called
Lignum vitæ.


Fig. 2090. Broad-Leaved Italian Tree of Life (1)
Fig. 2091. Narrow-Leaved Italian Tree of Life (2)

The Description.

1. Italian Lignum vitæ, or Wood of Life, groweth to a fair and
beautiful tree, having a straight and upright body, covered over
with a smooth and dark green bark, yielding forth many twiggy
branches, set forth of goodly leaves, like those of the Pear tree,
but of greater beauty and somewhat broader: among which cometh forth
the fruit, growing close to the branches, almost without stalks:
this fruit is round, and at the first green, but black when it is
ripe, as big as cherries, of an excellent sweet taste when it is
dried: but this is not the Indian Lignum sanctum, or Guaiacum,
whereof our bowls and physical drinks be made, but it is a bastard
kind thereof, first planted in the common garden at Padua, by the
learned Fallopius, who supposed it to be the right Guaiacum.

2. The leaves of this are longer and narrower than the former, but
firm also and nervous like as they are; the fruit is in shape like
Sebestens, but much less, of a bluish colour when it is ripe, with
many little stones within; the taste hereof is not unpleasant.
Matthiolus calls this Pseudolotus; and Tabernamontanus, Lotus
Africana.

The Place.

Guaiacum patavinum groweth plentifully about Lugdunum, or Lyons in
France: I planted it in the garden of Barn Elms near London two
trees: besides, there groweth another in the garden of Mr Gray an
apothecary of London, and in my garden likewise.

The Time.

It flowereth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

Guaiacum patavinum hath been reputed for the Lotus of Theophrastus:
in English it is called the Bastard Mevynwood.

This hath no affinity with the true Indian Guaiacum which is
frequently used in medicine.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The fruit of this is thought to be of the same temper and quality
with that of the Nettle tree.

CHAP. 125. Of the Strawberry Tree.

Fig. 2092. Strawberry Tree

The Description.

The Strawberry tree groweth for the most part low, very like in
bigness to the Quince tree (whereunto Dioscorides compareth it.) The
body is covered with a reddish bark, both rough and scaly: the
boughs stand thick on the top, somewhat reddish: the leaves be
broad, long, and smooth, like those of Bay, somewhat nicked in the
edges, and of a pale green colour: the flowers grow in clusters,
being hollow and white, and now and then on the one side somewhat of
a purple colour: in their places come forth certain berries hanging
down upon little long stems like unto Strawberries, but greater,
without a stone within, but only with little seeds, at the first
green, and when they be ripe they are of a gallant red colour, in
taste somewhat harsh, and in a manner without any relish; of which
thrushes and blackbirds do feed in winter.

The Place.

The Strawberry tree groweth in most countries of Greece, in Candy,
Italy, and Spain, also in the valleys of the mountain Athos, where,
being in other places but little, they become great huge trees, as
P. Bellonius writeth. Iuba also reporteth, that there be in Arabia
of them fifty cubits high. They grow only in some few gardens with
us.

The Time.

The Strawberry tree flowereth in July and August, and the fruit is
ripe in September, after it hath remained upon the tree by the space
of an whole year.

The Names.

This tree is called in Greek, Komaros, in Latin, Arbutus: in
English, Strawberry tree, and of some, Arbute tree.

The fruit is named in Greek, Memaikylon, or as others read it,
Memakylon: in Latin, Memæcylum, and Arbutus; and Pliny calleth it
Unedo: Ground Strawberries (saith he) have one body, and Unedo much
like unto them, another body, which only in appearance is like to
the fruit of the earth: The Italians call this Strawberry Albatro:
the Spaniards, Madrono, Medronheyro, and Medronho: the French,
Arboutes, Arbous: It may be termed in English, Tree Strawberry.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The fruit of the Strawberry tree is of a cold temperature,
hurting the stomach, and causing headache; wherefore no wholesome
food, though it be eaten in some places by the poorer sort of
people.

CHAP. 126. Of the Plum Tree.

The Kinds.

To write of Plums particularly would require a peculiar volume, and
yet the end not to be attained unto, nor the stock or kindred
perfectly known, neither to be distinguished apart: the number of
the sorts or kinds are not known to any one country: every climate
hath his own fruit, far different from that of other countries:
myself have three score sorts in my garden, and all strange and
rare: there be in other places many more common, and yet yearly
cometh to our hands others not before known, therefore a few figures
shall serve for the rest. Let such as require a larger history of
these varieties have recourse to the oft mentioned work of Mr
Parkinson: and such as desire the things themselves may find most of
the best with Mr John Millen in Old Street.

Fig. 2093. Kinds of Plum Tree (1-3, 5)

The Description.

1. The Plum or Damson tree is of a mean bigness: it is covered with
a smooth bark: the branches are long, whereon do grow broad leaves,
more long than round, nicked in the edges: the flowers are white:
the plums do differ in colour, fashion, and bigness, they all
consist of pulp and skin, and also of kernel, which is shut up in a
shell or stone. Some plums are of a blackish blue, of which some be
longer, others rounder, others of the colour of yellow wax, divers
of a crimson red, greater for the most part than the rest. There be
also green plums, and withal very long, of a sweet and pleasant
taste: moreover, the pulp or meat of some is drier, and easilier
separated from the stone: of other some it is moister, and cleaveth
faster: our common Damson is known to all, and therefore not to be
stood upon.

2. The Mirobalan Plum tree groweth to the height of a great tree,
charged with many great arms or boughs, which divide themselves into
small twiggy branches, by means whereof it yieldeth a goodly and
pleasant shadow: the trunk or body is covered with a finer and
thinner bark than any of the other Plum trees: the leaves do
somewhat resemble those of the Cherry tree, they are very tender,
indented about the edges: the flowers be white: the fruit is round,
hanging upon long footstalks pleasant to behold, green in the
beginning, red when it is almost ripe, and being full ripe it
glistereth like purple mixed with black: the flesh or meat is full
of juice pleasant in taste: the stone is small, or of a mean
bigness: the tree bringeth forth plenty of fruit every other year.

3. The Almond Plum groweth up to the height of a tree of a mean
bigness: the branches are long, smooth, and even: the leaves are
broad, somthing long, and ribbed in divers places, with small nerves
running through the same: the flowers are white, sprinkled with a
little dash of purple scarcely to be perceived: the fruit is long,
having a cleft down the middle, of a brown red colour, and of a
pleasant taste.

4. The Damascene Plum tree groweth likewise to a mean height, the
branches very brittle; the leaves of a deep green colour: the fruit
is round, of a bluish black colour: the stone is like unto that of
the Cherry, wherein it differeth from all other Plums.

5. The Bullace and the Sloe tree are wild kinds of Plums, which do
vary in their kind, even as the greater and manured Plums do. Of the
Bullace, some are greater and of better taste than others. Sloes are
some of one taste, and some of others, more sharp; some greater, and
others lesser; the which to distinguish with long descriptions were
to small purpose, considering they be all and every of them known
even unto the simplest: therefore this shall suffice for their
several descriptions.

The Place.

The Plum trees grow in all known countries of the world: they
require a loose ground, they also receive a difference from the
regions where they grow, not only of the form or fashion, but
especially of the faculties, as we will forthwith declare.

The Plum trees are also many times grafted into trees of other
kinds, and being so ingrafted, they faciem parentis, succum
adoptionis, ut Plinius dicit, exhibent.["As Pliny says, they exhibit
the appearence of the parent, and the juiciness of the child"]

The greatest variety of these rare Plums are to be found in the
grounds of Mr Vincent Pointer of Twickenham, before remembered in
the chapter Of Apples: although myself am not without some, and
those rare and delicate.

The wild Plums grow in most hedges through England.

The Time.

The common and garden Plum trees do bloom in April: the leaves come
forth presently with them: the fruit is ripe in summer, some sooner,
some later.

The Names.

The Plum tree is called in Latin, Prunus: in High Dutch,
Pflaumenbaum: in Low Dutch, Pruymen: in Spanish, Ciruelo: in French,
Prunier: in English, Plum tree.

The fruit is called in Latin, Prunum: in High Dutch, Pflaumen: in
Low Dutch, Pruymen: in Italian and French, Prune: in Spanish,
Prunas: in English, prune, and plum. These have also names from the
regions and countries where they grow.

The old writers have called those that grow in Syria near unto
Damascus, Damascena Pruna: in English, Damsons, or Damask Prunes:
and those that grow in Spain, Hispanica, Spanish Prunes or Plums. So
in our age we use to call those that grow in Hungary, Hungarica, or
Pannonica, Plums of Hungary: some, gallica Pruna, or French Prunes,
of the country of France. Clearcus Peripateticus saith, that they of
Rhodes and Sicilia do call the Damask Prunes Brabula.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Plums that be ripe and new gathered from the tree, what sort
soever they are of; do moisten and cool, and yield unto the body
very little nourishment, and the same nothing good at all: for as
Plums do very quickly rot, so is also the juice of them apt to
putrefy in the body, and likewise to cause the meat to putrefy which
is taken with them: only they are good for those that would keep
their bodies soluble and cool; for by their moisture and
slipperiness they do mollify the belly.

B. Dried plums, commonly called prunes, are wholesomer, and more
pleasant to the stomach, they yield more nourishment, and better,
and such as cannot easily putrefy. It is reported, saith Galen in
his book Of the Faculties of Nourishments, that the best do grow in
Damascus a city of Syria; and next to those, they that grow in
Spain: but these do nothing at all bind, yet divers of the damask
damson prunes very much; for damask damson prunes are more
astringent, but they of Spain be sweeter. Dioscorides saith, that
damask prunes dried do stay the belly; but Galen affirmth, in his
books of the faculties of simple medicines, that they do manifestly
loose the belly yet lesser than they that be brought out of Spain;
being boiled with mead or honeyed water, which hath a good quantity
of honey in it, they loose the belly very much (as the same author
saith) although a man take them alone by themselves, and much more
if the mead be supped after them. We most commend those of Hungary
being long and sweet; yet more those of Moravia the chief and
principal city in times past of the Province of the Marcomans: for
these after they be dried, that the watery humour may be consumed
away, be most pleasant to the taste, and do easily without any
trouble so mollify the belly, as that in that respect they go beyond
Cassia and Manna, as Thomas Iordanus affirmeth.

C. The leaves of the Plum tree are good against the swelling of the
uvula, the throat, gums, & kernels under the throat and jaws; they
stop the rheum and falling down of humours, if the decoction thereof
be made in wine, and gargled in the mouth and throat.

D. The gum which cometh out of the Plum tree doth glue and fasten
together, as Dioscorides saith.

E. Being drunk in wine it wasteth away the stone, and healeth
lichens in infants and young children; if it be laid on with 
vinegar, it worketh the same effects that the gum of the Peach and
Cherry tree doth.

F. The wild plums do stay and bind the belly, and so do the unripe
plums of what sort soever, whiles they are sharp and sour, for then
are they astringent.

G. The juice of sloes doth stop the belly, the lask and bloody flux,
the inordinate course of women's terms, and all other issues of
blood in man or woman, and may very well be used instead of Acatia,
which is a thorny tree growing in Egypt, very hard to be gotten, and
of a dear price, and therefore the better for wantons; albeit our
plums of this country are equal unto it in virtues.

CHAP. 127. Of Sebesten, or the Assyrian Plum.

Fig. 2094. Senesten or Assyrian Plum

The Description.

Sebestens are also a kind of plums: the tree whereof is not unlike
to the Plum tree, saving it groweth lower than the most of the
manured Plum trees; The leaves be harder and rounder; the flowers
grow at the tops of the branches, consisting of five small white
leaves, with pale yellowish threads in the middle, like those of the
Plum tree: after followeth the fruit like to little plums, fastened
in little skinny cups, which when they be ripe are of greenish black
colour, wherein is contained a small hard stone.The fruit sweet in
taste, the pulp or meat is very tough and clammy.

The Place.

The Sebesten trees grow plentifully in Syria and Egypt, they were in
times past foreign and strange in Italy, now they grow almost in
every garden, being first brought thither in Pliny his time. Now do
the Sebesten trees, saith he, in his 15th book, 18th chapter, begin
to grow in Rome, among the Service trees.

The Time.

The time answereth the common Plums.

The Names.

Pliny calleth the tree Myxa, it may be suspected that this is the
tree which Matron Paradus in his Attic Banquet in Athenæus doth call
Amamelis, but we cannot certainly affirm it, and especially because
divers have diversely deemed thereof. The berry or fruit is named
Myxon and Myxarion, neither have the Latins any other name. The
Arabians and the Apothecaries do call it Sebesten: which is also
made an English name: we may call it the Assyrian Plum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Sebestens be very temperately cold and moist, and have a thick
and clammy substance; therefore they nourish more than most fruits
do, but withal they easily stop the entrails, and stuff up the
narrow passages, and breed inflammations.

B. They take away the ruggedness of the throat and lungs, and also
quench thirst, being taken in lohoch or licking medicine, or
prepared any other kind of way, or else taken by themselves.

C. The weight of ten drams, or of an ounce and a half of the pap or
pulp hereof being inwardly taken, doth loose the belly.

D. There is also made of this fruit a purging electuary, but such an
one as quickly mouldeth, and therefore it is not to be used but when
it is new made.

CHAP. 128. Of the Indian Plum, or Mirobalans.

The Kinds.

There be divers kinds of Mirobalans, as Chebulæ, Belliricæ, Emblicæ,
&c. They likewise grow upon divers trees, and in countries far
distant one from another, and Garcias the Portugal physician is of
opinion, that the five kinds grow upon five divers trees.

Fig. 2095. Kinds of Mirobalan

The Description.

1. The first of the Mirobalan trees, called Chebulæ, is a shrubby
tree altogether wild (which the Indians do call Aretca:) in stature
not unlike to the Plum tree; the branches are many, and grow thick
together, whereon are set leaves like those of the Peach tree. The
fruit is greater than any of the rest, somewhat long, fashioned like
a Pear.

2. This second kind of Mirobalan, called Flava, or Citrina, which
some do call Aritiqui, but the common people of India, Arare,
groweth upon a tree of mean stature, having many boughs standing
finely in order, and set full of leaves like unto the Service tree.

3. The third kind of Mirobalans, called Emblicæ, the Indians do call
Amiale, which grow upon a tree of mean stature, like the former, but
the leaves are very much jagged, in shape like the leaves of Fern,
but that they be somewhat thicker: the Indians do not put the fruit
hereof unto physical uses, but occupy it for the thickening and
tanning of their leather instead of Rhus, or Currier's Sumach, as
also to make ink and bletch for other purposes.

4. Mirobalani Belliricæ, called of the savages Gotni, and Guti,
groweth up to a mean stature, garnished with leaves like unto Laurel
or the Bay tree, but somewhat lesser, thinner, and of a pale green
colour.

5. The fifth kind of Mirobalans is called Indica, which the Indians
do call Rezannale; it groweth upon a tree of mean stature, or rather
upon a shrub or hedge plant, bearing leaves like the Willow, and a
fruit eight square.

There is a sixth kind, the tree whereof is not mentioned in the
authors.

The Place and Time.

The first four kinds of Mirobalans do grow in the kingdom of
Cambaia: they grow likewise in Goa, Batkhal, Malanor, and Dabhol:
the Kebula in Visnagar, Deccan, Gujerat, and Bengal, & many other
places of the East Indies. The time agreeth with other fruits in
those countries.

The Names.

Those which we have said to be yellow, the inhabitants of those
countries where they grow do call them Arare; those that be black
they call Rezemale; the Bellericæ, Gotim; the Chebulæ, Aretca: the
Emblicæ are called Aretiqui.

The Temperature.

All the kinds of Mirobalans are in taste astringent and sharp like
unto the unripe Sorbus or Service berries, and therefore they are of
complexion cold and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The Indians use them rather to bind than purge, but if they do
use them for a purge, they use the decoction of them, and use them
much conserved in sugar, and especially the Chebulæ; the yellow and
black be good that way likewise.

B. The yellow and Bellericæ taken before meat, are good against a
lask, or weak stomach, as Garcia writeth.

C. The yellow and black, or Indicæ, and the Chebulæ, purge lightly,
if two or three drams be taken, and draw superfluous humours from
the head.

D. The yellow, as some write, purge choler, Chebulæ phlegm, Indicæ
melancholy, and strengthen the inward parts, but roasted in the
embers, or otherwise wasted, they dry more than they purge.

E. There are two sorts especially brought into these parts of the
world conserved, the Chebulæ, and of them the best are somewhat long
like a small lemon, with a hard rind and black pith, of the taste of
a conserved walnut; and the Bellericæ, which are round and lesser,
and tenderer in eating.

F. Lobel writeth, that of them the Emblicæ do meanly cool, some do
dry in the first degree, they purge the stomach of rotten phlegm,
they comfort the brain, the sinews, the heart, and liver, procure
appetite, stay vomit, and cool the heat of choler, help the
understanding, quench thirst, and the heat of the entrails: the
greatest and heaviest be the best.

G. They purge best, and with lesser pain if they be laid in water in
the sun until they swell, & sod on a soft fire, & after they have
sod and be cold, preserved in four times so much white honey, put to
them.

H. Garcias found the distilled water to be right profitable against
the French disease, and such-like infections.

I. The Bellericæ are also of a mild operation, and do comfort, and
are cold in the first degree, and dry in the second: the others come
near to the Emblicæ in operation.

CHAP. 129. Of the Jujube Tree.

Fig. 2096. The Jujube Tree

The Description.

The Jujube tree is not much lesser than Ziziphus candida, having a
wreathed trunk or body, and a rough bark full of rifts or crannies,
and stiff branches, beset with strong and hard prickles; from whence
grow out many long twigs, or little stalks, half a foot or more in
length, in show like Rushes, limber, and easily bowing themselves,
and very slender like the twigs of Spartum: about which come forth
leaves one above another, which are somewhat long, not very great,
but hard and tough like to the leaves of Peruinca or Periwinkle; &
among these leaves come forth pale and mossy little flowers: after
which succeed long red well-tasted sweet berries as big as olives
(of a mean quantity) or little prunes, or small plums, wherein there
are hard round stones, or in which a small kernel is contained.

The Place.

There be now at this day Jujube trees growing in very many places of
Italy, which in times past were newly brought thither out of Syria,
and that about Pliny his time, as he himself hath written in his
17th book, 10th chapter.

The Time.

It flowereth in April, at which time the seeds or stones are to be
let or sown for increase.

The Names

This tree is called in Greek Zizyphos and Ziziphos, with iota in the
second syllable: in Latin likewise, Zizyphus; and of Petrus
Crescentius, Zezulus: in English, Jujube tree.

The fruit or plums are named in Greek Zizypha or Zizipha: Galen
calleth them Serica, as Avicenna plainly showeth in his 369th
chapter, in treating of the Jujube, in which he set down those
things that are mentioned concerning Serica in Galen's books Of the
Faculties of Nourishments: in Latin likewise Zizypha and Serica: in
shops, Iuiubæ: in English, Jujubes.

The Temperature.

Jujubes are temperate in heat and moisture.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit of the Jujube tree eaten is of hard digestion, and
nourisheth very little; but being taken in syrups, electuaries, and
such like confections, it appeaseth and mollifieth the roughness of
the throat, the breast and lungs, and is good against the cough, but
exceeding good for the reins of the back, and kidneys and bladder.

CHAP. 130. Of the Cherry Tree.

The Kinds.

The ancient herbarists have set down four kinds of Cherry trees, the
first is great and wild, the second tame or of the garden: the
third, whose fruit is sour: the fourth is that which is called in
Latin Chamæcerasus, or the dwarf Cherry tree. The later writers have
sound divers sorts more, some bringing forth great fruit, others
lesser; some with white fruit, some with black, others of the colour
of black blood, varying infinitely according to the climate and
country where they grow.


Fig. 2097. Common English Cherry (1)
Fig. 2098. Spanish Cherry (3)

The Description

1. The English Cherry tree groweth to an high and great tree, the
body whereof is of a mean bigness, which is parted above into very
many boughs, with a bark somewhat smooth, and of a brown crimson
colour, tough and pliable: the substance or timber is also brown in
the middle, and the outward part is somewhat white. The leaves be
great, broad, long, set with veins or nerves, and slightly nicked
about the edges: the flowers are white, of a mean bigness,
consisting of five leaves, and having certain threads in the middle,
of the like colour: the cherries be round, hanging upon long stems
or footstalks, with a stone in the midst which is covered with a
pulp or soft meat; the kernel thereof is not unpleasant to the
taste, though somewhat bitter.

2. The Flanders Cherry tree differeth not from our English Cherry
tree in stature or form of leaves or flowers; the difference
consisteth in this, that this tree bringeth forth his fruit sooner,
and greater than the other: wherefore it may be called in Latin,
Cerasus precox, sive belgica.

3. The Spanish Cherry tree groweth up to the height of our common
Cherry tree: the wood or timber is soft and loose, covered with a
whitish scaly bark: the branches are knotty, greater, fuller of
substance than any other Cherry tree: the leaves are likewise
greater and longer than any of the rest, in shape like those of the
Chestnut tree: the flowers are like the others in form, but whiter
of colour: the fruit is greater and longer than any, white for the
most part all over, except those that stand in the hottest place
where the sun hath some reflection against a wall: they are also
white within, and of a pleasant taste.

4. The Gascon Cherry tree groweth very like to the Spanish Cherry
tree in stature, flowers, and leaves: it differeth in that it
bringeth forth very great cherries, long, sharp pointed, with a
certain hollowness upon one side, and spotted here and there with
certain prickles of purple colour as small as sand: the taste is
most pleasant, and excelleth in beauty.


Fig. 2099. Late-Ripe Cherry (5)
Fig. 2100. Cluster Cherry (6)

5. The Late-Ripe Cherry tree groweth up like unto our wild English
Cherry tree, with the like leaves, branches, and flowers, saving
that they are sometimes once doubled: the fruit is small, round, and
of a dark bloody colour when they be ripe, which the Frenchmen
gather with their stalks, and hang them up in their houses in
bunches or handfuls against winter, which the physicians do give
unto their patients in hot and burning fevers, being first steeped
in a little warm water, that causeth them to swell and plump up as
full and fresh as when they did grow upon the tree.

6. The Cluster Cherry tree differeth not from the last described
either in leaves, branches, or stature: the flowers are also like,
but never cometh any one of them to be double. The fruit is round,
red when they be ripe, and many growing upon one stem or footstalk
in clusters, like as grapes do. The taste is not unpleasant,
although somewhat sour.

Fig. 2101. Kinds of Cherry (7-10)

7. This Cherry tree with double flowers grows up unto a small tree,
not unlike to the common Cherry tree in each respect, saving that
the flowers are somewhat doubled, that is to say, three or four
times double; after which cometh fruit (though in small quantity)
like the other common Cherry.

8. The Double-Flowered Cherry tree grows up like unto an hedge bush,
but not so great nor high as any of the others; the leaves and
branches differ not from the rest of the Cherry trees. The flowers
hereof are exceeding double, as are the flowers of Marigolds, but of
a white colour, and smelling somewhat like the Hawthorn flowers;
after which come seldom or never any fruit, although some authors
have said that it beareth sometimes fruit, which myself have not at
any time seen; notwithstanding the tree hath grown in my garden many
years, and that in an excellent good place by a brick wall, where it
hath the reflection of the South sun, fit for a tree that is not
willing to bear fruit in our cold climate.

9. The Bird Cherry tree, or the Black Cherry tree, that bringeth
forth very much fruit upon one branch (which better may be
understood, by sight of the figure, than by words) springeth up like
an hedge tree of small stature, it groweth in the wild woods of
Kent, and are there used for stocks to graft other Cherries upon, of
better taste, and more profit, as especially those called the
Flanders Cherries: this wild tree grows very plentifully in the
North of England, especially at a place called Heggdale, neer unto
Rosgill in Westmorland, and in divers other places about Crosby
Ravenswaithe, and there called Hegberry tree: it groweth likewise in
Martome Park, four miles from Blackburn, and in Harward near
thereunto; in Lancashire almost in every hedge: the leaves and
branches differ not from those of the wild Cherry tree: the flowers
grow alongst the small branches, consisting of five small white
leaves, with some greenish and yellow thrums in the middle: after
which come the fruit, green at the first, black when they be ripe,
and of the bigness of sloes; of an harsh and unpleasant taste.

10. The other Bird Cherry tree differeth not from the former in any
respect, but in the colour of the berries; for as they are black; so
on the contrary, these are red when they be ripe, wherein they
differ.


Fig. 2102. Common Black Cherry (11)
Fig. 2103. Dwarf Cherry (12)

11. The common Black Cherry tree grows up in some places to a great
stature: there is no difference between it and our common Cherry
tree, saving that the fruit hereof is very little in respect of
other Cherries, and of a black colour.

12. The dwarf Cherry tree grows very seldom to the height of three
cubits: the trunk or body small, covered with a dark coloured black:
whereupon do grow very limber and pliant twiggy branches: the leaves
are very small, not much unlike to those of the Privet bush: the
flowers are small and white: after which come cherries of a deep red
colour when they be ripe, of taste somewhat sharp, but not greatly
unpleasant: the branches laid down in the earth, quickly take root,
whereby it is greatly increased.

Myself with divers others have sundry other sorts in our gardens,
one called the Hart Cherry, the greater and the lesser one of a
great bigness, and most pleasant in taste, which we call Luke Ward's
Cherry, because he was the first that brought the same out of Italy;
another we have called the Naples Cherry, because it was first
brought into these parts from Naples: the fruit is very great, sharp
pointed, somewhat like a man's heart in shape, of a pleasant taste,
and of a deep blackish colour when it is ripe as it were of the
colour of dried blood.

We have another that bringeth forth cherries also very great, bigger
than any Flanders cherry, of the colour of jet, or burnished horn,
and of a most pleasant taste, as witnesseth Mr Bull, the Queen's
Majesty's Clockmaker, who did taste of the fruit (the tree bearing
only one Cherry, which he did eat; but myself never tasted of it) at
the impression hereof. We have also another, called the Agriot
Cherry, of a reasonable good taste. Another we have with fruit of a
dun colour, tending to a watchet. We have one of the dwarf Cherries,
that bringeth forth fruit as great as most of our Flanders Cherries,
whereas the common sort hath very small cherries, and those of an
harsh taste. These and many sorts more we have in our London
gardens, whereof to write particularly would greatly enlarge our
volume, and to small purpose: therefore what hath been said shall
suffice. I must here (as I have formerly done, in pears, apples and
other such fruits) refer you to my two friends Mr John Parkinson,
and Mr John Millen, the one to furnish you with the history, and the
other with the things themselves, if you desire them.

The Time.

The Cherry trees bloom in April; some bring forth their fruit
sooner; some later: the red cherries be always better than the black
of their own kind.

The Names.

The Cherry tree is called in Greek, Kerasos: and also in Latin,
Cerasus: in High Dutch, Kirschenbaum: in Low Dutch, Kersemboome, and
Crieckenboom: in French, Cerisier: in English, Cherry tree.

The fruit or cherries be called in Greek Kerasa: and in Latin
likewise, Cerasa; in English, cherries: the Latin and English names
in their several titles shall suffice for the rest that might be
said.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The best and principal cherries be those that are somewhat sour:
those little sweet ones which be wild and soonest ripe be the worst:
they contain bad juice, they very soon putrefy, and do engender ill
blood, by reason whereof they do not only breed worms in the belly,
but troublesome agues, and often pestilent fevers: and therefore in
well governed commonwealths it is carefully provided, that they
should not be sold in the markets in the plague time.

B. Spanish cherries are like to these in faculties, but they do not
so soon putrefy: they be likewise cold, and the juice they make is
not good.

C. The Flanders or Kentish cherries that are thorough ripe, have a
better juice, but watery, cold and moist: they quench thirst, they
are good for an hot stomach, and profitable for those that have the
ague: they easily descend and make the body soluble: they nourish
nothing at all.

D. The late ripe cherries which the Frenchmen keep dried against
winter, and are by them called Morelle, and we after the same name
call them Morell cherries, are dry, and do somewhat bind; these
being dried are pleasant to the taste, and wholesome for the
stomach, like as prunes be, and do stop the belly.

E. Generally all the kinds of cherries are cold and moist of
temperature, although some more cold and moist than others: the
which being eaten before meat do soften the belly very gently, they
are unwholesome either unto moist and rheumatic bodies, or for
unhealthy and cold stomachs.

F. The common black cherries do strengthen the stomach, and are
wholesomer than the red cherries, the which being dried do stop the
lask.

G. The distilled water of cherries is good for those that are
troubled with heat and inflammations in their stomachs, and
prevaileth against the falling sickness given mixed with wine.

H. Many excellent Tarts and other pleasant meats are made with
cherries, sugar, and other delicate spices, whereof to write were to
small purpose.

I. The gum of the Cherry tree taken with wine and water, is reported
to help the stone; it may do good by making the passages slippery,
and by tempering & allaying the sharpness of the humours; and in
this manner it is a remedy also for an old cough. Dioscorides
addeth, that it maketh one well coloured, cleareth the sight, and
causeth a good appetite to meat.

CHAP. 131. Of the Mulberry Tree.


Fig. 2104. Mulberry Tree (1)
Fig. 2105. White Mulberry Tree (2)

The Description.

1. The common Mulbery tree is high, and full of boughs: the body
whereof is many times great, the bark rugged; & that of the root 
yellow: the leaves are broad and sharp pointed, something hard, and
nicked on the edges; instead of flowers, are blowings or catkins,
which are downy: the fruit is long, made up of a number of little
grains, like unto a blackberry, but thicker, longer, and much
greater, at the first green, and when it is ripe black, yet is the
juice (whereof it is full) red: the root is parted many ways.

2. The White Mulberry tree groweth until it be come unto a great and
goodly stature, almost as big as the former: the leaves are rounder,
not so sharp pointed, nor so deeply snipped about the edges, yet
sometimes sinuated or deeply cut in on the sides, the fruit is like
the former, but that it is white and somewhat more tasting like
wine.

The Place.

The Mulberry trees grow plentifully in Italy and other hot regions,
where they do maintain great woods and groves of them, that their
silkworms may feed thereon. The Mulberry tree is fitly set by the
slip; it may also be grafted or inoculated into many trees, being
grafted in a white Poplar, it bringeth forth white Mulberies, as
Berytius in his Geoponics reporteth. These grow in sundry gardens in
England.

The Time.

Of all the trees in the orchard the Mulberry doth last bloom, and
not before the cold weather is gone in May (therefore the old
writers were wont to call it the wisest tree) at which time the
silkworms do seem to revive, as having then wherewith to feed and
nourish themselves, which all the winter before do lie like small
grains or seeds, or rather like the dunging of a flesh fly upon a
glass, or some such thing, as knowing their proper time both to
perform their duties for which they were created, and also when they
may have wherewith to maintain and preserve their own bodies unto
their business aforesaid.

The berries are ripe in August and September. Hegesander in Athenæus
affirmeth, that the Mulbery trees in his time did not bring forth
fruit in twenty years together, and that so great a plague of the
gout then reigned and raged so generally, as not only men, but boys,
wenches, eunuchs, and women were troubled with that disease.

The Names

This tree is named in Greek Moria, and in Latin, Morus: in shops,
Morus Celsi: in high Dutch, Maulberbaum: in Low Dutch,
Moerbesseboom: in French, Meurier: in English, Mulberry tree.

The fruit is called in Greek Moron: and in Latin, Morum: in shops,
Morum Celsi: in High Dutch, Moerbesie: in Italian, Moro: in French,
Meure: in Spanish, Moro and Mores: in English, Mulberry.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Mulberries being gathered before they be ripe, are cold and dry
almost in the third degree, and do mightily bind; being dried they
are good for the lask and bloody flux, the powder is used in meat,
and is drunk with wine and water

B. They stay bleedings, and also the reds; they are good against
inflammations or hot swellings of the mouth and jaws, and for other
inflammations newly beginning.

C. The ripe and new gathered Mulberries are likewise cold and be
full of juice, which hath the taste of wine, and is something
drying, and not without a binding quality: and therefore it is also
mixed with medicines for the mouth, and such as help the hot
swellings of the mouth, and almonds of the throat; for which
infirmities it is singular good.

D. Of the juice of the ripe berries is made a confection with sugar,
called Diamorum: that is, after the manner of a syrup, which is
exceeding good for the ulcers and hot swellings of the tongue,
throat, and almonds, or uvula of the throat, or any other malady
arising in those parts.

E. These Mulberries taken in meat, and also before meat, do very
speedily pass through the belly, by reason of the moisture and
slipperiness of their substance, and make a passage for other meats,
as Galen saith.

F. They are good to quench thirst, they stir up an appetite to meat,
they are not hurtful to the stomach, but they nourish the body very
little, being taken in the second place, or after meat, for although
they be less hurtful than other like fruits, yet are they corrupted
and putrefied, unless they speedily descend.

G. The bark of the root is bitter, hot and dry, and hath a scouring
faculty: the decotion hereof doth open the stoppings of the liver
and spleen, it purgeth the belly, and driveth forth worms.

H. The same bark being steeped in vinegar helpeth the toothache: of
the same effect is also the decoction of the leaves and bark, saith
Dioscorides, who showeth that about harvest time there issueth out
of the root a juice, which the next day after is found to be hard,
and that the same is very good against the toothache; that it
wasteth away Phyma, and purgeth the belly.

I. Galen saith, that there is in the leaves and first buds of this
tree a certain middle faculty, both to bind and scour.

CHAP. 132. Of the Sycomore Tree.

Fig. 2106. Sycomore

The Description.

The Sycomore tree is of no small height, being very like to the
Mulbery tree in bigness & show, as also in leaf: the fruit is as
great as a fig, and of the same fashion, very like in juice and
taste to the wild fig, but sweeter, and without any grains or seeds
within, which groweth not forth of the tender boughs, but out of the
body and great old arms very fruitfully: this tree hath in it plenty
of milky juice, which so soon as any part is broken or cut, doth
issue forth.

The Place.

It growth, as Dioscorides writeth, very plentifully in Caria and
Rhodes, and in sundry places of Egypt, as at the great Cairo or
Alkaire, and in places that do not bring forth much wheat, in which
it is an help, and sufficeth instead of bread & corn when there is
scarcity of victuals. Galen writeth, that he saw a plant of the
Sycomore tree like to the wild Fig tree, fruit and all.

The Time.

It bringeth forth fruit three or four times in one year, and oftener
if it be scraped with an iron knife, or other like instrument.

The Names

This tree is called in Greek Sykomoros, of the Fig tree and the
Mulbery tree: in Latin, Sycomorus: Cornelius Celsus nameth it
backward Morosycos: the Egyptians of our time do call it Ficus
pharaonis, or Pharaoh his Fig tree, as witnesseth Bellonius: and it
is likewise termed Ficus ægyptia, Egyptian Fig tree, and also Morus
ægyptia, or Egyptian Mulberry tree. We call it in English, Sycomore
tree after the Greek and Latin, and also Mulberry Fig Tree, which is
the right Sycomore tree, and not the great Maple, as we have said in
the chapter of the Maple.

The fruit is named in Greek Sycomoron, and in Italian, Sycomoro and
Fico d'Egitto.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The fruit of the Sycomore tree hath no sharpness in it at all, as
Galen saith. It is somewhat sweet in taste, and is of temperature
moist after a sort, and cold as be Mulberries.

B. It is good, saith Dioscorides, for the belly; but it is arophos,
that is, without any nourishment, and troublesome to the stomach.

C. There issueth forth of the bark of this tree in the beginning of
the spring, before the fruit appeareth, a liquor, which being taken
up with a sponge, or a little wool, is dried, made up into fine
cakes, and kept in gallipots: this mollifieth, closeth wounds
together, and dissolveth gross humours.

D. It is both inwardly taken and outwardly applied against the
bitings of serpents, hardness of the milt or spleen, and pain of the
stomach proceeding of a cold cause: this liquor doth very quickly
putrefy.

CHAP. 133. Of the Fig Tree.


Fig. 2107. Fig Tree (1)
Fig. 2108. Dwarf Fig Tree (2)

The Description.

1. The garden Fig tree becometh a tree of a mean stature, having
many branches full of white pith within, like Elder pith, and large
leaves of a dark green colour, divided into sundry sections or
divisions. The fruit cometh out of the branches without any flower
at all that ever I could perceive, which fruit is in shape like unto
Pears, of colour either whitish, or somewhat red or of a deep blue,
full of small grains within, of a sweet and pleasant taste; which
being broken before it be ripe, doth yield most white milk, like
unto the kinds of Spurge, and the leaves also being broken do yield
the like liquor; but when the figs be ripe, the juice thereof is
like honey.

2. The Dwarf Fig tree is like unto the former in leaves and fruit,
but it never groweth above the height of a man, and hath many small
shoots coming from the roots, whereby it greatly increaseth.

There is also another wild kind, whose fruit is never ripe;
Theophrastus nameth it Erineos; Pliny Caprificus.

The Place.

The Fig trees do grow plentifully in Spain and Italy, and many other
countries, as in England; where they bear fruit, but it never cometh
to kindly maturity, except the tree be planted under an hot wall,
whereto neither North, nor Northeast winds can come.

The Time.

The Dwarf Fig tree groweth in my garden, and bringeth forth ripe and
very great fruit in the month of August, of which figs sundry
persons have eaten at pleasure.

In England the Fig trees put not forth their leaves until the end of
May, where oftentimes the fruit cometh forth before the leaves
appear.

The Names

The Fig tree is called in Greek, Sykos, and of divers, for
difference sake between it and the wild Fig tree, Sykos emeros: in
Latin, Ficus, and Ficus sativa, and urbana: in High Dutch,
Feygenbaum: in Low Dutch, Vijgheboom: in French, Figuier: in
Italian, Feco: in Spanish, Higuera: in English, Fig tree

The fruit is named in Greek, Sykon: in Latin, Ficus: and the unripe
fruit Grossus: that which is dried is called in Latin, Carica: in
High Dutch, Feygen: in Low Dutch, Vijghen: in French, Figues: in
Italian, Fiche: in Spanish, Higos: in English, Fig: the little seeds
which are found in them are named by Galen Cechramides.

The Temperature.

The green figs new gathered are somewhat warm and moist: the dry and
ripe figs are hot almost in the third degree, and withal sharp and
biting.

The leaves also have some sharpness, with an opening power, but not
so strong as the juice.

The Virtues.

A. The dry figs do nourish better than the green or new figs;
notwithstanding they engender not very good blood, for such people
as do feed much thereon do become lousy.

B. Figs be good for the throat and lungs, they mitigate the cough,
and are good for them that be short winded: they ripen phlegm,
causing the same to be easily spat out, especially when they be
sodden with Hyssop, and the decoction drunk.

C. Figs stamped with salt, Rue, and the kernels of nuts withstand
all poison and corruption of the air. The King of Pontus, called
Mithridates, used this preservative against all venom and poison.

D. Figs stamped and made into the form of a plaster with wheat meal,
the powder of Fenugreek, and linseed, and the roots of Marsh
Mallows, applied warm, do soften and ripen impostumes, phlegmons,
all hot and angry swellings and tumors behind the ears: and if you
add thereto the roots of Lilies, it ripeneth and breaketh venereous
impostumes that come in the flank, which impostume is called Bubo,
by reason of his lurking in such secret places: in plain English
terms they are called botches.

E. Figs boiled in Wormwood wine with some barley meal are very good
to be applied as an emplaster upon the bellies of such as have the
dropsy.

F. Dry figs have power to soften, consume, and make thin, and may be
used both outwardly and inwardly, whether it be to ripen or soften
impostumes, or to scatter, dissolve, and consume them.

G. The leaves of the Fig tree do waste and consume the King's Evil,
or swelling kernels in the throat, and do mollify, waste, and
consume all other tumours, being finely pounded and laid thereon:
but after my practise, being boiled with the roots of marsh Mallows
until they be soft, and so incorporated together, and applied in
form of a plaster.

H. The milky juice either of the figs or leaves is good against all
roughness of the skin, lepries, spreading sores, tetters, smallpox,
measles, pushes, wheals, freckles, lentils, and all other spots,
scurviness, and deformity of the body and face, being mixed with
barley meal and applied: it doth also take away warts and such like
excrescences, if it be mingled with some fatty or greasy thing.

I. The milk doth also cure the toothache, if a little lint or cotton
be wet therein, and put into the hollowness of the tooth.

K. It openeth the veins of the hemorrhoids, and looseneth the belly,
being applied to the fundament.

L. Figs stamped with the powder of Fenugreek, and vinegar, and
applied plasterwise, do ease the intolerable pain of the hot gout,
especially the gout of the feet.

M. The milk thereof put into the wound proceeding of the biting of a
mad dog, or any other venomous beast, preserveth the parts
adjoining, taketh away the pain presently, and cureth the hurt.

N. The green and ripe figs are good for those that be troubled with
the stone of the kidneys, for they make the conduits slippery, and
open them, and do also somewhat cleanse: whereupon after the eating
of the same, it happeneth that much gravel and sand is conveyed
forth.

O. Dry or barrel figs, called in Latin Caricæ, are a remedy for the
belly, the cough, and for old infirmities of the chest and lungs:
they scour the kidneys, and cleanse forth the sand, they mitigate
the pain of the bladder, and cause women with child to have the
easier deliverance, if they feed thereof for certain days together
before their time.

P. Dioscorides saith, that the white liquor of the Fig tree, and
juice of the leaves, do curdle milk as rennet doth, and dissolve the
milk that is cluttered in the stomach, as doth vinegar.

Q. It bringeth down the menses, if it be applied with the yolk of an
egg, or with yellow wax.

CHAP. 134. Of the Prickly Indian Fig Tree.

Fig. 2109. Indian Fig

The Description.

This strange and admirable plant, called Ficus indica, seems to be
no other thing than a multiplication of leaves, that is, a tree made
of leaves, without body or boughs; for the leaf set in the ground
doth in short space take root, and bringeth out of itself other
leaves, from which do grow others one after another, till such time
as they come to the height of a tree, having also in the mean season
boughs as it were coming from those leaves, sometimes more,
otherwhiles fewer, as Nature list to bestow, adding leaf unto leaf,
whereby it occupieth a great piece of ground: these leaves are long
and broad, as thick as a man's thumb, of a deep green colour, set
full of long, slender, sharp, and whitish prickles: on the tops of
which leaves come forth long flowers not unlike to those of the
manured Pomegranate tree, of a yellow colour: after which cometh the
fruit like unto the common fig, narrow below, and bigger above, of a
green colour, and stuffed full of a red pulp and juice, staining the
hands of them that touch it, as do the mulberries, with a bloody or
sanguine colour: the top of which figs are environed with certain
scaly leaves like a crown, wherein are also contained small grains
that are the seeds: the which being sown, do bring forth plants
round bodied, like unto the trunk of other trees, with leaves placed
thereon like the other; which being set in the ground bring forth
trees of leaves, as we have showed.

Upon this plant in some parts of the West Indies grow certain
excrescences, which in continuance of time turn into insects; and
these outgrowings are that high prized cochineal wherwith they dye
colours in grain.

The Place.

This plant groweth in all the tract of the East and West Indies, and
also in the country Norembega, now called Virginia, from whence it
hath been brought into Italy, Spain, England, and other countries:
in Italy it sometimes beareth fruit, but more often in Spain, and
never as yet in England, although I have bestowed great pains and
cost in keeping it from the injury of our cold climate.

It groweth also at S. Crux and other places of Barbary, and also in
an island of the Mediterranean sea, called Zante, about a day and
night's sailing with a mean wind from Patras a port in Morea, where
my servant William Marshall (before remembered) did see not only
great store of those trees made of leaves, but also divers other
round bodied plants of a woody substance: from whence be brought me
divers plants thereof in tubs of earth, very fresh and green, which
flourished in my garden at the impression hereof.

The Time.

These plants do grow green and fresh both winter and summer, by the
relation of my foresaid servant: notwithstanding they must be very
carefully kept in these countries from the extremity of winter.

The Names.

This is thought to be the plant called of Pliny, Opuntium; whereof
he hath written, lib. 21. cap. 17, in this manner: About Opuns is
the herb Opuntia, to man's taste sweet, and it is to be marvelled,
that the root should be made of the leaves, and that it should so
grow. Opuns is a city near unto Phocis in Greece, as Pausanias,
Strabo, and Pliny testify: but it is commonly called in Latin, Ficus
indica: of the Indians, Tune, and Tuna, and also Anapallus, as
testifieth Bellonius: in English, Indian Fig tree.

There is a certain other described for the Indian Fig tree, by
Theophrastus, lib. 4, which Pliny, lib. 12. cap. 5. doth eloquently
express almost in the same words, but turned into Latin, whereof we
intend to speak in the next chapter.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. We have no certain instruction from the ancients, of the
temperature or faculty of this plant, or of the fruit thereof:
neither have we anything whereof to write of our own knowledge, more
than that we have heard reported of such as have eaten liberally of
the fruit hereof, that it changed their urine to the colour of
blood; who at the first sight thereof stood in great doubt of their
life, thinking it had been blood, whereas it proved afterwards by
experience to be nothing but the tincture or colour the urine had
taken from the juice of the fruit, and that without all hurt or
grief at all.

B. It is reported of some, that the juice of the fruit is excellent
good against ulcers of long continuance.

C. Cochineal is given alone, and mixed with other things, in malign
diseases, as pestilent fevers and the like, but with what success I
know not.

CHAP. 135. Of the Arched Indian Fig Tree.

Fig. 2110. Arched Indian Fig Tree

The Description.

This rare and admirable tree is very great, straight, and covered
with a yellowish bark tending to tawny: the boughs and branches are
many, very long, tough, and flexible, growing very long in short
space, as do the twigs of Osiers, and those so long and weak, that
the ends thereof hang down and touch the ground, where they take
root and grow in such sort, that those twigs become great trees: and
these being grown up unto the like greatness, do cast their branches
or twiggy tendrils unto the earth, where they likewise take hold and
root; by means whereof it cometh to pass, that of one tree is made a
great wood or desert of trees, which the Indians do use for
coverture against the extreme heat of the sun, wherewith they are
grievously vexed: some likewise use them for pleasure, cutting down
by a direct line a long walk, or as it were a vault, through the
thickest part, from which also they cut certain loopholes or windows
in some places, to the end to receive thereby the fresh cool air
that entereth thereat, as also for light, that they may see their
cattle that feed thereby, to avoid any danger that might happen unto
them either by the enemy or wild beasts: from which vault or close
walk doth rebound such an admirable echo or answering voice, if one
of them speak unto another aloud, that it doth resound or answer
again four or five times, according to the height of the voice, to
which it doth answer, and that so plainly, that it cannot be known
from the voice itself: the first or mother of this wood or desert of
trees is hard to be known from the children, but by the greatness of
the body, which three men can scarcely fathom about: upon the
branches whereof grow leaves hard and wrinkled, in shape like those
of the Quince tree, green above, and of a whitish hoary colour
underneath, whereupon the elephants delight to feed: among which
leaves come forth the fruit, of the bigness of a man's thumb, in
shape like a small fig, but of a sanguine or bloody colour and of a
sweet taste, but not so pleasant as the figs of Spain;
notwithstanding they are good to be eaten, and withal very
wholesome.

The Place.

This wondrous tree groweth in divers places of the East Indies,
especially near unto Goa, and also in Malacca: it is a stranger in
most parts of the world.

The Time.

This tree keepeth his leaves green winter and summer.

The Names.

This tree is called of those that have travelled, Ficus indica, the
Indian Fig; and Arbor goa, of the place where it groweth in greatest
plenty: we may call it in English, the Arched Fig tree.

Such as desire to see more of this Fig tree, may have recourse to
Clusius his Exotics, Lib. 1. cap. 1, where he shows it was mentioned
by divers ancient writers, as Q. Curtius, lib. 9: Pliny, lib. 12.
cap. 5: Strabo, lib. 5, and Theophrastus. Hist. Plant. lib. 4. cap.
5, by the name of Ficus indica.

The Temperature and Virtues.

We have nothing to write of the temperature or virtues of this tree,
of our own knowledge: neither have we received from others more,
than that the fruit hereof is generally eaten, and that without any
hurt at all but rather good, and also nourishing.

CHAP. 136. Of Adam's-Apple Tree, or the West-Indian Plantain.

Fig. 2111. Adam's-Apple tree and Fruit

The Description.

Whether this plant may be reckoned for a tree properly, or for an
herby plant, it is disputable, considering the soft and herby
substance whereof it is made; that is to say, when it hath attained
to the height of six or seven cubits, and of the bigness of a man's
thigh, notwithstanding it may be cut down with one stroke of a
sword, or two or three cuts with a knife, even with as much ease as
the root of a Radish or Carrot of the like bigness: from a thick fat
thready root rise immediately divers great leaves, of the length of
three cubits and a half, sometimes more, according to the soil where
it groweth, and of a cubit and more broad, of bigness sufficient to
wrap a child in of two years old, in shape like those of Mandrake,
of an overworn green colour, having a broad rib running through the
middle thereof: which leaves, whether by reason of the extreme hot
scorching sun, or of their own nature, in September are so dry and
withered, that there is nothing thereof left or to be seen but only
the middle rib. From the midst of these leaves riseth up a thick
trunk, whereon doth grow the like leaves, which the people do cut
off, as also those next the ground, by means whereof it riseth up to
the height of a tree, which otherwise would remain a low and base
plant. This manner of cutting they use from time to time, until it
come to a certain height, above the reach of the elephant, which
greedily seeketh after the fruit. In the midst of the top among the
leaves cometh forth a soft and fungous stump, whereon do grow divers
apples in form like a small cucumber, and of the same bigness,
covered with a thin rind like that of the fig, of a yellow colour
when they be ripe: the pulp or substance of the meat is like that of
the Pumpkin, without either seeds, stones, or kernels, in taste not
greatly perceived at the first, but presently after it pleaseth, and
enticeth a man to eat liberally thereof; by a certain enticing
sweetness it yields: in which fruit, if it be cut according to the
length (saith mine author) oblique, transverse, or any other way
whatsoever, may be seen the shape and form of a cross, with a man
fastened thereto. Myself have seen the fruit, and cut it in pieces,
which was brought me from Aleppo in pickle; the cross I might
perceive, as the form of a spread eagle in the root of Fern; but the
man I leave to be sought for by those that have better eyes and
judgment than myself.

Fig. 2112. A Better Illustration of Adam's-Apple Fruit

April 10 1633. My much honoured friend Dr. Argent (now President of
the College of Physicians of London) gave me a plant he received
from the Bermudas: the length of the stalk was some two foot; the
thickness thereof some seven inches about, being crested, and full
of a soft pith, so rhat one might easily with a knife cut it
asunder. It was crooked a little or indented; so that each two or
three inches space it put forth a knot of some half inch thickness,
and some inch in length, which incompassed it more than half about;
and upon each of these joints or knots, in two ranks one above
another, grew the fruit, some twenty, nineteen, eighteen, &c. more
or less, at each knot: for the branch I had, contained nine knots or
divisions, and upon the lowest knot grew twenty, and upon the
uppermost fifteen. The fruit which I received was not ripe, but
green, each of them was about the bigness of a large bean; the
length of them some five inches, and the breadth some inch and half:
they all hang their heads downwards, have rough or uneven ends, and
are five-cornered; and if you turn the upper side downward, they
somewhat resemble a boat, as you may see by one of them expressed by
itself: the husk is as thick as a bean's, and will easily shell off
it: the pulp is white and soft: the stalk whereby it is fastened to
the knot is very short, and almost as thick as one's little finger.
This stalk with the fruit thereon I hanged up in my shop, where it
became ripe about the beginning of May, and lasted until June: the
pulp or meat was very soft and tender, and it did eat somewhat like
a Musk-Melon. I have given you the figure of the whole branch, with
the fruit thereon, which I drew as soon as I received it, and it is
marked with this figure 1. The figure 2 showeth the shape of one
particular fruit, with the lower side upwards. 3. The same cut
through the middle longways. 4. The same cut sideways. I have been
told (but how certain it is I know not) that the flowers which
precede the fruit are bell-fashioned, and of a blue colour. I could
observe no seed in the fruit; it may be it was because it had been
cut from the stock so long before it came to maturity. This plant is
found in many places of Asia, Africa, and America, especially in the
hot regions: you may find frequent mention of it amongst the sea
voyages to the East and West Indies, by the name of Plantain, or
Platanus, Bananas, Bonanas, Bovanas, Davanas, Poco, &c. Some (as our
author hath said) have judged it the forbidden fruit; other some,
the grapes brought to Moses out of the Holy Land.

The Place.

This admirable tree groweth in Egypt, Cyprus, and Syria, near unto a
chief city there called Alep, which we call Aleppo; and also by
Tripolis, not far from thence: it groweth also in Canara, Deccan,
Gujerat, and Bengal, places of the East Indies.

The Time.

From the root of this tree shooteth forth young springs or shoots,
which the people take up and plant for the increase in the spring of
the year. The leaves wither away in September, as is above said.

The Names.

It is called Musa by such as travel to Aleppo: by the Arabians, Musa
Maum: in Syria, Mose: the Grecians and Christians which inhabit
Syria, and the Jews also, suppose it to be that tree of whose fruit
Adam did taste; which others think to be a ridiculous fable: of
Pliny, Opuntia.

It is called in the East Indies (as at Malabar where it also
groweth) Palan: in Malay, Pican: and in that part of Africa which we
call Guinea, Bananas: in English, Adam's-Apple tree.
The Temperature.

Dioscorides and Sergio judge, that it heateth in the end of the
first degree, and moisteneth in the end of the same.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit hereof yieldeth but little nourishment: it is good for
the heat of the breast, lungs, and bladder: it stoppeth the liver,
and hurteth the stomach if too much of it be eaten, and procureth
looseness in the belly: whereupon it is requisite for such as are of
a cold constitution, in the eating thereof to put unto it a little
ginger or other spice.

B. It is also good for the reins, or kidneys, and to provoke urine:
it nourisheth the child in the mothers womb, and stirreth to
generation.

CHAP. 137. Of the Date Tree.

Fig. 2113. Date Tree with Flowers and Fruit

The Description.

The Date tree groweth very great and high: the body or trunk thereof
is thick, and covered with a scaly rugged bark, caused by the
falling away of the leaves: the boughs grow only on the top,
consisting of leaves set upon a woody middle rib like those of Reeds
or Flags: the inner part of which rib or stalk is soft, light,
hollow, and spongy. Among the leaves come forth the flowers included
in a long skinny membrane, as it were a sheath or hose, like that
which covereth the Fleur-de-Lys before it be blown, which being
opened of itself, white flowers start forth, standing upon short and
slender footstalks, which are fastened with certain small filaments
or thready strings like unto little branches: after which spring out
from the same branches the fruit or dates, which be in fashion long
and round, in taste sweet, and many times somewhat harsh, of a
yellowish red colour; wherein is contained a long hard stone, which
is instead of kernel and seed; the which I have planted many times
in my Garden, and have grown to the height of three foot: but the
first frost hath nipped them in such sort, that soon after they
perished, notwithstanding my industry by covering them, or what else
I could do for their succour.

The Place.

The Date trees grow plentifully in Africa and Egypt; but those which
are in Palestine and Syria be the best: they grow likewise in most
places of the East and West Indies, where there be divers sorts, as
well wild, as tame or manured.

The Time.

The Date tree is always green, and flowereth in the spring time: the
fruit is ripe in September, and being then gathered they are dried
in the sun, that they may be the better both transported into other
countries far distant, as also preserved from rotting at home.

The Names.

The tree is called in Greek, Phoinix: in Latin, Palma: in English,
Date tree.

The fruit is named in Greek, Balanos Phoinikos: that is to say,
Glans Palmarum, or the fruit of the Date trees: and by one word,
Phoinikobalanos: in Latin, Palmula: in shops, Dactylus: in High
Dutch Dattelen: in Low Dutch, Dadelen: in Italian, Dattoli: in
French, Dattes: in Spanish, Tamaras, and Dattiles: in English, Date.

The cod or sheath wherein the flowers and dates are wrapped, is
called Elate: and of some, Birassos.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. All manner of dates whatsoever are hard of digestion, and cause 
headache: the worser sort be those that be dry and binding, as the
Egyptian dates; but the soft, moist, and sweet ones are less
hurtful.

B. The blood which is engendered of dates in man's body is
altogether gross, and somewhat clammy: by these the liver is very
quickly stopped, especially being inflamed and troubled with some
hard swelling: so is the spleen likewise.

C. The dates which grow in colder regions, when they cannot come to
perfect ripeness, if they be eaten too plentifully, do fill the body
full of raw humours, engender wind, and oft-times cause the leprosy.

D. The drier sorts of dates, as Dioscorides saith, be good for those
that spit blood, for such as have bad stomachs, and for those also
that be troubled with the bloody flux.

E. The best dates, called in Latin Caryotæ, are good for the
roughness of the throat and lungs.

F. There is made hereof both by the cunning confectioners and cooks,
divers excellent cordial, comfortable, and nourishing medicines, and 
that procure lust of the body very mightily.

G. They do also refresh and restore such unto strength as are
entering into a consumption, for they strengthen the feebleness of
the liver and spleen, being made into convenient broths, and
physical medicines directed by a learned physician.

H. Dry dates do stop the belly, and stay vomiting, and the wambling
of women's stomachs that are with child, if they be either eaten in
meats or otherwise, or stamped and applied unto the stomach as a
pectoral plaster.

I. The ashes of the date stones have a binding quality, and
emplastic faculty, they heal pushes in the eyes, Staphylomata, and
falling away of the hair of the eyelids, being applied together with
Spikenard: with wine it keepeth proud flesh from growing in wounds.

K. The boughs and leaves do evidently bind, but especially the hose,
that is to say, the sheath or case of the flowers: and therefore it
is good to use these so oft as there is need of binding.

L. The leaves and branches of the Date tree do heal green wounds and
ulcers, refresh and cool hot inflammations.

M. Galen in his book Of Medicines According to the Kinds mentioneth
a composition called Diapalma, which is to be stirred with the bough
of a Date tree instead of a spature or a thing to stir with, for no
other cause than that it may receive thereby some kind of astriction
or binding force.

CHAP. 138. Of the Wild Date Tree.

Fig. 2114. Small Wild Date (1)

The Description.

1. Theophrastus maketh this plant to be a kind of Date tree, but low
and of small growth, seldom attaining above the height of a cubit:
on the top whereof shoot forth for the most part long leaves like
those of the Date tree, but lesser and shorter; from the sides
whereof breaks forth a bush of thready strings: among which riseth
up small branches garnished with clusters of white flowers, in which
before they be opened are to be seen unperfect shapes of leaves,
closely compassed about with an innumerable sort of thin skinny
hulls; which rude shapes with the flowers are served up and eaten at
the second course among other junkets, with a little salt and
pepper, being pleasant to the taste. The stalk is about the
thickness of one's little finger, here and there set with a few
crooked pricks: the leaves within some handful or two of the stalk
are cut up and made into little besoms, which are sold in many glass
shops here in London.


Fig. 2115. Cone-Bearing Wild Date (2)
Fig. 2116. The Fruit of the Cone Date

2. The wild Date tree that brings forth cones or key-clogs, is of
most travellers into the Indies thought to be barren of dates,
except sometimes it yieldeth forth some small berries like unto
dates, but dry, and nothing worth. This tree groweth to the height
and bigness of a low tree; the trunk or body whereof is soft, of a
fungous or pithy substance, unfit for building, as is the manured
Date tree: the branch itself was brought unto us from the Indies,
dry & void of leaves, wherefore we must describe the leaves by
report of the bringer. The branches (saith my author) are covered
over with long flaggy leaves, hanging down of a great length like
those of the Date tree: the branches are also covered with a scaly
or scabbed bark, very rough, one scale or plate lying over another,
as tiles upon a house: the fruit grows at the end of the branches,
not unlike a great Pine apple cone, covered over with a skin like
the Indian nut: wherein is contained a shell, within which shell
lieth hid an acorn or long kernel of an inch long, and sometimes
longer, very hard to be broken, in taste like the Chestnut; which
the savage people do grate and stamp to powder to make them bread.

The Place.

Theophrastus saith the first grows in Candy, but much more
plentifully in Cilicia, and are now found in certain places of Italy
by the seaside, and also in divers parts of Spain.

The other hath been found by travellers into the West Indies, from
whence have been brought the naked branches with the fruit.

The Time.

The time answereth that of the manured Date tree.

The Names.

The little Date tree or wild Date tree is named in Naples,
Cephaglione: in Latin commonly Palmites. That which is found in the
midst of the young springs, and is used to be eaten in banquets, is
called in Latin, Palmæ cerebrum, the brain of the Date tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Galen supposeth that the brain of the Date tree consisteth of
sundry parts, that is to say, of a certain watery and warm
substance, and of an earthy and cold; therefore it is moist and
cold, with a certain astriction or binding quality.

B. Being taken as a meat it engendereth raw humours and wind, and
therefore it is good to be eaten with pepper and salt.

CHAP. 139. Of the Drunken Date Tree.

Fig. 2117. The Drunken Date Tree

The Description.

The drunken Date tree, which Carolus Clusius calleth Faufel, is an
Indian tree of a great bigness, the timber whereof is very soft and
spongeous, exceeding smooth and plain unto a great height, not
possible to be climbed up; and therefore the Indians for their
easier ascending up, at some distances do tie round about the tree
certain withes or ropes made of the barks of trees, as may be
perceived by the figure, whereby very easily they go up and down to
gather the fruit at their pleasure. The top of the tree is divided
into sundry branches, in substance like to the great cane; whereupon
do grow fair flaggy leaves like those of the Palm or Date tree,
whereof doubtless this is a wild kind: from the bottom of which
branches cometh forth fruit in long bunches like traces of Onions,
covered with a soft pulp like unto the walnut, rough, and very full
of hair of a yellowish colour, and like the dried Date when it is
ripe: within which husk is contained fruit like unto the nutmeg, but
greater, very hard, and striped over with red and white veins, or
sinews.

The Place, Time, and Names.

This Date tree, which the Arabians call Faufel, that is by
interpretation, Avellana indica, the Indian nut or filbert, Avicenna
and Serapio call Filfel, and Fufel. It groweth in the East Indies in
divers and sundry places, as in Malabar, where vulgarly it is called
Pac and of the nobles and gentlemen, Areca: which name is used
amongst the Portugals which dwell in those Indies: in Gujerat and
Deccan it is called Cupare: in Ceylon, Poaz: in Malacca, Pinan: in
Cochin, Chacani: in English, the drunken Date tree, which name we
have coined from his quality, because the fruit maketh those drunk
that eat thereof.

The Temperature.

It is cold and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit of Areca before it be ripe is reckoned amongst the
stupefactive or astonishing medicines; for whosoever eateth thereof
waxeth drunk, because it doth exceedingly amaze and astonish the
senses.

B. When the Indians are vexed with some intolerable ache or pain, or
must of necessity endure some great torment or torture, then do they
take of this fruit, whereby the rigor of that pain which otherwise
they should feel, is very much mitigated.

C. The juice of the fruit of Areca doth strengthen the gums, fasten
the teeth, comfort the stomach, stay vomiting and looseness of the
belly: it doth also purge the body from congealed or clotted blood
gathered within the same.

CHAP. 140. Of the Indian Nut Tree.

Fig. 2118. The Indian Nut (1)

The Description.

1. The Grecians have not known, but the Arabians have mentioned this
Indian Nut tree, the body whereof is very great, smooth and plain,
void of boughs or branches, of great height; wherefore the Indians
do wrap ropes about the body thereof, as they do upon the tree last
described, for their more ease in gathering the fruit: the timber
whereof is very spongy within, but hard without, a matter fit to
make their canoes and boats of: on the top of the tree grow the
leaves like those of the Date tree, but broad, and sharp at the
point as thorns, whereof they use to make needles, bodkins, and such
like instruments, wherewith they sew the sails of their ships and do
such like business: among these leaves come forth clusters of
flowers like those of the Chestnut tree, which turn into great fruit
of a round form, and somewhat sharp at one end; in that end next
unto the tree is one hole, sometimes two bored through: this nut or
fruit is wrapped in a coverture, consisting of a substance not
unlike to hemp before it be beaten soft: there is also a finer and
gentler stuff next unto the shell, like unto Flax before it be made
soft: in the middle whereof is contained a great nut covered with a
very hard shell, of a brown colour before it be polished, afterward
of a black shining colour like burnished horn: next into the shell
upon the inside there cleaveth a white kernelly substance firm and
solid, of the colour and taste of a blanched almond: within the
cavity or hollowness thereof is contained a most delectable liquor
like unto milk; and of a most pleasant taste.

Fig. 2119. The Little Indian Nut & Mehenbethene (2 & 3)

2. We have no certain knowledge from those that have travelled into
the Indies, of the tree which beareth this little Indian nut;
neither have we anything of our own knowledge, more than that we see
by experience, that the fruit hereof is lesser, wherein consisteth
the difference.

3. The other, expressed in the same table with the former, by the
name of Mehenbethene, Clusius received it by the same name from
Cortusus of Padua: yet it doth not (as he saith) well agree with the
description; and he rather approves of their opinion who refer it to
the Nux unguentaria, or Ben. It is some inch long, of a triangular
figure, with a hard and woody shell: which broken, shows three cells
or partitions, in each whereof is contained a long kernel white and
sweet.

The Place.

This Indian Nut groweth in some places of Africa, and in the East
Indies, and in all the islands of the West Indies, especially in
Hispaniola, Cuba, and Saint John's Island, and also upon the
continent by Carthagena, Nombre de Dios, and Panama, and in
Virginia, otherwise called Norembega, part of the same continent,
for the most part near unto the seaside, and in moist places, but it
is seldom found in the uplandish countries.

The Time.

It groweth green winter and summer.

The Names.

The fruit is called in Latin, Nux indica: of the Indians, Cocus: of
the Portugals that dwell in the East Indies, Cocco, taken from the
end, wherein are three holes representing the head of a monkey:
Serapio and Rhasis do call this tree Iaralnare, id est, arborem
nuciferam, the tree bearing nuts: of Avicenna, Glauci al hend: of
the vulgar people, Maro, and the fruit Narel; which name Narel is
common among the Persians and Arabians: it is called in Malabar,
Tengamaran: the ripe fruit, Tenga; and the green fruit, Eleri: in
Goa it is called Lanhan: in Malaya, Triccan: and the nut, Nihor.

The distilled liquor is called Sula; and the oil that is made
thereof, Copra.

The Temperature.

It is of a mean temper betwixt hot and cold.

The Virtues and use.

A. The Indians do use to cut the twigs and tender branches toward
the evening, at the ends whereof they have bottle gourds, hollow
canes, and such like things, fit to receive the water that droppeth
from the branches thereof, which pleasant liquor they drink instead
of wine; from the which is drawn a strong and comfortable Aqua Vitæ,
which they use in time of need against all manner of sicknesses; of
the branches and boughs they make their houses; of the trunk or body
of the tree, ships and boats; of the hemp on the outward part of the
fruit, they make ropes and cables; and of the finer stuff, sails for
their ships.

B. Likewise they make of the shell of the nut, cups to drink in,
which we likewise use in England, garnished with silver for the same
purposes. The kernel serveth them for bread and meat: the milky
juice doth serve to cool and refresh their wearied spirits: out of
the kernel when it is stamped, is pressed a most precious oil, not
only good for meat, but also for medicine, wherewith they anoint
their feeble limbs after their tedious travail, by means whereof the
ache and pain is mitigated, and other infirmities quite taken away
proceeding of other causes.

CHAP. 141. Of the Dragon Tree.

Fig. 2120. Dragon Tree and Fruit

The Description.

This strange and admirable tree groweth very great, resembling the
Pine tree, by reason it doth always flourish, and hath his boughs or
branches of equal length and bigness, which are bare and naked, of
eight or nine cubits long, and of the bigness of a man's arm: from
the ends of which do shoot out leaves of a cubit and a half long,
and full two inches broad, somewhat thick, and raised up in the
middle, then thinner and thinner like a two edged sword: among which
come forth little mossy flowers, of small moment, and turn into
berries, of the bigness of cherries, of a yellowish colour, round,
light and bitter, covered with a threefold skin or film, wherein is
to be seen, as Monardus and divers other report, the form of a
Dragon, having a long neck or gaping mouth; the ridge or back armed
with sharp prickles, like the porcupine; it hath also a long tail, &
four feet, very easy to be discerned: the figure of it we have set
forth unto you according to the greatness thereof, because our words
and meaning may be the better understood, and also the leaf of the
tree in his full bigness, because it is impossible to be expressed
in the figure: the trunk or body of the tree is covered with a rough
bark, very thin, and easy to be opened or wounded with any small
tool or instrument; which being so wounded in the dog days, bruised
or bored, doth yield forth drops of a thick red liquor, which of the
name of the tree are called Dragon's tears, or Sanguis Draconis,
Dragon's blood: divers have doubted whether the liquor or gummy
juice were all one with Cinnabaris of Dioscorides (not meaning that
cinnibar made of quicksilver) but the received opinion is, they
differ not, by reason their quality and temperature work the like
effect.

The Place.

This tree groweth in an ilsand which the Portugals call Madeira, and
in one of the Canary Islands, called Insula Portus Sancti; and as it
seemeth it was first brought out of Africa, although some are of a
contrary opinion, and say, that it was first brought from Cartagena,
in America, by the Bishop of the same province.

The Time

The time of his growing we have touched in the description, where we
said that it flourisheth and groweth green all the year.

The Names.

The names have been sufficiently spoken of in the description and in
their several titles.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Sanguis Draconis which is thought to proceed from this tree
hath an astringent faculty; and is with good success used in the
overmuch flowing of the courses, in fluxes, dysenteries, spitting of
blood, fastening loose teeth, and such other affects which require
astriction.

B. Smiths also use it to varnish over their works to give them a
sanguine colour, and keep them from rust.

CHAP. 142. Of the Sassafras or Ague Tree.

Fig. 2121. Sassafras

The Description.

The Sassafras tree grows very great much like to the Pine tree: the
trunk or body is straight, smooth, and void of boughs, of a great
height: it is covered with a twofold gross rind, the uppermost of
the colour of ashes, that next the wood of a tawny colour: on the
top come forth many goodly branches like those of the Palm tree,
whereon grow green leaves somewhat like those of the Fig tree, of a
sweet smell when they be green, but much sweeter when they be dry,
declining to the smell of fennel, with much sweetness in taste: they
are green winter and summer, neither bearing fruit nor flowers, but
is altogether barren as it is said: the roots are gross, conformable
to the greatness of the tree, of a tawny colour, dispersing
themselves far abroad under the upper crust of the earth, by means
whereof they are often cast down with mean blasts of wind. The wood
of the tree is very strong, hard, and brittle, it hath not so strong
& pleasant a smell as that of the root; neither is it in such use.
The leaves are of two sorts, some long and smooth, and not snipped
about the edges; other some, and those chiefly on the end of the
branches, are deeply gashed in, as it were divided into three
several parts. I have given the figure of a branch taken from a
little tree, which grew in the garden of Mr Wilmot at Bow; who died
some few years ago.
The Place.

This tree groweth in most parts of the West Indies, specially about
the cape of Florida, Wingandacoa, and Virginia, otherwise named
Norembega.

The Time.

It flourisheth and keepeth green winter and summer.

The Name.

The Spaniards and French men have named this tree, Sassafras: the
Indians in their tongue, Pavame: for want of an English name we are
contented to call it the Ague tree, of his virtue in healing the
Ague.

The Temperature.

The boughs and branches hereof are hot & dry in the second degree;
the rind is hotter, for that it entereth into the third degree of
heat and dryness, as is manifestly perceived in the decoction.

The Virtues.

A. The best of all the tree is the root, and that worketh the best
effect, the which hath the rind cleaving very fast to the inner
part, and is of colour tawny, and much more sweet of smell than all
the tree and his branches.

B. The rind tasteth of a more sweet smell than the tree; and the
water being sod with the root is of greater and better effects than
any other part of the tree, and is of a more sweet smell, and
therefore the Spaniards use it, for that it worketh better and
greater effects.

C. It is a tree that groweth near unto the sea, and in temperate
places that have not much drouth, nor moisture. There be mountains
growing full of them, and they cast forth a most sweet smell, so
that at the beginning when they saw them first, they thought they
had been trees of Cinnamon, & in part they were not deceived: for
that the rind of this tree hath as sweet a small as cinnamon hath,
and doth imitate it in colour and sharpness of taste, and
pleasantness of smell: and so the water that is made of it is of a
most sweet smell and taste, as the cinnamon is, and procureth the
same works and effects as cinnamon doth.

D. The wood hereof cut in small pieces and boiled in water, to the
colour of claret wine, and drunk, for certain days together, helpeth
the dropsy, removeth oppilation or stopping of the liver, cureth
quotidian and tertian agues, and long fevers.

E. The root of Sassafras hath power to comfort the liver, and to
free from oppilations, to comfort the weak and feeble stomach, to
cause good appetite, to consume windiness, the chiefest cause of
crudity and indigestion, stay vomiting, and make sweet a stinking
breath.

F. It provoketh urine, removeth the impediments that do cause
barrenness, and maketh women apt to conceive.

CHAP. 143. Of the Storax Tree.

Fig. 2122. Storax

The Description.

The Storax tree groweth to the height and bigness of the Quince
tree: the trunk or body is covered with a bark or rind like unto the
Birch tree: the branches are small and limber, whereon do grow
leaves like those of the Quince tree, greenish above, and whitish
underneath: among which come forth white flowers, like those of the
Orange tree, of an unpleasant smell: after cometh the fruit or
berries, standing upon long and slender footstalks, covered over
with a little woolliness, of the bigness of a bladder nut, and of
the same colour wherein is contained small seed, whereunto also
cleave certain gummy tears, bearing the name of the tree, and which
issue from the trunk or body when it is wounded.
The Place.

This tree groweth in divers places of France, Italy and Spain, where
it bringeth forth little or no gum at all: it groweth in Judæa,
Pamphylia, Syria, Pisidia, Sidon, and many other places of Jewry or
Palestine, as also in divers islands in the Mediterranean sea,
namely Cyprus, Candy, Zante, and other places, where it bringeth
forth his gummy liquor in full perfection of sweetness, and also in
great plenty, where it is gathered and put into great canes or
reeds, whereof as some deem it took the name Calamita; others deem
of the leaves of reeds wherein they wrap it: hereof I have two small
trees in my garden, the which I raised of seed.

The Time.

It flowereth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

This tree, as may be gathered by some, was called Styrax, by reason
of that gum or liquor which droppeth out of the same, being like
unto the hollow pipes of ice, that hang at the eaves of houses in
winter, called Styria, or of the canes or the leaves of reeds spoken
of before: in Latin, Storax calamitæ: in English, Storax, which is
kept in canes or the leaves of reeds: there floweth from some of
these trees a certain gummy liquor, which never groweth naturally
hard, but remaineth always thin, which is called liquid Styrax, or
Storax.

The Temperature.

The gum of this tree is of an heating, mollifying, and concocting
quality.

The Virtues.

A. It helpeth the cough, the falling down of rheums and humours into
the chest, and hoarseness of the voice: it also helpeth the noise
and sounding of the ears, prevaileth against strumas, or the King's
evil, nodes on the nerves, and hard swellings proceeding of a cold
cause: it prevaileth also against all cold poisons, as Hemlocks and
such like.

B. Of this gum there are made sundry excellent perfumes, pomanders,
sweet waters, sweet bags, and sweet washing balls, and divers other
sweet chains & bracelets, whereof to write were impertinent to this
history.

CHAP. 144. Of the Sorrowful Tree or Indian Mourner.

Fig. 2123. Sorrowful Tree

The Description.

Arbor tristis, the sad or sorrowful tree waxeth as big as an Olive
tree, garnished with many goodly branches, set full of leaves like
those of the Plum tree: among which come forth most odoriferous and
sweet smelling flowers, whose stalks are of the colour of saffron,
which flourish and show themselves only in the night-time, and in
the day-time look withered and with a mourning cheer: the leaves
also at that time shrink in themselves together, much like a tender
plant that is frost-bitten, very sadly lumping, lowering, and
hanging down the head, as though it loathed the light, and could not
abide the heat of the sun. I should but in vain lose labour in
repeating a foolish fancy of the poetical Indians, who would make
fools believe, that this tree was once a fair daughter of a great
lord or king, and that the sun was in love with her, with other toys
which I omit. The flowers are white, somewhat like those of Jasmine,
but more double, and they are of a very sweet smell: there succeed
them many little cods, containing some six seeds apiece somewhat
like those of Stramonium.

The Place, Time, and Names.

This tree groweth in the East Indies, especially in Goa, and Malaya:
in Goa is called Parizataco: in Malaya, Singadi: in Deccan, Pul: of
the Arabians, Guart: and of the Persians and Turks, Gul: in English,
the Sad or Sorrowful tree, or the Indian Mourner.The time is specied
in the description.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. We have no certain knowledge of the temperature hereof;
nevertheless we read that the Indians do colour their broths and
meats with the stalks of the flowers hereof instead of saffron, or
whatsoever that they desire to have of a yellow colour.

B. It is reported, that if a linen cloth be steeped in the distilled
water of the flowers; and the eyes bathed and washed therewith,
helpeth the itching and pain thereof, and stayeth the humours that
fall down to the same.

C. There is made of the splinters of the wood certain tooth-picks,
and many pretty toys for pleasure.

CHAP. 145. Of the Balsam Tree.


Fig. 2124. Balsam fruit (1)
Fig. 2125. Alpinus' Balsam (3)

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of trees from which do flow Balsams, very
different one from another, not only in form, but also in fruit,
liquor, and place of growing; the which to distinguish would require
more time and travail than either our small time will afford, or
riches for our maintenance to discover the same in their natural
countries: which otherwise by report to set down certain matter by
uncertainties, would discredit the author, and no profit shall arise
thereby to the reader: notwithstanding we will set down so much as
we have found in the works of some travellers, which best agree with
the truth of the history.

The Description.

1. There be divers trees growing in the Indies, whose fruits are
called by the name of the fruit of the Balsam tree: among the rest
this whose figure we have set forth unto your view, we ourselves
have seen and handled; and therefore the better able to describe it.
It is a fruit very crooked, and hollowed like the palm of a hand,
two inches long, half an inch thick, covered with a thick smooth
rind, of the colour of a dry Oaken leaf; wherein is contained a
kernel (of the same length and thickness, apt to fill the said shell
or rind) of the substance of an almond; of the colour of ashes, fat,
and oily; of a good smell, and very unpleasant in taste.

2. The wood we have dry brought unto us from the Indies for our use
in physic (a small description may serve for a dry stick)
nevertheless we have other fruits brought from the Indies, whose
figures are not set forth, by reason they are not so well known as
desired; whereof one is of the bigness of a walnut, somewhat broad
on the upper side, with a rough or rugged shell, uneven, black of
colour, and full of a white kernel, with much juice in it; of a
pleasant taste and shell, like the oil of Mace: the whole fruit is
exceeding light, in respect of the quantity or bigness, even as it
were a piece of cork; which notwithslanding sinketh to the bottom
when it falleth into the water, like as doth a stone.

3. This tree, saith Garcias, that beareth the fruit Carpobalsamum,
is also one of the Balsam trees: it groweth to the height and
bigness of the Pomegranate tree, garnished with very many branches
whereon do grow leaves like those of Rue, but of colour whiter,
always growing green: amongst which come forth flowers, whereof we
have no certainty: after which cometh forth fruit like that of the
Turpentine tree, which in shops is called Carpobalsamum, of a
pleasant smell; but the liquor which floweth from the wounded tree
is much sweeter: which liquor of some is called Opobalsamum.

Prosper Alpinus hath writ a large Dialogue of the Balsam of the
Ancients, and also figured and delivered the history thereof in his
book De Plant. Ægypti, cap. 14, whither I refer the curious. I have
presented you with a slip from his tree, and the Carpobalsamum set
forth by our author, which seems to be of the same plant. The leaves
of this are like to those of Lentiscus, always green, and winged,
growing three, five, or seven fastened to one footstalk; the wood is
gummy, reddish, and well smelling: the flowers are small and white
like those of Acatia, growing usually three nigh together: the fruit
is of the shape and bigness of that of the Turpentine tree,
containing yellow and well smelling seeds, filled with a yellowish
moisture like honey, their taste is bitterish, & somewhat biting the
tongue.

4. Of these Balsam trees there is yet another sort: the fruit
whereof is as it were a kernel without shell, covered with a thin
skin streaked with many veins, of a brown colour: the meat is firm
and solid, like the kernel of the Indian Nut, of a white colour, and
without smell, but of a grateful taste; and it is thought to be hot
in the first degree, or in the beginning of the second.

5. There be divers sorts more, which might be omitted because of
tediousness: nevertheless I will trouble you with two special trees
worthy the noting: there is, saith my author, in America a great
tree of monstrous hugeness, beset with leaves and boughs even to the
ground; the trunk whereof is covered with a twofold bark, the one
thick like unto cork, & another thin next to the tree: from between
which barks doth flow (the upper bark being wounded) a white Balsam
like unto tears or drops, of a most sweet savour, and singular
effects, for one drop of this which thus distilleth out of the tree,
is worth a pound of that which is made by decoction: the fruit
hereof is small in respect of the others; it seldom exceedeth the
bigness of a pea, of a bitter taste, enclosed in a narrow husk of
the length of a finger, something thin, and of a white colour; which
the Indians do use against headache: which fruit of most is that we
have before described, called Carpobalsamum.

6. It is also written, that in the island called Hispaniola, there
groweth a small tree, of the height of two men, without the industry
of man, having stalks or stems of the colour of ashes; whereon do
grow green leaves, sharp at both ends, but more green on the upper
side than on the lower; having a middle rib somewhat thick and
standing out; the footstalks whereon they grow are somewhat reddish:
among which leaves cometh fruit growing by clusters, as long as a
man's hand, fingers and all: the stones or grains in the fruit be
few, and green; but growing to redness more and more as the fruit
waxeth ripe. From the which is gathered a juice after this manner:
they take the young shoots and buds of the tree, and also the
clusters of the fruit, which they bruise, and boil in water to the
thickness of honey, which being strained, they keep it for their
uses.

They use it against wounds and ulcers; it stoppeth and stancheth the
blood; maketh them clean; bringeth up the flesh, and healeth them
mightily, and with better success than true Balsam. The branches of
the tree being cut, do cast forth by drops a certain clear water,
more worth than Aqua vitæ, most wholesome against wounds, and all
other diseases proceeding from cold causes, if it be drunken some
few days together.

The Place.

These trees grow in divers parts of the world, some in Egypt, and
most of those countries adjacent: there groweth of them in the East
and West Indies; as travellers in those parts report.

The Time.

These trees for the most part keep green winter and summer.

The Names.

Balsam is called in Greek, Balsamon: in Latin also Balsamum: of the
Arabians Balseni, Balesina, and Belsan: in Italian, Balsamo: in
Erench, Baume.

The liquor that floweth out of the tree when is wounded, is called
Opobalsamum: the wood Xylobalsamum: the fruit Carpobalsamum, and the
liquor which naturally floweth from the tree in Egypt Balsamum.

The Temperature.

Balsam is hot and dry in the second degree, with astriction.

The Virtues.

A. Natural Balsam taken in a morning fasting, with a little Rose
water or wine, to the quantity of five or six drops, helpeth those
that be asthmatic, or short of wind: it prevaileth against the pains
of the bladder, and stomach, and comforteth the same mightily; and
also amendeth a stinking breath; & takes away the shaking fits of
the quotidian ague, if it be taken two or three times.

B. It helpeth consumptions, cleanseth the barren womb, especially
being anointed upon a pessary, or mother suppository, and used.

C. The stomach being anointed therewith, digestion is helped
thereby; it also preserveth the stomach from obstructions and
windiness; it helpeth the hardness of the spleen; easeth the griefs
of the reins and belly, proceeding of cold causes.

D. It also taketh away all manner of aches, proceeding of cold
causes, if they be anointed therewith; but more speedily, if a linen
cloth be wet therein, and laid thereon: used in the same manner, it
dissolveth hard tumors, called demata; and strengtheneth the weak
members.

E. The same refresheth the brain, and comforteth the parts
adjoining, it helpeth the palsy, convulsions, and all griefs of the
sinews, if they be anointed therewith.

F. The marvellous effects that it worketh in new and green wounds,
were here too long to set down, and also superfluous; considering
the skilfull surgeon whom it most concerneth, doth know the use
thereof, and as for the beggerly quacksalvers, runnagates, and
knavish mountebanks, we are not willing to instruct them in things
so far above their reach, capacity and worthiness.

CHAP. 146. Of a kind of Balm, or Balsam Tree.


Fig. 2126. Lobel's and Clusius' Balsam.
Fig. 2127. The same Balsam tree, an older specimen

The Description.

This tree which the people of the Indies do call Molli, groweth to
the bigness of a great tree, having a trunk or body of a dark green
colour, sprinkled over with many ash-coloured spots: the branches
are many, and of very great beauty; whereupon do grow leaves not
unlike to those of the Ash tree, consisting of many small leaves,
set upon a middle rib; growing narrower ever towards the point,
every particular one jagged on the sides like the teeth of a saw;
which being plucked from the stem, yieldeth forth a milky juice,
tough and clammy, savouring like the bruised leaves of Fennel, and
as it seemeth in taste somewhat astringent: the flowers grow in
clusters upon the twiggy branches, like those of the Vine a little
before the grapes be formed: after followeth the fruit or berries,
somewhat greater than peppercorns, of an oily substance, green at
the first, and of a dark reddish colour when they be ripe.

The first of the figures was taken from a tree, only of three years
growth, but the latter from a tree come to his full growth, as it is
affirmed in Clusius his Cur. Poster. It differs only in that the
leaves of the old trees are not at all snipped or divided on the
edges.

The Place.

This tree, saith a learned physician called Iohannes Fragosus, doth
grow in the King of Spain his garden at Madrid, which was the first
that ever he did see: since which time, John Ferdinando Secretary
unto the foresaid king did show unto the said Fragosus in his own
garden a tree so large, and of such beauty, that he was never
satisfied with looking on it, and meditating upon the virtues
thereof. Which words I have received from the hands of a famous
learned man, called Mr Lancelot Brown, doctor in physic, and
physician to the Queen's Majesty, at the impression hereof;
faithfully translated out of the Spanish tongue, without adding or
taking anything away.

They grow plentifully in the vales and low grounds of Peru, as all
affirm that have travelled to the West Indies; as also those that
have described the singularities thereof. Myself with divers others,
as namely Mr Nicholas Lete, a worshipful merchant of the City of
London; and also a most skilful apothecary, Mr James Garret, who
have received seeds hereof from the right Honourable the Lord
Hunsdon, Lord High Chamberlain of England, worthy of triple honour
for his care in getting, as also for his curious keeping rare and
strange things brought from the farthest parts of the world; which
seeds we have sown in our gardens, where they have brought forth
plants of a foot high; and also their beautiful leaves
notwithstanding our care, diligence, and industry, they have
perished at the first approach of winter, as not being able by
reason of their tenderness to endure the cold of our winter blasts.

The Time.

 As touching the time of his flourishing, and bringing his fruit to
maturity, we have as yet no certain knowledge, but is thought to be
green both winter and summer.

The Names.

This most notable tree is called by the Indian name Molle: of some,
Molly, and Muelle, taken from his tender softnes, as some have
deemed: it may be called the Fennel tree, or one of the Balm, or
Balsam trees.

The Temperature,

This tree is thought to be of an a stringent or binding quality;
whereby it appears besides the hot temperature it hath, to be
compounded of divers other faculties.

The Virtues.

A. The Indians use to seethe the fruit or berries hereof in water,
and by a special skill they have in the boiling, do make a most
wholesome wine or drink, as also a kind of vinegar, and sometimes
honey; which are very strange effects, these three things being so
contrary in taste.

B. The leaves boiled, and the decoction drunk, helpeth them of any
disease proceeding of a cold cause.

C. The gum which issueth from the tree, being white like unto manna,
dissolved in milk, taketh away the web of the eyes, and cleareth the
sight, being wiped over with it.

D. The bark of this tree boiled, and the legs that be swollen and
full of pain, bathed and washed with the decoction divers times,
taketh away both infirmities in short space.

E. This tree is of such estimation among the Indians, that they
worship it as a god, according unto their savage rites and 
ceremonies: much like as Pliny reporteth of Homer's Moly, the most
renowned of all plants, which they had in old time in such
estimation and reverence, that as it is recorded, the gods gave it
the name of Moly, and so writeth Ovid:

Pacifer huic dederat florem Cyllenius album,
Moly voocant Superi, nigra radice tenetur.
["Cyllenius the peacemaker gave him a white flower which comes from
a black root, which the gods call Moly"
Ovid, Metamorphoses, Bk. XIV, l.291-2]

If any be desirous to see more hereof, they may read a learned
discourse of it set forth in the Latin tongue, by the learned Lobel,
who hath at large written the history thereof, dedicated unto the
Right Honourable, the Lord Chamberlain, at the impression hereof;
faithfully overseen and examined by the learned physician before
remembered, Mr Doctor Brown, and his censure upon the same. Together
with Lobel's reply, who judged this plant (and not without good
reason) to be a kind of the true Balsam of the ancients, and not
much different from that set forth by Prosper Alpinum, whereof I
have made mention in the foregoing chapter.

CHAP. 147. Of the Canel, or Cinnamon Tree.

Fig. 2128. Cinnamon Leaf, Bark & Trunk (1)

The Description.

1. The tree which hath the cinnamon for his bark is of the stature
of an Olive tree: having a body as thick as a man's thigh, from
which the cinnamon is taken; but that taken from the smaller
branches is much better: which branches or boughs are many, and very
straight; whereon do grow beautiful leaves, in shape like those of
the Orange tree, and of the colour of the Bay leaf (not as it hath
been reported) like unto the leaves of flags or Fleur-de-Lys: among
these pleasant leaves and branches come forth many fair white
flowers, which turn into round black fruit or berries, of the
bigness of an hazelnut, or the olive berry, and of a black colour;
out of which is pressed an oil, that hath no smell at all until it
be rubbed and chafed between the hands: the trunk or body with the
greater arms or boughs of the tree are covered with a double or
twofold bark, like that of Suber, the Cork tree: the innermost
whereof is the true and pleasant Cinnamon, which is taken from the
tree, and cast upon the ground in the heat of the sun; through the
heat thereof it turneth and foldeth itself round together, as we
daily see by viewing the thing itself: this tree being thus peeled,
recovereth a new bark in the space of three years, and is then ready
to be disbarked as before. That Cinnamon which is of a pale colour
hath not been well dried in the sun: that of a fair brown colour is
best; & that which is blackish, hath been too much dried, and also
hath taken some wet in the time of drying.

2. Besides the cinnamon vulgarly known and used, there is another
sort which also is commonly received for the Cassia of Dioscorides
and the ancients. Now this differs from the former in that it is of
a redder colour, of a more hard, solid, and compact substance,
commonly also thicker, & if you chew it, more clammy and viscous:
the taste and smell are much like cinnamon, yet not altogether so
strong as that of the best cinnamon. There is much controversy in
late writers concerning both the true Cinnamon, and Cassia of the
ancients: the which I have not time nor space here to mention, much
less to insist upon: I have observed that both the Cinnamon and
Cassia that we have are covered over with a rough grayish bark, like
that of an Oak or other such tree, which is clean scraped off, and
taken away before it be brought to us.

The Place.

The chiefest places where the trees do grow that bear Cinnamon, are
Ceylon and. Malabar: but those of Ceylon are the best: they grow in
other of the Molucca islands, as Java, the greater and the less, and
also in Mindanao, for the most part upon mountains.

The Time.

The Cinnamon tree groweth green winter and summer, as do all the
other trees of the Moluccas, and East Indies for the most part: the
boughs whereof are cut off at seasonable times, by the express
commandment of the king of the country; and not before he have
appointed the time.

There hath been some controversy among writers concerning the tree
whose bark is Cassia, and that tree that beareth Cinnamon, making
them both one tree: but that opinion is not to be received: for
there is a great difference between them, as there is betwixt an
Oak, and a Chestnut tree; for the tree whose bark is Cassia is
doubtless a bastard kind of Canel, or Cinnamon: in show it is very
like, but in sweetness or smell and other circumstances belonging to
Cinnamon, far inferior.

The Names.

Cinnamon is called in Italian Canella: in Spanish, Canola: in
French, Canelle: in High Dutch, Zimmet coezlin: the Grecians,
Kinnamomon: the Latins likewise Cinnamomum: the Arabians, Darseni,
and as some say, Quarfaa, others, Querfe: in Ceylon, Cuurde: in the
island Java they name it Cameaa: in Ormus, Darchine (i.e.) lignum
Chinense, the wood of China: in Malabar, Caismains, which in their
tongue signifieth Dulce lignum, Sweet wood: in English, Cinnamome,
Cinnamon, and Canel. The other is called Cassia, and Cassia lignea.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that Cinnamon hath power to warm, and is of
thin parts: it is also dry and astringent, it provoketh urine,
cleareth the eyes, and maketh sweet breath.

B. The decoction bringeth down the menses, prevaileth against the
bitings of venomous beasts, the inflammation of the intestines and
reins.

C. The distilled water hereof is profitable to many, and for divers
infirmities, it comforteth the weak, cold, and feeble stomach,
easeth the pains and frettings of the guts and entrails proceeding
of cold causes, it amendeth the evil colour of the face, maketh
sweet breath, & giveth a most pleasant taste unto divers sorts of
meats, and maketh the same not only more pleasant, but also more
wholesome for any bodies of what constitution soever they be,
notwithstanding the binding quality.

D. The oil drawn chemically prevaileth against the pains of the
breast, comforteth the stomach, breaketh windiness, causeth good
digestion, and being mixed with some honey, taketh away spots from
the face, being anointed therewith.

E. The distilled water of the flowers of the tree, as Garcias the
Lusitanian physician writeth, exclleth far in sweetness all other
waters whatsoever, which is profitable for such things as the bark
itself is.

F. Out of the berries of this tree is drawn by expression, as out of
the berries of the Olive tree, a certain oil, or rather a kind of
fat like butter, without any smell at all, except it tbe made warm,
and then it smelleth as the Cinnamon doth, and is much used against
the coldness of the sinews, all pains of the joints, and also the
pains and distemperature of the stomach and breast.

G. To write as the worthiness of the subject requireth, would ask
more time than we have to bestow upon any one plant; therefore these
few shall suffice, knowing that the thing is of great use among
many, and known to most.

H. Cassia used in a larger quantity serveth well for the same
purposes which Cinnamon doth.

CHAP. 147. Of Gum Lac, and his Rotten Tree.

Fig. 2129. Gum Lac and its stick

The Description.

The tree that bringeth forth that excremental substance called
Lacca, bothin the shops of Europe and elsewhere, is called of the
Arabians, Persians and Turks, Loc Sumatri, as who should say, Lacca
of Sumutra: some which have so termed it, have thought that the
first plenty thereof came from Sumutra, but herein they have erred,
for the abundant store thereof came from Pegu, where the inhabitants
thereof do call it Lac, & others of the same province, Trec: the
history of which tree, according to that famous herbarist Clusius is
as followeth. "There is in the country of Pegu and Malabar, a great
tree, whose leaves are like them of the Plum tree, having many small
twiggy branches; when the trunk or body of the tree waxeth old, it
rotteth in sundry places, wherein do breed certain great ants or
pismires, which continually work and labour in the time of harvest
and summer, against the penury of winter: such is the diligence of
those ants, or such is the nature of the tree wherein they harbour,
or both, that they provide for their winter food, a lump or mass of
substance, which is of a crimson colour, so beautiful and so fair,
as in the whole world the like is not seen, which serveth not only
to physical uses but is a perfect and costly colour for painters,
called by us, Indian Lac. The pismires (as I said) work out this
colour, by sucking the substance or matter of Lacca from the tree,
as bees do make honey and wax, by sucking the matter thereof from
all herbs, trees, and flowers, and the inhabitants or that country,
do as diligently seek for this Lacca, as we in England and other
countries seek in the woods for honey; which Lacca after they have
found, they take from the tree, and dry it into a lump; among which
sometimes there come over some sticks and pieces of the tree with
the wings of the ants, which have fallen among it, as we daily see."

The Indian Lac or Lake which is the rich colour used by painters, is
none of that which is used in shops, nor here figured or described
by Clusius, wherefore our author was much mistaken in that he here
confounds together things so different; for this is of a resinous
substance, and a faint red colour, and wholly unfit for painters,
but used alone and in composition to make the best hard sealing wax.
The other seems to be an artificial thing, and is of an exquisite
crimson colour, but of what it is, or how made, I have not as yet
found anything that carries any probability of truth.

The Place

The tree which beareth Lacca groweth in Ceylon and Malabar, and in
other parts of the East Indies.

The Time.

Of the time we have no certain knowledge.

The Names.

Indian Lac is called in shops Lacca: in Italian, Lachetta: Avicenna
calleth it Luch: Paulus and Dioscorides, as some have thought,
Cancamum: the other names are expressed in the description.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Lac or Lacca is hot in the second degree, it comforteth the heart
and liver, openeth obstructions, expelleth urine and prevaileth
against the dropsy.

B. There is an artificial Lac made of the scrapings of Brazil and
saffron, which is used of painters, and not to be used in physic as
the other natural Lacca.

CHAP. 149. Of the Indian Leaf.

Fig. 2130. Indian Leaf

The Description.

Tamalapatra, or the Indian Leaf grows upon a great tree like the
Orange tree, with like leaves also, but broader, a little sharp
pointed, of a green glistering colour, and three small ribs running
through each leaf, after the manner of Ribwort, whereby it is easy
to be known: it smelleth somewhat like unto cloves, but not so
strong as spikenard or mace (as some have deemed) nor yet of so
subtle and quick a scent as cinnamon. There was sent or added unto
this figure by Cortusus a certain fruit like unto a small acorn,
with this inscription, Fructus Canellæ, the fruit of the Canel tree,
which may be doubted of, considering the description of the
forenamed tree holden generally of most to be perfect.

The Place.

The Indian leaf groweth not fleeting upon the water like unto Lens
palustris, as Dioscorides and Pliny do set down, (though learned and
painful writers) but is the leaf of a great tree, a branch whereof
we have set forth unto your view, which groweth in Arabia and
Cambay, far from the water side.

The Time.

Of the time we have no certain knowledge, but it is supposed to be
green winter and summer.

The Names.

Tamalapatra is called of the Indians in their mother tongue,
especially of the Arabians, Cadegi Indi, or Ladegi Indi, that is,
Folium indicum, or indum, the Indian leaf: but the Mauritanians do
call it Tembul. The Latins and Grecians following some of the
Arabians, have called it Malabathrum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Indian leaf is hot and dry in the second degree, agreeing
with Nardus in temperature, or as others report with mace: it
provoketh urine mightily, warmeth and comforteth the stomach, and
helpeth digestion.

B. It prevaileth against the pin and web in the eyes, the inflamed
and watery eyes, and all other infirmities of the same.

C. It is laid among clothes, as well to keep them from moths and
other vermin, as also to give unto them a sweet smell.

CHAP. 150. Of the Clove Tree.

Fig. 2131. The Clove Tree

The Description.

The Clove tree groweth great in form like unto the Bay tree, the
trunk or body whereof is covered with a russet bark: the branches
are many, long, and very brittle, whereupon do grow leaves like
those of the Bay tree, but somewhat narrower: amongst which come the
flowers, white at the first, after of a greenish colour, waxing of a
dark red colour in the end: which flowers are the very cloves when
they grow hard: after when they be dried in the sun they become of
that dusky black colour which we daily see, wherein they continue.
For those that we have in estimation are beaten down to the ground
before they be ripe, and are suffered there to lie upon the ground
until they be dried throughly, where there is neither grass, weeds,
nor any other herbs growing to hinder the same, by reason the tree
draweth unto itself for his nourishment all the moisture of the
earth a great circuit round about, so that nothing can there grow
for want of moisture, and therefore the more convenient for the
drying of the cloves. Contrariwise, that gross kind of cloves which
hath been supposed to be the male, are nothing else than fruit of
the same tree tarrying there until it fall down of itself unto the
ground, where by reason of his long lying, and meeting with some
rain in the mean season, it loseth the quick taste that those others
have. Some have called these Fusti, whereof we may English them
Fusses. Some affirm that the flowers hereof surpass all other
flowers in sweetness when they are green; and hold the opinion, that
the hardened flowers are not the cloves themselves, (as we have
written) but think them rather to be the seat or husk wherein the
flowers do grow: the greater number hold the former opinion. And
further, that the trees are increased without labour, grafting,
planting, or other industry, but by the falling of the fruit, which
bear fruit within eight years after they be risen up, and so
continue bearing for an hundred years together, as the inhabitants
of that country do affirm.

The Place.

The Clove tree groweth in some few places of the Molucca islands, as
in Ceylon, Java the greater and the less, and in divers other
places.

The Time.

The Cloves are gathered from the fifteenth of September unto the end
of February, not with hands, as we gather apples, cherries, and such
like fruit, but by beating the tree, as Walnuts are gotten, as we
have written in the description.

The Names.

The fruit hereof was unknown to the ancient Grecians: of the later
writers called Karyophyllon: in Latin also Caryophyllus, and Clavus:
in French, Clou de Gyrofle: the Mauritanians, Charhumfel: in
Italian, Carofano: in High Dutch, Naegel: in Spanish, Clavo de
especia: of the Indians, Calafur: in the Moluccas, Changue: of the
Pandets, Arumfel, and Charumfel: in English, Clove tree, & Cloves.

The Temperature.

Cloves are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Cloves strengthen the stomach, liver, and heart, help digestion,
and provoke urine.

B. The Portugal women that dwell in the East Indies draw from the
cloves when they be yet green, a certain liquor by distillation, of
a most fragrant smell, which comforteth the heart, and is of all
cordials the most effectual.

C. Cloves stop the belly: the oil or water thereof dropped into the
eyes, sharpens the sight, and cleanseth away the cloud or web in the
same.

D. The weight of four drams of the powder of cloves taken in milk
procureth the act of generation.

E. There is extracted from the cloves a certain oil or rather thick
butter of a yellow colour; which being chafed in the hands smelleth
like the cloves themselves, wherewith the Indians do cure their
wounds and other hurts, as we do with Balsam.

F. The use of cloves, not only in meat and medicine, but also in
sweet powder and such like, is sufficiently known: therefore this
shall suffice.

CHAP. 151. Of the Nutmeg Tree.


Fig. 2132. Female Nutmeg (1)
Fig. 2133. Male Nutmeg (2)

The Description.

1. The tree that beareth the nutmeg and the mace is in form like to
the Pear tree, but the leaves of it are like those of the Bay or
Orange tree, always green on the upper side, and more whitish
underneath; among which come forth the nut and mace as it were the
flowers. The nut appeareth first, compassed about with the mace, as
it were in the middle of a single rose, which in process of time 
doth wrap and enclose the nut round on every side: after cometh a
husk like that of the walnut, but of an harder substance, which
encloseth the nut with his mace as the walnut husk doth cover the
nut, which in time of ripeness doth cleave of itself as the walnut
husk doth, and showeth his mace, which then is of a perfect crimson
colour, and maketh a most goodly show, especially when the tree is
well laden with fruit: after the nut becometh dry, the mace likewise
gapeth and forsaketh the nut, even as the first husk or coverture,
and leaves it bare and naked, as we all do know; at which time it
getteth to itself a kind of dark yellow colour, and loseth that
brave crimson dye which it had at the first.

2. The tree which carrieth the male nutmeg (according to Clusius)
thus differs from the last described: the leaves are like those of
the former in shape, but much bigger, being sometimes a foot long,
and three or four inches broad; their common length is seven or
eight inches, and breadth two and a half: they are of a whitish
colour underneath, and green and shining above. The nuts also grow
at the very ends of the branches, sometimes two or three together,
and not only one, as in the common kind. The nut itself is also
larger and longer: the mace that encompasses it is of a more elegant
colour, but not so strong as that of the former.

Fig. 2134. Nutmeg fruit with nut and mace.

I can scarce believe our author's assertion in the foregoing
description, that the nut appeareth first, compassed about with the
mace as were in the midst of single rose, &c. But I rather think
they all come forth together, the nutmeg, mace, the green outward
husk and all, just we see walnuts do, and only open themselves when
they come to full maturity. In the third figure you may see
expressed the whole manner of the growing of the nutmeg, together
with both the sorts of nutmegs taken forth of their shells.

The Place.

The nutmeg tree groweth in the Indies, in an island especially
called Banda, and in the islands of Molucca, and in Ceylon, though
not so good as the first.

The Time.

The fruit is gathered in September in great abundance, all things
being common in those countries.

The Names.

The Nutmeg tree is called of the Grecians, Karyon myristikon: of the
Latins, Nux moschata, and Nux myristica: in Italian, Noce Moscada:
in Spanish, Nuez de escetie: in French, Noix Muscade: in High Dutch,
Moschat nusz: of the Arabians, Leuzbane, or Gianziban: of the
country people where they grow, Palla: The maces, Bunapalla. In
Deccan the nut is called Iapatri, and the maces, Iaifol: of
Avicenna, Iausiband, (i.e.) Nux Bandensis ["Nut of Banda"]. The
maces he calleth Befbase: in English, Nutmeg.

The Temperature.

The nutmeg, as the Mauritanians write, is hot and dry in the second
degree complete, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.

A. Nutmegs cause a swect breath, and amend those that do stink, if
they be much chewed and holden in the mouth.

B. The nutmeg is good against freckles in the face, quickeneth the
sight, strengthens the belly and feeble liver; it taketh away the
swelling in the spleen, stayeth the lask, breaketh wind, and is good
against all cold diseases in the body.

C. Nutmegs bruised and boiled in Aqua vitae until they have wasted
and consumed the moisture, adding thereto of Rhodomel (that is,
honey of Roses) gently boiling them, being strained to the form of a
syrup, cure all pains proceeding of windy and cold causes, if three
spoonfuls be given fasting for certain days together.

D. The same bruised and boiled in strong white wine until three
parts be sodden away, with the roots of Motherwort added thereto in
the boiling, and strained: this liquor drunk with some sugar cureth
all gripings of the belly proceeding of windiness.

E. As touching the choice, there is not any so simple but knoweth
that the heaviest, fattest, and fullest of juice are the best, which
may easily be found out by pricking the same with a pin or such
like.

CHAP. 152. Of the Pepper Plant.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Pepper, that is to say, white, black, and
long Pepper: one greater and longer than the other; and also a kind
of Ethiopian Pepper.


Fig. 2135. Black Pepper (1)
Fig. 2136. White Pepper (2)

The Description.

1. The plant that beareth the Black Pepper groweth up like a Vine
among bushes and brambles where it naturally groweth; but where it
is manured it is sown at the botom of the tree Faufel and the Date
trees, whereon it taketh hold, and climbeth up even to the top, as
doth the Vine, ramping and taking hold with his clasping tendrils of
any other thing it meeteth withal. The leaves are few in number,
growing at each joint one, first on one side of the stalk, then on
the other, like in shape to the long undivided leaves of Ivy, but
thinner, sharp pointed, and sometimes so broad, that they are four
inches over, but most commonly two inches broad, and four long,
having always five pretty large nerves running alongst them. The
fruit grow cluttering together upon long stalks, which come forth at
the joints against the leaves, as you may see in the figure: the
root (as one may conjecture) is creeping; for the branches that lie
on the ground do at their joints put forth new fibres or roots. We
are beholden to Clusius for this exact figure and description, which
he made by certain branches which were brought home by the
Hollanders from the East Indies. The curious may see more hereof in
his Exotics and Notes upon Garcias.

2. The plant that brings White Pepper is not to be distinguished
from the other plant, but only by the colour of the fruit, no more
than a Vine that beareth black grapes, from that which bringeth
white: and of some it is thought, that the selfsame plant doth
sometimes change itself from black to white, as divers other plants
do. Neither Clusiuus, nor any other else that I have yet met with,
have delivered us anything of certain, of the plant whereon White
Pepper grows: Clusius only hath given us the manner how it grows
upon the stalks as you may see it here expressed.

There is also another kind of Pepper, seldom brought into these
parts of Europe, called Piper canarium: it is hollow within, light,
and empty, but good to draw phlegm from the head, to help the
toothache and choleric affects.


Fig. 2137. Long Pepper (3)
Fig. 2138. Ethiopian Pepper (4)

3. The tree that beareth Long Pepper hath no similitude at all with
the plant that brings Black and White Pepper: some have deemed them
to grow all on one tree, which is not consonant to truth, for they
grow in countries far distant one from, another, and also that
country where there is Black Pepper hath not any of the Long Pepper;
and therefore Galen following Dioscorides, were together both
overseen in this point. This tree, saith Monardes, is not great, yet
of a woody substance, dispersing here and there his clasping
tendrils, wherewith it taketh hold of other trees and such other
things as do grow near unto it. The branches are many and twiggy,
whereon grows the fruit, consisting of many grains growing upon a
slender footstalk, thrust or compact close together, green at the
first, and afterward blackish; in taste sharper and hotter than
common black Pepper, yet sweeter, and of better taste.

For this figure also I acknowledge myself beholden to the learned
and diligent Clusius who caused it to be drawn from a branch of some
foot in length, that he received from Dr. Lambert Hortensius, who
brought it from the Indies. The order of growing of the leaves and
fruit is like that of the Black; but the joints stand somewhat
thicker together, the leaf also doth little differ from that of the
Black, only it is thinner, of a lighter green, and (as Clusius
thought) hath a shorter footstalk, the veins or nerves also were
less imminent, more in number, and run from the middle rib to the
sides, rather than alongst the leaf.

4. This other kind of Pepper brought unto us from Ethiopia, called
of the country where it groweth, Piper æthiopicum: in shops, Amomum,
and also Longa Vita. It groweth upon a small tree, in manner of an
hedge bush, whereupon grow long cods in bunches, a finger long, of a
brown colour, uneven, and bunched or pushed up in divers places,
divided into five or six lockers or cells, each whereof containeth a
round seed somewhat long, lesser than the seeds of Pæony, in taste
like common Pepper, or Cardamomum, whose faculty and temperature it
is thought to have, whereof we hold it a kind.

Fig. 2139. Tailed Pepper (5)

5. Another kind of Pepper is sometimes brought, which the Spaniards
do call Pimenta de rabo, that is, Pepper with a tail: it is like
unto Cubebs, round, full, somewhat rough, black of colour, and of a
sharp quick taste, like the common Pepper, of a good smell: it
groweth by clusters upon small stems or stalks, which some have
unadvisedly taken for Amomum. The King of Portugal forbade this kind
of Pepper to be brought over, for fear least the right Pepper should
be the less esteemed, and so himself hindered in the sale thereof.

The Place.

Black and White Pepper grow in the kingdom of Malabar, and that very
good; in Malacca also, but not so good; and also in the Islands
Sunda and Cude: there is great store growing in the kingdom of
China, and some in Cananor, but not much.

Pepper of Ethiopia groweth in America, in all the tract of the
country where Nata and Carthago are situated. The rest hath been
spoken of in their several descriptions. The white Pepper is not so
common as the black, and is used there instead of salt.

The Time.

The plant riseth up in the first of the spring; the fruit is
gathered in August.

The Names.

The Grecians, who had best knowledge of Pepper, do call it Peperi:
the Latins, Piper: the Arabians, Fulfel and Fulful: in Italian,
Pepe: in Spanish, Pimenta: in French, Poivre: in High Dutch, Pffer:
in English, Pepper.

That of Ethiopia is called, Piper æthiopicum, Amomum, Vita longa,
and of some, Cardomomum, whereof we hold it to be a kind. I received
a branch hereof at the hands of a learned physician of London,
called M. Steven Bredwell, with his fruit also.

The Temperatare.

The Arabians and Persian physicians judge, that Pepper is hot in the
third degree.

But the Indian physicians which for the most part are emperics, hold
that Pepper is cold, as almost all other spice, which are hot
indeed: the Long Pepper is hot also in the third degree, and as we
have said, is thought to be the best of all the kinds.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides and others agreeing with him, affirm, that Pepper
resisteth poison, and is good to be put in medicaments for the eyes.

B. All Pepper heateth, provoketh urine, digesteth, draweth,
disperseth, and cleanseth the dimness of the sight, as Dioscorides
noteth.

CHAP. 153. Of Bastard Pepper, called Betel, or Betre.

Fig. 2140. Bastard Pepper or Betel

The Description.

This plant climbeth and rampeth upon trees, bushes, or whatsoever
else it meeteth withal, like unto the Vine, or the Black Pepper,
whereof some hold it for a kind. The leaves are like those of the
greater Bindweed, but somewhat longer, of a dusty colour, with
divers veins or ribs running through the same. The fruit groweth
among the leaves, very crookedly writhed, in shape like the tail of
a Lizard, of the taste of Pepper, yet very pleasant to the palate.

The Place.

Ir groweth among the Date trees, and Areca, in most of the Molucca
Islands, especially in the marsh grounds.

The Time.

The time answereth that of Pepper.

The Names.

This hath been taken for the Indian Leaf, but not properly: of most
it is called Tembul, and Tambul: in Malabar Betre: in Deccan,
Gujerat, and Canam it is called Pam: in Malaya, Siri.

The Use and Temperature.

The leaves chewed in the mouth are of a bitter taste, whereupon
(saith Garcias) they put thereto some Areca and with the lime made
of oyster shells, whereunto they also add some Ambergris, Lignum
Aloes, and such like, which they stamp together, making it into a
paste, which they roll up into round balls, keep dry for their use,
and carry the same in their mouths until by little and little it is
consumed; as when we carry sugar candy in our mouths, or the juice
of Liquorice; which is not only unto the silly Indians meat, but
also drink in their tedious travels, refreshing their wearied
spirits and helping memory: which is esteemed among the empiric
physicians, to be hot and dry in the second degree. Garcia doth not
affirm that the Indians eat it for meat, or in want of drink, but
that they eat it after meat, and that to give the breath a pleasant
scent, which they count a great grace, so that if an inferior person
that hath not chewed Betre, or some such thing, come to speak with
any great man, he holds his hand before his mouth lest his breath
should offend him.

CHAP. 154. Of Grains, or Grains of Paradise.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Grains, same long, others Pear fashion;
some greater; and others lesser.

Fig. 2141. Grains of Paradise

The first figure hereof setteth forth unto your view the cod wherein
the hot spice lieth, which we call Grains: in shops, Grana Paradisi:
it groweth, by the report of the learned, upon a low herby plant:
the leaves are some four inches long, and three broad, with somewhat
a thick middle rib, from which run transverse fibres; they much in
shape resemble those of Cloves. The fruit is like a great cod or
husk, in shape like a fig when it groweth upon the tree, but of
colour russet, thrust full of small seeds or grains of a dark
reddish colour (as the figure showeth which is divided) of an
exceeding hot taste.

The other sorts may be distinguished by the sight of the picture,
considering the only difference consists in form.

The Place.

Grains grow in Guinea, and the Cardamoms in all the East Indies,
from the port of Calicut unto Cananor; it groweth in Malabar, in
Java, and in divers other places.

The Time.

They spring up in May, being sown of seed, and bring their fruit to
ripeness in September.

The Names.

Grains are called in Greek, Kardamomon: in Latin, Cardamomum; of the
Arabians, Corrumeni: of divers Gentiles, Dore: of Avicenna, Saccolaa
quebir (i.e.) magnum: the other, Saccolaa ceguer (i.e.) minus. It is
called in Malabar, Etremelli: in Ceylon, Encal: in Bengal, Gujerat,
and Deccan, Hil, and Eluchi. The first and largest sort are called
of some, Mileguetta, and Milegetta: in English, Grains, and Grains
of Paradise.

The Temperature.

Avicenna writeth, that Saccolaa, Cardamomum, or Grana Paradisi, are
hot and dry in the third degree, with astriction.

The Virtues.

A. The Grains chewed in the mouth draw forth from the head and
stomach waterish and pituitous humours.

B. They also comfort and warm the weak, cold, and feeble stomach,
help the ague, and rid the shaking fits, being drunk with Sack.

CHAP. 155. Of Yucca.

Fig. 2142. Yucca

The Description.

The plant of whose root the Indian bread called Cassava is made, is
a low herb consisting only of leaves and roots: it hath neither
stalk, flowers, nor fruit, that I can understand of others, or by
experience of the plant itself, which hath grown in my garden four
years together, and yet doth grow and prosper exceedingly;
nevertheless without stalk, fruit, or flowers, as aforesaid. It hath
a very great root, thick and tuberous, and very knobby, full of
juice somewhat sweet in taste, but of a pernicious quality, as saith
my author: from which root riseth up immediately forth of the ground
very many leaves joined unto the head of the root in a round circle;
the which are long, of the length of a cubit, hollowed like a gutter
or trough, very smooth, and of a green colour, like that of Woad:
the edges of the leaves are sharp like the edge of a knife, and of a
brown colour; the point of the leaf is a prick as sharp as a needle,
which hurteth those that unadvisedly pass by it: the leaf with
advised eye viewed is like unto a little wherry, or such like boat:
they are also very tough, hard to break, and not easy to cut, except
the knife be very sharp.

Thus saith our author, but Lobel in the second part of his
Adversaria largely describes and figures this plant; and there he
affirms he wrote a description (the which he there sets down) for
our author; but he did not follow it, and therefore committed these
errors: First, in that he saith it is the root whereof Casava bread
was made; whenas Lobel in his description said he thought it to be
alia species a Yucca Indica ex qua panis communis fit ["Another
species of Indian Yucca from which common bread is made"]. Secondly,
in that he set down the place out of the Historia Lugdunensis (who
took it out of Thevet) endeavouring by that means to confound it
with that there mentioned, whenas he had his from Mr Edwards his
man. And thirdly, (for which indeed he was most blameworthy, and
wherein he most showed his weakness) for that he doth confound it
with the Manihot or true Yucca, which all affirm to have a leaf like
that of hemp, parted into seven or more divisions: and also in that
he puts it to the Arachidna of Theophrastus, whenas he denies it
both flower and fruit, yet within some few years after our author
had set forth this work it flowered in his garden.

This some years puts forth a pretty stiff round stalk some three
cubits high, divided into divers unequal branches carrying many
pretty large flowers, shaped somewhat like those of Fritillaria, but
that they are narrower at their bottoms; the leaves of the flower
are six: the colour on the inside white, but on the outside of an
overworn reddish colour from the stalk to the midst of the leaf; so
that it is a flower of no great beauty, yet to be esteemed for the
rarity. I saw it once flower in the garden of Mr Wilmot at Bow, but
never since, though it hath been kept for many years in sundry other
gardens, as with Mr Parkinson and Mr Tuggy. This was first written
of by our author; and since by Lobel and Mr Parkinson, who keep the
same name, as also Bauhine, who to distinguish it from the other
calls it Yucca foliis aloes.

The Place.

This plant groweth in all the tract of the Indies, from the Magellan
Straits unto the cape of Florida, and in most of the islands of the
Cannibals, and others adjoining, from whence I had that plant
brought me that groweth in my garden, by a servant of a learned and
skilful apothecary of Exeter, named Mr Tho. Edwards.

The Time.

It keepeth green both winter and summer in my garden, without any
coverture at all, notwithstanding the injury of our cold climate.

The Names.

It is reported unto me by Travellers, that the Indians do call it in
same parts, Manihot, but generally Yucca: it is thought to be the
plant called of Theophrastus, Arachidna: and of Pliny, Aracidna.

The Temperature.

This plant is hot and dry in the first degree, which is meant by the
feces or dross, when the poisonous juice is pressed or strained
forth, and is also dry in the middle of the second degree.

CHAP. 156. Of the Fruit Anacardium, and Caious, or Caiocus.


Fig. 2143. Malacca Bean
Fig. 2144. Malacca Kidney bean

The Description.

The ancient writers have been very brief in the history of
Anacardium: the Grecians have touched it by the name of Anakardion,
taking the name from the likeness it hath of an heart both in shape
and colour; called of the Portugals that inhabit the East Indies,
Fava de Malaqua, the bean of Malacca; for being green, and as it
hangeth on the tree, it resembleth a Bean, saving that it is much
bigger: but when they be dry they are of a shining blackish colour,
containing between the outward rind and the kernel (which is like an
Almond) a certain oil of a sharp caustic or burning quality, called
Mel Acardinum, although the kernel is used in meats and sauces, as
we do Olives and such like, to procure appetite.

The other fruit groweth upon a tree of the bigness of a Pear tree:
the leaves are much like to those of the Olive tree, but thicker and
fatter, of a faint green colour: the flowers are white, consisting
of many small leaves much like the flowers of the Cherry tree, but
much doubled, without smell: after cometh the fruit (according to
Clusius, of the form and magnitude of a goose egg, full of juice; in
the end whereof is a nut) in shape like an hare's kidney, having two
rinds, between which is contained a most hot and sharp oil like that
of Anacardium, whereof it is a kind.

The bean or kernel itself is no less pleasant and wholesome in
eating, than the Pistacia, or fistic nut, whereof the Indians do eat
with great delight, affirming that it provoketh venery, wherein is
their chiefest felicity. The fruit is contained in long cods like
those of beans, but greater: near unto which cods cometh forth an
excrescence like unto an apple, very yellow, of a good smell,
spongious within, and full of juice, without any seeds, stones, or
grains at all, somewhat sweet in taste, at the one end narrower than
the other, Pear fashion, or like a little bottle, which hath been
reputed of some for the fruit, but not rightly; for it is rather an
excrescence, as is the Oak Apple.

The Place.

The first grows in most parts of the East Indies, especially in
Cananor, Calicut, Cambaya, and Deccan. The later in Brazil.

The Time.

These trees flower and flourish winter and summer.

The Names.

Their names have been touched in their descriptions. The first is
called Anacardium, of the likeness it hath with an heart: of the
Arabians, Mador: of the Indians, Bibo.

The second is called Caious, and Caius: of some, Caiocus.
The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The oil of the fruit is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it hath
also a caustic or corrosive quality: it taketh away warts, breaketh
apostumes, prevaileth against lepry, alopecia, and easeth the pain
of the teeth, being put into the hollowness thereof.

B. The people of Malabar do use the said oil mingled with chalk, to
mark their clothes or any other thing they desire to be coloured or
marked, as we do use chalk, ochre, and red marking stones, but their
colour will not be taken forth again by any manner of art
whatsoever.

C. They also give the kernel steeped in whey to them that he
asthmatic or short winded; and when the fruit is yet green they
stick the same so steeped against the worms.

D. The Indians for their pleasure will give the fruit upon a thorn
or some other sharp thing, and hold it in the flame of a candle, or
any other flame, which there will burn with such crackings,
lightnings, and withal yield so many strange colours, that it is
great pleasure to the beholders which have not seen the like before.

CHAP. 157. Of Indian Morris Bells, and divers other Indian Fruits.


Fig. 2145. Indian Morris Bells (1)
Fig. 2146. Indian Morocco Bells (2)

The Description.

1. This fruit groweth upon a great tree of the bigness of a Pear
tree, full of branches, garnished with many leaves which are always
green, three or four fingers long, and in breadth two: when the
branches are cut off there issueth a milky juice not inferior to the
fruit in his venomous quality. The trunk or body is covered with a
grayish bark: the timber is white and soft, not fit to make fire of,
much less for any other use; for being cut and put to the fire to
burn, it yieldeth forth such a loathsome and horrible stink, that
neither man nor beast are able to endure it: wherefore the Indians
have no use thereof, but only of the fruit which in shape is like
the Greek letter delta, of the bigness of a chestnut, and covered
with a most hard shell, wherein is contained a kernel of a most
venomous and poisonsome quality, wherewith the men being angry with
their wines, do poison them, and likewise the women their husbands:
they likewise use to dip or anoint and envenom their arrows
therewith, the more speedily to dispatch their enemies. Which kernel
they take forth with some convenient instrument, leaving the shell
as whole as may be, not touching the kernel with their hands because
of its venomous quality, which would spoil their hands, and
sometimes take away their life also. In which shells they put some
little stones, and tie them upon strings (as you may perceive by the
figure) which they dry in the sun, and after tie them about their
legs, as we do bells, to set forth their dances, and Morisco
Matachins, wherein they take great pleasure, by reason they think
themselves to excel in those kinds of dances. Which rattling sound
doth much delight them, because it setteth forth the distinction of
sounds, for they tune them and mix them with great ones and little
ones, in such sort as we do chimes or bells.

2. There is also another sort hereof, differing only in form; they
are of the like venomous quality, and used for the same purpose.
Thus saith our author, but the fruit of this Higuerro is like that
of a gourd in pulp, and it may be eaten: the shape of the fruit is
round, whereas the former is three-cornered.

The Place.

These do grow in most parts of the West Indies, especially in some
of the islands of the Cannibals, who use them in their dances more
than any of the other Indians. You may see these upon strings as
they are here figured, amongst many other varieties, with Mr John
Tradescant at South Lambeth.

The Time.

We have no certain knowledge of the time of flowering or bringing
the fruit to maturity.

The Names and Use.

We have sufficiently spoken of the names and use hereof, therefore
what hath been said may suffice.

CHAP. 158. Of the Vomiting and Purging Nuts.


Fig. 2147. Vomiting Nuts (1)
Fig. 2148. Purging Nuts (2)

The Description.

1. Avicenna and Serapio make Nux vomica, and Nux Methel, to be one,
whereabout there hath been much cavilling; yet the case is plain, if
the text be true, that the Thorn Apple is Nux Methel. Of the tree
that beareth the fruit that is called in shops Nux vomica, and Nux
Methel, we have no certain knowledge: some are of opinion, that the
fruit is the root of an herb, and not the nut of a tree: and
therefore since the case among the learned resteth doubtful, we
leave the rest that might be said to a further consideration. The
fruit is round, flat, like a little cake, of a russet overworn
colour, fat and firm, in taste sweet, and of such an oily substance, 
that it is not possible to stamp it in a mortar to powder; but when
it is to be used, it must be grated or scraped with some instrument
for that purpose.

2. There be certain nuts brought from the Indies, called purging
nuts, of their quality in purging gross and filthy humours. For want
of good instruction from those that have travelled the Indies, we
can write nothing of the tree itself: the nut is somewhat long,
oval, or in shape like an egg; of a brown colour: within the shell
is contained a kernel, in taste sweet, and of a purging faculty.

The Place and Time.

These nuts do grow in the deserts of Arabia, and in some places of
the East Indies: we have no certain knowledge of their springing, or
time of maturity.

The Temperature.

Avicenna affirmeth the vomiting nut to be of a poisonous quality,
cold in the fourth degree, having a stupefying nature, and bringeth
deadly sleep.

The Virtues.

A. Of the physical virtues of the vomiting nuts we think it not
necessary to write, because the danger is great, and not to be given
inwardly, but mixed with other compositions, and that very curiously
by the hands of a faithful apothecary.

B. The powder of the nut mixed with some flesh, and cast unto crows
and other ravenous fowls, doth kill and so dull their senses at the
least, that you may take them with your hands.

C. They make also an excellent salad, mixed with some meat or
butter, and laid in the garden where cats use to scrape to bury
their excrements, spoiling both the herbs and also seeds new sown.

CHAP. 159. Of Divers Sorts of Indian Fruits.

The Kinds.

These fruits are of divers sorts and kinds, whereof we have little
knowledge, more than the fruits themselves, with the names of some
of them: therefore it shall suffice to set forth unto your view the
form only, leaving unto time, and those that shall succeed, to write
of them at large, which in time may know that, that in this time of
infancy is unknown.

Fig. 2149. Kinds of Indian Fruit (1-10)

The Description.

1. The first and one of the best known of these fruits, are the
Cubibæ, called of the Arabian physicians Cubibe and Quabeb; but of
the vulgar Quabebochini: in Java where they plentifully grow, Cumuc:
the other Indians, (the Malayans excepted) call them Cubas sini, not
for that they grow in China, but because the Chinese use to buy them
in Java and Sunda, and so carry them to the other ports of India.
The plant which carries this fruit hath leaves like those of pepper,
but narrower, and it also winds about trees like as Ivy or Pepper
doth: the fruit hangs in clusters, like as those we call Red
Currants, and not close thrust together in bunches, as grapes: the
fruit or berries are of the bigness of peppercorns, wrinkled, and of
a brownish colour: they are of a hot and biting aromatic taste, and
oft-times hollow within, but if they be not hollow, then have they a
pretty reddish smooth round seed under their rough outer husk; each
of these berries commonly hath a piece of his footstalk adhering to
it. It is reported that the natives where it grows first gently boil
or scald these berries before they sell them, that so none else may
have them, by sowing the seeds. Some have thought these to have been
the Carpesium of the ancients; and other some have judged them the
seeds of Agnus castus, but both these opinions are erronious.

A. These are hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree;
wherefore they are good against the cold and moist affects of the
stomach and flatulencies: they help to cleanse the breast of tough
and thick humours; they are good for the spleen, for hoarseness and
cold affects of the womb, chewed with Mastic, they draw much
phlegmatic matter from the head, they heat and comfort the brain.
The Indians use them macerated in wine to excite venery.

2. The plant which carries this fruit is unknown, but the berry is
well known in shops by the name of Cocculus Indicus: some call them
Cocci Orientales: others, Cocculæ Orientales: Some, as Cardus for
one, think them the fruit of Solanum furiosum: others judge them the
fruit of a Tithymale, or of a Clematis. These berries are of the
bigness of Bay berries commonly round, and growing but one upon a
stalk; yet sometimes they are a little cornered, and grow two or
three clustering together: their outer coat or shell is hard, rough,
and of a brownish dusky colour: their inner substance is very oily,
of a bitter taste.

B. They are used with good success to kill lice in in children's
heads, being made into powder and so strewed amongst the hair. They
have also another faculty which author formerly set down in the
chapter of Alaternus (where he confounded these with Fagaras) in
these words, which I have there omitted, to insert here;

C. In England we use the fruit called Cocculus Indi in powder mixed
with flour, honey, and crumbs of bread to catch fish with, it being
a numbing, soporiferous, or sleeping medicine, causeth the fish to
turn up their bellies, as being senseless for a time.

3. Fagara is a fruit of the bigness of a chickpea, covered with a
thin coat of a blackish ash colour, under which outer coat is a
slender shell containing a solid kernel, involved in a thin and
black film. The whole fruit both in magnitude, form, and colour is
so like the Cocculus Indus last described, that at the first sight
one would take it to be the same. Avicenna mentions this in his
266th Chap. after this manner. What is Fagara? It is a fruit like a
Chickpea, having the seed of Mahaleb, and in his hollowness is a
black kernel as in Schehedenegi, and it is brought out of Sofale.

He places it amongst those that heat and dry in the third degree,
and commends it against the coldness of the stomach and liver, it
helps concoction, and binds the belly.

4. This which Clusius thinks to be Mungo (which is used in the East
Indies about Gujerat and Deccan for provender for horses) is a small
fruit of the bigness of pepper, crested, very like coriander seed,
but that it is bigger and black, it is of a hot taste.

5. Buna is a fruit of the bigness of Fagara, or somewhat bigger or
longer, of a blackish ash colour, covered with a thin skin, furrowed
on both sides longwise, whereby it is easily divided into two parts,
which contain each a kernel longish and flat upon one side, of a
yellowish colour, and acid taste. They say that in Alexandria they
make a certain very cooling drink hereof. Rauwolfius in his journal
seems to describe this fruit by the name of Bumu: and by the
appellation, form, and faculties, he thinks it may be the Buncho of
Avicenna, and Buncha of Rhasis, to Almansor. Clusius.

6. This is a kind of Cardamom: and by divers it is thought to be the
true Amomum of the ancients, and to this purpose Nicholas Marogna, a
physician of Verona hath written a treatise which is set forth at
the later end of Pona's description of Mount Baldus, to which I
refer the curious: these cods or berries (whether you please to call
them) grow thick clustering together, they are round, and commonly
of the bigness of a cherry: the outer skin is tough, smoother,
whiter, and less crested than that of the cardamom: within this film
lie the seeds clustering together, yet with a thin film parted into
three, the particular seeds are cornered, somewhat smoother and
larger than those of cardamoms, but of the same aromatic taste, and
of a brown colour. Their temperature and faculties may be referred
to those of cardamoms.

7, 8. This with the next ensuing are by Clusius set forth by the
names I here give you them, though (as he saith) neither of them
agree with the Amomum of Dioscorides, they were only branches set
thick with leaves, having neither any observable smell or taste:
they were sent to the learned and diligent apothecary Walarandus
Donrez, of Lyons, from Ormuz the famous mart & port town in the
Persian Bay.

9. Those that accompanied the renowned Sir Francis Drake in his
voyage about the world, lit upon a certain desert island, wherein
grew many very tall trees, and looking for something amongst these
to refresh themselves, amongst others they observed some bigger than
Oaks, having leaves like those of the Bay tree, thick and shining,
not snipped about the edges; their fruit was longish like to the
small acorns of the Ilex or Holm Oak, but without any cup; yet
covered with a thin shell of an ash colour, and sometimes black,
having within it a longish white kernel wrapped in a thin peeling,
being without any manifest taste; they when they found it, though
much oppressed with hunger, yet durst not taste thereof, lest it
should have been poisonous: but afterwards coming to the island
Beretina, not far from this, they found it to abound with these
trees, and learned that their fruit was not poisonous, but might be
eaten. Whereupon afterwards they in want of other victuals, boiled
some as they do peas and ground others into flour, wherewith they
made puddings. They found this tree also in the Moluccas.

10. The first expressed in this table is the Mad Plum, or as Clusius
had rather term it the Mad Nut; for he calls them Karya Manika, or
Insanæ Nuces. The Hollanders finding them in their return from the
East Indies, and eating the kernels, were for a time distracted, and
that variously, according to the particular temperature of each that
ate of them; as you may see in Clusius Exot. lib. 2. Cap. 26. This
was round, little more than two inches about, with a shell not
thick, but sufficiently strong, brownish on the outside, and not
smooth, but on the inside of a yellowish colour and smooth,
containing a membranous stone or kernel covered with a black pulp,
in form and bigness not much unlike a bullace or sloe, having a
large white spot on the lower part whereas it was fastened to the
stalk: under the pulp lay the kernel, somewhat hard, and of an ash
colour: the footstalk was short and commonly carried but one fruit,
yet sometimes they observed two growing together: the tree whereon
this fruit grew was of the bigness of a Cherry tree, having long and
narrow leaves like those of the Peach tree: the other fruit figured
in the 2nd place was of a brownish yellow colour, somewhat bigger,
but not unlike a small nut, and inch long, and somewhat more about,
smaller below, and bigger above, and as it were parted into four,
being very hard and solid. Of this see more in the fourteenth place.

Fig. 2150. Kinds of Indian Fruit (11-15)

11. The Cacao is a fruit well known in divers parts of America; for
they in some places use it instead of money, and to make a drink, of
which, though bitter, they highly esteem: the trees which bear them
are but small, having long and narrow leaves, and will only grow
well in places shadowed from the sun. The fruit is like an almond
taken out of his husk, and it is covered with a thin black skin
wherein is contained a kernel obliquely divided into two or three
parts, brownish, and distinguished with ash-coloured veins, of an
astringent and ungrateful taste.

12. This which Clusius had from Cortulus, for the fruit of Bdellium,
is thought to be the Cuci of Pliny, and is the Cuciophera of
Matthiolus. The whole fruit is of the largeness of a quince, and of
the same colour, with a sweet and fibrous flesh, under which is a
nut of the bigness of a large Walnut or somewhat more, almost of a
triangular form, bigger below, and smaller above, well smelling, of
a dark ash colour, with a very hard shell, which broken there is
therein contained a hard kernel of the colour and hardness of
marble, having a hollowness in the middle, as much as may contain a
hazelnut.

13. In this table are four several fruits described by Clusius Exot.
lib. 2. cap. 21. The first is called Baruce, and is said to grow
upon a high tree in Guyana called Hura: it consisted of many nuts of
some inch long, strongly fastened or knit together, each having a
hard woody shell, falling into two parts, containing a round and
smooth kernel covered with an ash-coloured film.

C. They say the names there use this fruit to purge and vomit.

The second called Arara grows in Guyana, but how, it is not known:
it was some inch long, covered with a skin sufficiently hard and
black, fastened to a long and rugged stalk that seemed to have
carried more than one fruit: the kernel is black, and of the bigness
of a wild Olive.

D. The natives use the decoction hereof to wash malign ulcers, and
they say the kernel will loose the belly.

The third named Orukoria is the fruit of a tree in Wiapock, called
Iuruwa, they use this to cure their wounds, dropping the juice of
the fruit into them. This fruit is flat, almost an inch broad, and
two long, but writhen like the cod of the true Cytisus, but much
bigger, very wrinkled, of an ash colour, containing a smooth seed.

The fourth called Cropiot is a small and shrivelled fruir, not much
unlike the particular joints of the Ethiopian pepper.

E. The savages use to take it mixed amongst their tobacco to assuage
headache: there were divers of them put upon a string (as you may
see in the figure) the better to dry them.

14. This which by Clusius & Lobel is thought to be the Guanabanus
mentioned by Scaliger Exerc. 281. Part. 6, is a thick fruit some
foot and half long, covered with a thick and hard rind, friezed over
with a soft downiness, like as a Quince is, but of a greenish
colour, with some veins, or rather furrows running along st it, as
in melons: the lower end is somewhat sharp: at the upper end it is
fastened to the boughs, with a firm, hard, and fibrous stalk: this
fruit contains a whitish pulp, which the Ethiopians use in burning
fevers to quench the thirst, for it hath a pleasant tartness: this
dried becomes friable, so that it may be brought into powder with
one's fingers, yet retaineth its acidity: in this pulp lie seeds
like little kidneys, or the seeds of the true Anagyris, of a black
shining colour, with some fibres coming out of their middles: these
sown brought forth a plant having leaves like the Bay tree, but it
died at the approach of winter. Clusius.

15. Ananas pinias, or Pine Thistle, is a plant having leaves like
the Aizoon aquaticum, or Water Sengreen, somewhat sharp and prickly
about the edges: the stalk is round, carrying at the top thereof one
fruit of a yellowish colour when it is ripe, of the bigness of a
melon, covered with a scale-like rind: the smell is grateful,
somewhat like that of the Melocoton: at the top of the fruit, and
sometimes below it, come forth such buds as you see here presented
in the figure, which they set in the ground and preserve the kind by
instead of seed: the meat of this fruit is sweet & very pleasant of
taste, & yields good nourishment; there are certain small fibres in
the meat thereof, which though they do not offend the mouth, yet
hurt they the gums of such as too frequently feed thereon.

Fig. 2151. Kinds of Indian fruit (16-20)

16. The form of this is somewhat strange, for it is like a large
Poppy head cut off nigh the top: the substance thereof was
membranous and wrinkled, of a brownish colour, very smooth: the
circumference at the top is about nine inches, and so it grows
smaller and smaller even to the stalk, which seems to have carried a
flower whereto this fruit succeeded: the top of the fruit was even,
and in it were orderly placed 24 cavities, in each whereof was
contained a little nut like an acorn, almost an inch long, and as
much thick; the upper part was of a brownish colour, & the kernel
within was rank and all mouldy. Clusius could learn neither whence
this came, nor how it grew, but with a great deal of probability
thinks it may be that which the ancients described by the name of
Faba ægyptia.

17. The former of these two Clusius received by the name of Coxco
Cypote, that is the nut Cypote: It is of a dusky brown colour,
smooth, and shining, but on the lower part of an ash colour, rough,
which the painter did not well express in drawing the figure. The
2nd he received by the name of Almendras del Peru, (i.e) Almonds of
Peru: the shell was like in colour and substance to that of an
almond, and the kernel not unlike neither in substance nor taste:
yet the form of the shell was different, for it was triangular, with
a back standing up, and two sharp sides, and these very rough.

18. This was the fruit of a large kind of Convolvulus which the
Spaniards called Buenas noches, or Goodnight, because the flowers
use to fade as soon as night came. The seeds were of a sooty colour
as big as large pea, being three of them contained in a skinny
three-cornered head. You may see more hereof in Clusius, Exot. lib.
2. cap. 18.

19. This is the figure of a square fruit which Clusius conjectures
to have been some kind of Indian Nut or Coco: it was covered with a
smooth rind, was seven inches long, and a foot and half about, being
four inches and a half from square to square.

20. About Bantam in the East Indies grows a tall tree sending forth
many branches, which are set thick with leaves long and narrow,
bigger than those of Rosemary: it carries cods six inches long, and
five about, covered with a thin skin, wrinkled and sharp pointed,
which open themselves from below into five parts, and are full of a
soft woolly or Cottony matter, wherewith they stuff cushions,
pillows and the like, and also spin some for certain uses: amongst
the down lie black seeds like those of Cotton, but less, and not
fastened to the down.

Fig. 2152. Kinds of Indian Fruit (21-24)

21. This which Clusius calls Palma saccifera, or the Bag Date,
because it carries the figure of an Hippocras bag, was found in a
desert island in the Atlantic ocean, by certain Dutch mariners who
observed whole woods thereof: these bags were some of them 22 or
more inches long, and some seven inches broad in the broadest place,
strongly wove with threads crossing one another of a brownish yellow
colour. These satchels (as they report who cut them from the tree)
were filled with fruit of the bigness of a walnut husk and all:
within these were others, as round as if they had been turned and so
hard that you could scarce break them with a hammer: in the midst of
these were white kernels, tasting at the first somewhat like pulse,
but afterwards bitter like a Lupine.

22. The tree which carries this rough cod is very large, as I have
been told by divers: some who saw it in Persia, & others that
observed it in Mauritius Island. Clusius also notes that they have
been brought from divers places: the cod is some three inches long,
and some two inches broad, of a dusky red colour, and all rough and
prickly: in these cods are contained one, two or more round nuts or
seeds of a grayish ash colour, having a little spot on one side,
where they are fastened to the cod they are exceeding hard, and
difficult to break, but broken they show a white kernel very bitter
and unpleasant of taste. I have seen very many and have some of
these, and some have offered to sell them for East Indian Beazor,
whereto they have some small resemblance, though nothing in faculty
like them (if I may credit report, which I had rather do than make
trial) for I have been told by some that they are poisonous; and by
others, that they strongly procure vomit.

23. The long cod expressed in this figure is called in the East
Indies (as Clusius was told) Kaye baka, it was round, the thickness
of one's little finger, and six inches long: the rind was thick,
black, hard and wrinkled, and it contained a hard pulp of a sourish
taste, which they affirm was eatable.

The other was a cod of some inch and half long, and some inch broad,
membranous, rough, and of a brownish colour, sharp pointed, and
opening into two parts, and distinguished with a thin film into four
cells, wherein were contained scarlet pear-fashioned little berries,
having golden spots especially in the midles. This grows in Brazil,
and as Clusius was informed was called Daburi.

24. In the second place of the tenth figure and description in this
chapter you may find the single nut here figured, described, & set
forth; but this figure better expresses the manner of growing
thereof: for first it presents to the view the nuts in their outer
husks growing close together, then the single nuts in and out of
their husks, and lastly their kernel: the shell of this nut contains
in it a certain oily substance, somewhat resembling the oil of Sweet
almonds: the tree whereof this nut is the fruit grows in Guinea, and
is much used by the people there, for they press a liquor forth of
the leaves, or else boil them in water, & this serves them instead
of wine & beer, or at least for a common drink; of the fruit they
make bread of a very sweet and pleasant taste.

Fig. 2153. Scaly Fruits (25)

25. These scaly fruits are set forth by Clusius, Exot. l. 2, c. 3.
The first was three inches long and two inches about, and had in it
a longish hard solid kernel, with many veins dispersed over it, and
such kernels are sometimes polished, whereby they become white, and
then their black veins make a fine show, which hath given occasion
to some impostors to put them to sale for rare and precious stones.

The second was small, round and scaly, and the scales turned their
points downwards towards the stalk.

The third was also scaly, of the bigness of a walnut in his husk,
with the scales very orderly placed, and of a brownish colour: it
had a kernel which rattled in it when it was shaken.


Fig. 2154. Other Strange Fruits (26a)
Fig. 2155. Other Strange Fruits (26b)

26a. The first of the two in the former table was brought from
Guinea, it was of the bigness and shape of a plum, two inches long,
and one and half broad, of a thick fungous substance, somewhat
wrinkled, and blackish on the outside, and within containing a
certain whitish insipid friable pulp, wherein lay a few small seeds.

The second was some inch and half long, an inch thick, covered with
an ash-coloured skins composed within of many fibres almost like the
husk of the nut Faufell, at the lower end it stood in a double cup,
and it was sharp pointed at the upper end: in this skin was
contained a kernel, or rather nut, black, hard, and very wrinkled,
not much unlike to that of Faufell, whereto I refer it as a kind
thereof. These two are treated of by Clusius, Exot. lib. 2. c. 23.

26b. The first of the second table (wherein are contained four
figures) was of a round form, yet a little flat on one side,
distinguished under the black and shining coat wherewith it was
covered, with furrows running every way, not unlike to the nut
Faufell taken forth of his cover: the inner pulp was hard and
whitish, first of a salt, and then of an astringent taste.

The second of these was an inch long, but rather the kernel of a
fruit, than a fruit itself; it was round except at the one end, and
all over knobby (though the picture express not so much) there was
also some show of a triangular form at each end.

The third was two inches and a half long, and in the broadest part
some inch and more broad: it was somewhat crooked, the back high and
rising, the top narrow, and the lower part sharp pointed, of an ash
colour, with thick and eminent nerves running alongst the back from
the top to the lower part, expressed with such art, as if they had
been done by some curious hand: it seemed to have been covered over
with another rind; but it was worn off by the beating of the waves
of the sea upon the shore.

The fruit Cunane figured in the fourth place of this table, was two
inches long, and an inch broad at the head, and so smaller by little
& little, with a back standing out, smooth, black, and shining,
having three holes at the top, one above, & two below: they said it
grew upon a small tree called Morremor, and was yet unripe, but when
it was ripe it would be as big again, and that the natives where it
grew (which was as I take it about Wiapock) roast it upon the coals,
and eat it against the headache. Clusius sets forth these four in
his Exot. l. 2. c. 22, he describes Cunane cap. 11.

CHAP. 160. Of Sundew, Youthwort, or Ros Solis.


Fig. 2156. Round-Leaved Sundew (1)
Fig. 2157. Long-Leaved Sundew (2)

The Description.

1. Sundew is a little herb, and groweth very low, it hath a few
leaves standing upon slender stems, very small, something round, a
little hollow, and like an ear picker, hairy and reddish as be also
the stems, having dew and moisture upon them at the driest time of
the year, and when the sun shineth hottest even at high noon; and a
month after there spring up little stalks, a hand-breadth high, on
which stand small whitish flowers: the roots are very slender, and
like unto hairs.

2. The second kind is like unto the former, in stalks and flowers,
but larger, and the leaves are longer, and not so round, wherein
consisteth the difference.

The Place.

They grow in desert, sandy and sunny places, but yet watery, and
seldom other-where than among the white marsh moss which groweth on
the ground and also upon bogs.

The Time.

Sundew flourisheth in summer, it flowereth in May or June: it is to
be gathered when the weather is most dry and calm. The distilled
water hereof that is drawn forth with a glass still, is of a
glittering yellow colour like gold, and coloureth silver put therein
like gold.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Ros solis: of divers, Rosella: it is named of
others, Salsi rosa, of the dew which hangeth upon it, when the sun
is at the hottest: it is called in High Dutch, Sondaw, and Suidaw,
in Low Dutch, Loopichecruit, which in English signifieth Lustwort,
because sheep and other cattle, if they do but only taste of it, are
provoked to lust. It is called in English, Sundew, Ros Solis, Youth-
wort: in the Northern parts, Red Rot, because it rotteth sheep; and
in Yorkshire, Moor Grass.

The Temperature.

It is a searing or caustic herb, and very much biting, being hot and
dry in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves being stamped with salt do exulcerate and raise
blisters, to what part of the body soever they be applied.

B. The later pysicians have thought this herb to be a rare and
singular remedy for all those that be in a consumption of the lungs,
and especially the distilled water thereof: for as the herb doth
keep and hold fast the moisture and dew, and so fast, that the
extreme drying heat of the sun cannot consume and waste away the
same: so likewise men thought that herewith the natural and radical
humidity in men's bodies is preserved and cherished. But the use
thereof doth otherwise teach, and reason showeth the contrary: for
seeing it is an extreme biting herb, and that the distilled water is
not altogether without this biting quality, it cannot be taken with
safety: for it hath also been observed, that they have sooner
perished that used the distilled water hereof, than those that
abstained from it, and have followed the right and ordinary course
of diet.

C. Cattle of the female kind are stirred up to lust by eating even
of a small quantity: which thing hath greatly increased their vain
opinion, without sense or reason; for it doth not move nor provoke
cattle to lust, for that it increaseth the substance of the seed,
but because through his sharp and biting quality it stirreth up a
desire to lust, which before was dulled, and as it were asleep.

D. It strengtheneth and nourisheth the body, especially if it be
distilled with wine, and that liquor made thereof which the common
people do call Rosa Solis.

E. If any be desirous to have the said drink effectual for the
purposes aforesaid, let them lay the leaves of Rosa Solis in the
spirit of wine, aiding thereto cinnamon, cloves, mace, ginger,
nutmegs, sugar, and a few grains of musk suffering it so to stand in
a glass close stopped from the air, and set in the sun by the space
of ten days, then strain the same, and keep it for your use.

CHAP. 161. Of Moss of trees.

Fig. 2158. Tree Moss

The Description.

Tree Moss hath certain things like hairs, made up as it were of a
multitude of slender leaves, now and then all to be jagged, hacked,
and finely carved, twisted and interlaced one in another, which
cleave fast to the barks of trees, hanging down from the bodies: one
of this kind is more slender and thin, another more thick, another
shorter, another longer; all of them for the most being of a whitish
colour, yet oftentimes there is a certain one also which is black,
but lesser and thinner: the most commendable of them all, as Pliny
saith, be those that are whitish, then the reddish, and lastly such
as be black.

The Place.

This Moss is found on the Oak tree, the White and Black Poplar tree,
the Olive tree, the Birch tree, the Apple tree, the Pear tree, the
Pine tree, the wild Pine tree, the Pitch Tree, the Fir tree, the
Cedar tree, the Larch tree, & on a great sort of other trees, The
best, as Dioscorides saith, is that of the Cedar tree, the next of
the Poplar, in which kind the white and the sweet smelling Moss is
the chiefest; the blackish sort is of no account. Matthiolus
writeth, that in Italy that Moss is sweet which groweth on the Pine
tree, the Pitch Tree, the Fir tree, & the Larch tree, and the
sweetest that of the Larch tree.

The Time.

Moss upon the trees continueth all the year long.

The Names.

It is called of the Grecians, Bryon: of the Latins, Muscus: the
Arabians and some apothecaries in other countries call it Usnea: in
High Dutch, Mosz: in Low Dutch, Mosch: the Frenchmen, Lu Mousch: the
Italians, Musgo: in Spanish, Musco de los arbores: in English, Moss,
Tree Moss, or Moss of trees.

The Temperature.

Moss is somewhat cold and binding, which notwithstanding is more and
less according unto the nature and faculty of that tree on which it
groweth, and especially of his bark: for it taketh unto itself and
also retaineth a certain property of that bark, as of his breeder of
which he is engendered: therefore the Moss which cometh of the Oak
doth cool and very much bind, besides his own and proper faculty, it
receiveth also the extreme binding quality of the Oak bark itself.

The Moss which cometh of the Cedar tree, the Pine tree, the Pitch
Tree, the Fir tree, the Larch tree, and generally all the Resin
trees are binding and do moreover digest and soften.

The Virtues.

A. Serapio saith, that the wine in which Moss hath been steeped
certain days, bringeth sound sleep, strengtheneth the stomach,
stayeth vomiting, and stoppeth the belly.

B. Dioscorides writeth, that the decoction of Moss is good for women
to sit in, that are troubled with the whites; it is mixed with the
oil of Ben, and with oils to thicken them withal.

C. It is fit to be used in compositions which serve for sweet
perfumes, and that take away wearisomeness; for which things that is
best of all which is most sweet of smell.

CHAP. 162. Of Ground Moss.

The Kinds.

There groweth also on the superficial or uppermost part of the earth
divers Mosses, as also upon rocks and stony places, and marsh
grounds, differing in form not a little.

Fig. 2159. Common Ground Moss (1)

The Description.

1. The common Moss groweth upon the earth, and the bottom of old and
ancient trees, but specially upon such as grow in shadowy woods, and
also at the bottom of shadowy hedges and ditches, and such like
places: it is very well known by the softness and length thereof,
being a moss most common, and therefore needeth not any further
description.


Fig. 2160. Besom Ground Moss (2)
Fig. 2161. Greater and Lesser Golden Moss (3, 4)

2. Besom Moss, which seldom or never is found but in bogs and marsh
places, yet sometimes have I found it in shadowy dry ditches, where
the sun never showeth his face: it groweth up half a cubit high,
every particular leaf consisting of an innumerable sort of hairy
threads set upon a middle rib, of a shining black colour like that
of Maidenhair, or the Capillare Moss Dianthum aureum, whereof it is
a kind.

3. This kind of Moss, called Muscus capillaris, is seldom found but
upon bogs and moorish places, and also in some shadowy dry ditches
where the sun doth not come. I found it in great abundance in a
shadowy ditch upon the left hand near unto a gate that leadeth from
Hampstead Heath toward Highgate; which place I have showed unto
divers expert surgeons of London, in our wandering abroad for our
farther knowledge in simples. This kind of Moss, the stalks thereof
are not above one handful high, covered with short hairs standing
very thick together, of an obscure yellow green colour; out of which
stalks spring up sometimes very fine naked stems, somewhat black,
upon the tops of which hang as it were little grains like wheat
corns. The roots are very slender and marvellous fine.

Of this Adianthum aureum there are three kinds, different only in
magnitude, and that the two bigger have many hairy threads upon
their branches, whenas the least hath only three or four close to
the root; and this is the least of plants that I ever yet saw grow.

4. Of this there is also another kind altogether lesser and lower.
This kind of moss groweth in moist places also, commonly in old
mossy and rotten trees, likewise upon rocks, and oftentimes in the
chinks and crannies of stone walls.

Fig. 2162. Flowering Branched Moss (5)

5. There is oftentimes found upon old Oaks and Beeches, and such
like overgrown trees, a kind of Moss having many slender branches,
which divide themselves into other lesser branches; whereon are
placed confusedly very many small threads like hairs, of a greenish
ash colour: upon the ends of the tender branches sometimes there
cometh forth a flower in shape like unto a little buckler or hollow
Mushroom, of a whitish colour tending to yellowness, and garnished
with the like leaves of those upon the lower branches.

Fig. 2163. Cup or Chalice Moss (6)

6. Of this Moss there is another kind, which Lobel in his Dutch
Herbal hath set forth under the title of Muscus Pyxidatus, which I
have Englished, Cup Moss or Chalice Moss: it groweth in the most
barren dry and gravelly ditch banks, creeping flat upon the ground
like unto Liverwort, but of a yellowish white colour: among which
leaves start up here and there certain little things fashioned like
a little cup called a beaker or chalice, and of the same colour and
substance of the lower leaves, which undoubtedly may be taken for
the flowers: the powder of which Moss given to children in any
Iiquor for certain days together, is a most certain remedy against
that perilous malady called the chincough.


Fig. 2164. Moss Fern (7)
Fig. 2165. Horned Moss (8)

7. There is likewise found in the shadowy places of high mountains,
and at the foot of old and rotten trees, a certain kind of Moss in
face and show not unlike to that kind of Oak fern called Dryopteris.
It creepeth upon the ground, having divers long branches, consisting
of many small leaves, every particular leaf made up of sundry little
leaves, set upon a middle rib one opposite to another.

8. There is found upon the tops of our most barren mountains, but
especially where sea coals are accustomed to be digged, stone to
make iron of, and also where ore is gotten for tin and lead, a
certain small plant: it riseth forth of the ground with many bare
and naked branches, dividing themselves at the top into sundry knags
like the forked horns of a deer, every part whereof is of an
overworn whitish colour.

Tragus, Lonicerus, and Bauhin refer this to the Ferns; and the last
of them calleth it Filix saxatilis corniculata: Pena and Lobel made
it their Holostium alterum: Thalius calls it Adianthum acroschiston,
seu furcatum.

Fig. 2166. Toothed Moss (9)

9. There is found creeping upon the ground a certain kind of Moss at
the bottom of Heath and Ling, and such like bushes growing upon
barren mountains; consisting as it were of scales made up into a
long rope or cord, dispersing itself far abroad into sundry
branches, thrusting out here and there certain roots like threads,
which take hold upon the upper crust of the earth, whereby it is
sent and dispersed far abroad: the whole plant is of a yellowish
green colour.

Fig. 2167. Little Toothed Moss (10)

10. This other kind of moss is found in the like places: it also
disperseth itself far abroad, and is altogether lesser than the
precedent, wherein consists the difference.


Fig. 2168. Club Moss (11)
Fig. 2169. Heath Cypress (12)

11. There is likewise another kind of Moss, which I have not
elsewhere found than upon Hampstead Heath, near unto a little
cottage, growing close upon the ground amongst bushes and brakes,
which I have showed unto divers surgeons of London, that have walked
thither with me for their further knowledge in simples, who have
gathered this kind of Moss, whereof some have made them hatbands,
girdles, and also bands to tie such things as they had before
gathered, for the which purpose it most fitly served; some pieces
whereof are six or eight foot long, consisting as it were of many
hairy leaves set upon a tough string, very close couched and compact 
together, from which is also sent forth certain other branches like
the first: in sundry places there be sent down fine little strings,
which serve instead of roots, wherewith it is fastened to the upper
part of the earth, and taketh hold likewise upon such things as grow
next unto it. There spring also from the branches bare and naked
stalks, on which grow certain ears as it were like the catkins or
blowings of the Hazel tree, in shape like a little club or the Reed
Mace, saving that it is much lesser, and of a yellowish white
colour, very well resembling the claw of a wolf, whereof it took his
name; which knobby catkins are altogether barren, and bring forth
neither seed nor flower.

12. This is a kind of Muscus clavatus, or Club-Moss. It is thought
to be the Selago mentioned by Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 11. Tragus and
some others call it Savina sylvestris: Turner and Tabernamontanus,
Chamæcyparissus: but Bauhin the most fitly nameth it Muscus clavatus
foliis cypressi: and Turner not unfitly in English, Heath Cypress.
This is a low plant, and keeps green winter and summer: the leaves
are like those of Cypress, bitter in taste, without smell: it
carries such ears or catkins as the former, and those of a yellowish
colour: it is found growing in divers woody mountainous places of
Germany, where they call it Wald Sevenbaum, or wild Savin.

Fig. 2170. Skull Moss (13)

13. This kind of Moss is found upon the skulls or bare scalps of men
and women, lying long in charnel houses or other places, where the
bones of men and women are kept together: it groweth very thick,
white, like unto the short moss upon the trunks of trees: it is
thought to be a singular remedy against the falling evil and the
chincough in children, if it be powdered, and then given in sweet
wine for certain days together.

Fig. 2171. Small Heath Moss (14)

14. Upon divers heathy places in the month of May is to be found
growing a little short Moss not much in shape different from the
first described, but much less, and parted at the top into star-
fashioned heads. Lobel calls this, Muscus in ericetis proveniens.

The Place.

Their several descriptions set forth their natural places of
growing.

The Time.

They flourish especially in the summer months.

The Names.

Goldilocks is called in High Dutch, Widertodt, golden Wedertodt,
Jung Vrauwen Har: in Low Dutch, Gulden Wederdoot: Fuchsius nameth it
Polytrichon apuleii, or Apuleius his Maidenhair: nevertheless.
Apulieus' Maidenhair is nothing else but Dioscorides his
Trichomanes, called English Maidenhair; and for that cause we had
rather it should be renamed Muscus capillaris, or hairy Moss. This
is called in English, Goldilocks: it might also be termed Golden
Moss, or Hairy Moss.

Wolf's Claw is called of divers herbarists in our age, Muscus
terrestris: in High Dutch, Beerlay, Surtelkraut, Seilkraut: in Low
Dutch, Wolfs clauwen: whereupon we first named it Lycopodium, and
Pes Lupus: in English, Wolf's Foot, or Wolf's Claw, and likewise
Club-Moss. Most shops of Germany in former times did falsly term it
Spica celtica: but they did worse, and were very much too blame,
that used it in compound medicines instead of Spica celtica, or
French Spiknard: as touching the rest, they are sufficiently spoken
of in their descriptions.

The Temperature.

The Mosses of the earth are dry and astringent, of a binding
quality, without any heat or cold.

Goldilocks and the Wolf's Claws are temperate in heat and cold.

The Virtues.

A. The Arabian physicians do put Moss amongst their cordial
medicines, as fortifying the stomach, to stay vomit, and to stop the
lask.

B. Moss boiled in wine and drunk stoppeth the spitting of blood,
pissing of blood, the terms, and bloody flux.

C. Moss made into powder is good to stanch the bleeding of green and
fresh wounds, and is a great help unto the cure of the same.

D. Wolf's Claw provoketh urine, and as Hieronymus Tragus reporteth,
wasteth the stone, and driveth it forth.

E. Being stamped and boiled in wine and applied, it mitigateth the
pain of the gout.

F. Floating wine, which is now become slimy, is restored to his
former goodness if it be hanged in the vessel, as the same author
testifieth.

CHAP. 163. Of Liverwort.


Fig. 2172. Ground Liverwort (1)
Fig. 2173. Two kinds of Small Liverwort (2)

The Description.

1. Liverwort is also a kind of Moss which spreadeth itself abroad
upon the ground, having many uneven or crumpled leaves lying one
over another, as the scales of fishes do, green above, and brown
underneath: amongst these grow up small short stalks, spread at the
top like a blazing star, and certain fine little threads are sent
down, by which it cleaveth and sticketh fast upon stones, and upon
the ground, by which it liveth and flourisheth.

2. The second kind of Liverwort differeth not but in stature, being
altogether less, and more smooth or even: the flowers on the tops of
the slender stems are not so much laid open like a star; but the
especial difference consisteth in one chief point, that is to say,
this kind being planted in a pot, and set in a garden above the
ground, notwithstanding it spitteth or casteth round about the place
great store of the same fruit, where never any did grow before.

Of of this sort which is small, and oftentimes found growing in
moist gardens among Bear's-ears, and such plants, when they are kept
in pots, there are two varieties, one having little stalks some inch
long, with a star-fashioned head at the top: the other hath the like
tender stalk, and a round head at the top thereof.

Fig. 2173. Stone Liverwort (3)

3. This is found upon rocks and stony places, as well near unto the
sea, as further into the land: it groweth flat upon the stones, and
creepeth not far abroad as the ground Liverwort doth, it only
resteth itself in spots and tufts set here and there, of a dusty
russet colour above, and blackish underneath: among the crumpled
leaves rise up divers small stems, whereupon do grow little star-
like flowers of the colour of the leaves: it is often found at the
bottom of high trees growing upon high mountains, especially in
shadowy places.

The Place.

This is often found in shadowy and moist places, on rocks and great
stones laid by the highway, and in other common paths where the
sunbeams do seldom come, and where no traveller frequenteth.

The Time.

It brings forth his blasing stars and leaves oftentimes in June and
July.

The Names.

It is called of the Greeks and Latins, Lichen: and of some, Brion,
that is to say, Muscus, or Moss, as Dioscorides witnesseth: it is
named in shops Hepatica, yet there are also many other herbs named
Hepaticæ, or Liverworts, for difference whereof this may fitly be
called Hepatica petræa, or Stone Liverwort, having taken that name
from the Germans, who call this Liverwort, Steyn Leberkraut: and in
Low Dutch, Steen Levercruyt: in English, Liverwort.

The Temperature.

This Stone Liverwort is of temperature cold and dry, and somewhat
binding.

The Virtues.

A. It is singular good against the inflammations of the liver, hot
and sharp agues, and tertians which proceed of choler.

B. Dioscorides teacheth, that Liverwort being applied to the place
stancheth bleeding, takes away all inflammations, and that it is
good for a tetter or ring-worm, called in Greek, lichen, and that it
is a remedy for them that have the yellow jaundice, even that which
cometh by the inflammation of the liver; and that furthermore it
quencheth the inflammations of the tongue.

CHAP. 164. Of Lungwort, or wood Liverwort, and Oyster-green.

Fig. 2175. Tree Lungwort (1)

The Description.

1. To Liverwort there is joined Lungwort, which is also another kind
of Moss, drier, broader, of a larger size, and set with scales: the
leaves hereof are greater, and diversely folded one in another, not
so smooth, but more wrinkled, rough and thick almost like a fell or
hide, and tough withal: on the upper side whitish, and on the nether
side blackish or dusty, it seemeth to be after a sort like to lungs
or lights.

The Place.

It groweth upon the bodies of old Oaks, Beech, and other wild trees,
in dark & thick woods: it is oftentimes found growing upon rocks,
and also in other shadowy places.

The Time and Names.

It flourisheth especially in the summer months.

It taketh his name Pulmonaria of the likeness of the form which it
hath with lungs or lights, called in Latin Pulmones, of some,
Lichen: it is called in High Dutch, Lungenkraut: in Low Dutch
Longhencruyt: in French, Herb à Poulmon: in English, Lungwort, and
Wood Liverwort.

The Temperature.

This seemeth to be cold and dry.

The Virtues.

A. It is reported that shepherds and certain horse-leeches do with
good success give the powder hereof with salt unto their sheep and
other cattle which be troubled with the cough, and be broken winded.

B. Lungwort is much commended of the learned physicians of our time
against the diseases of the lungs, especially for the inflammations
and ulcers of the same, being brought into powder, and drunk with
water.

C. It is likewise commended for bloody and green wounds, and for
ulcers in the secret parts, and also to stay the reds. Moreover, it
stoppeth the bloody flux, and other fluxes and scourings, either
upwards or downwards, especially if they proceed of choler: it
stayeth vomiting, as men say, and it also stoppeth the belly.

Fig. 2176. Sea Lungwort or Oyster-Green (2)

2. This kind of sea Moss is an herby matter much like unto
Liverwort, altogether without stalk or stem, bearing many green
leaves, very uneven or crumpled, and full of wrinkles, and somewhat
broad, not much differing from leaves of crisp or curled Lettuce:
this groweth upon rocks within the bowels of the sea, but especially
among oysters, and in greater plenty among those oysters which are
called Wallfleet oysters: it is very well known even to the poor
oyster-women which carry oysters to call up and down, who are
greatly desirous of the said moss for the decking and beautifying of
their oysters, to make them sell the better. This moss they do call
Oyster-Green.

D. Oyster green fried with eggs and made into a tansy & eaten, is a
singular remedy for to strengthen the weakness of the back.

Fig. 2177. Round-Leaved Oyster-Weed (3)

3. The branches of this elegant plant are some handful or better
high, spread abroad on every side, and only consisting of sundry
single roundish leaves, whereto are fastened sometimes one,
sometimes two or more such leaves, so that the whole plant consists
of branches made up of such round leaves, fastened together by
divers little & very small threads: the lower leaves which stick
fast to the rocks are of a brownish colour, the other of a whitish
or a light green colour, smooth and shining. This grows upon rocks
in divers parts of the Mediterranean. Clusius setteth it forth by
the name of Lichen marinus; and he received it from Imperato by the
name of Sertuloria: and Cortusus had it from Corsica, by the title
of Corrallina latifolia; and he called it Opuntia marina, having
reference to that mentioned by Theophrastus in his Historia
Plantorum, lib. 1. cap. 12.

Fig. 2178. Sea Oak or Wrack (4)
Fig. 2179. Another kind of Sea Oak or Wrack (4a)

4. There is also another sort of seaweed found upon the drowned
rocks which are naked and bare of water at every tide. This seaweed
groweth unto the rocks, fastened unto the same at one end, being a
soft herby plant, very slippery, insomuch that it is a hard matter
to stand upon it without falling: it rampeth far abroad, and here
and there is set with certain puffed up tubercles or bladders, full
of wind, which giveth a crack when it is broken: the leaf itself
doth somewhat resemble the Oaken leaf, whereof it took his name
Quercus marina, the sea Oak: of some, Wrack, and Crow gall. His use
in physic hath not been set forth, and therefore this bare
description may suffice.

Other Kinds of Seaweed

Of this Quercus marina, or Fucus, there are divers sorts, whereof I
will give you the figures and a brief history.

4a. The first of these is only a variety of the last described,
differing therefrom in the narrowness of the leaves, and largeness
of the swollen bladders.


Fig. 2180. Sea Thongs (5)
Fig. 2181. The Third Kind of Sea Wrack (6)

5. This grows to the length of five or six foot, is smooth and
membranous, being some half fingers breadth, and variously divided,
like wet parchment or leather cut into thongs: this hath no swollen
knots or bladders like as the former; and is the Fucus marinus
secondus of Dodonæus.

6. This Wrack or seaweed hath long and flat stalks like the former,
but the stalks are thick set with swollen knots or bladders, out of
which sometimes grow little leaves, in other respects it is not
unlike the former kinds. Dodonæus makes this his Fucus marinus 3.


Fig. 2182. Jagged Sea Wrack (7)
Fig. 2183. Grass Wrack (8)

7. The leaves of this other Wrack, which Dodonæus makes his Fucus
marinus quartus, are narrower, smaller, and much divided; and this
hath either none or very few of those swollen bladders which some of
the former kinds have.

8. This, which Lobel calleth Alga marina, hath jointed black
branched creeping roots of the thickness of one's finger, which end
as it were in divers ears, or hairy awns, composed of whitish hairy
threads somewhat resembling Spikenard: from the tops of those ears
come forth leaves, long, narrow, soft, and grass-like, first green,
but white when they are dry. It grows in the sea as the former. They
use it in Italy and other hot countries to pack up glasses with, to
keep them from breaking.


Fig. 2184. Sea Girdle and Hangers (9)
Fig. 2185. Sea Ragged Staff (10)

9. Of this tribe are divers other plants; but I will only give you
the history of two more, which I first observed the last year, going
in company with divers London apothecaries to find simples, as far
as Margate in the island of Thanet; and whose figures (not before
extant that I know of) I first gave in my journal or enumeration of
such plants as we there and in other places found. The first of
these by reason of his various growth is by Bauhine in his Prodromus
distinguished into two, and described in the second and third
places. The third he calls Fucus longissimo, latissimo, crassoque
folio, and this is marked with the figure 1. The second he calls
Fucus arboreus polyschides; and this you may see marked with the
figure 2. This seaweed (as I have said) hath a various face, for
sometimes from a fibrous root, which commonly groweth to a pebble
stone, or fastened to a rock, it sendeth forth a round stalk seldom
so thick as one's little finger and about some half foot in length,
at the top whereof grows out a single leaf, sometimes an ell long,
and then it is about the breadth of one's hand, and it ends in a
sharp point, so that it very well resembles a two edged sword.
Sometimes from the same root come forth two such fashioned leaves,
but then commonly they are lesser. Otherwhiles at the top of the
stalk it divides itself into eight, nine, ten, twelve, more or fewer
parts, and that just at the top of the stalk, and these never come
to that length that the single leaves do. Now this I judge to be the
Fucus polyschides of Bauhine. That these two are not several kinds I
am certain; for I have marked both these varieties from one and the
same root, as you may see them here expressed in the figure. At
Margate where they grow they call them Sea Girdles, and that name
well befits the single one; and the divided one they may call Sea
Hangers, for if you do hang the tops downwards, they do reasonable
well resemble the old fashioned sword-hangers. Thus much for their
shape: now for their colours which is not the same in all; for some
are more green, and these can scarce be dried; other some are
whitish, and these do quickly dry, and then both in colour and
substance are so like parchment, that such as know them not would at
the first view take them to be nothing else. This is of a glutinous
substance, and a little saltish taste, and divers have told me they
are good meat, being boiled tender, and so eaten with butter,
vinegar, and pepper.

10. This which I give you in the tenth place is not figured or
described by any that as yet I have met with; wherefore I gave the
figure and description in the forementioned journal, which I will
here repeat. This is a very succulent and fungous plant, of the
thickness of one's thumb; it is of a dark yellowish colour, and
buncheth forth on every side with many unequal tuberosities or
knots: whereupon W. Thomas Hicks being in our company did fitly name
it Sea Ragged Staff. We did not observe it growing, but found one ot
two plants thereof some foot long apiece.

Fig. 2186. Hairy Riverweed (11)

11. In some slow running waters is to be found this long green hairy
weed, which is thought to be the Conferva of Pliny: it is made up
only of long hairy green threads, thick thrummed together without
any particular shape or fashion, but only following the current of
the stream.

CHAP. 165. Of Sea Moss, or Coralline.

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Moss, growing as well within the bowels of
the sea, as upon the rocks, distinguished under sundry titles.



Fig. 2188. White Sea Moss (2)

Fig. 2187. White Coralline (1)
Fig. 2189. English Coralline (3)

The Description.

1. This kind of Sea Moss hath many small stalks finely covered or
set over with small leaves, very much cut or jagged, even like the
leaves of Dill, but hard, and of a stony substance.

2. The second is much like unto the former, yet not stony, but more
finely cut, and growing more upright, branching itself into many
divisions at the top, growing very thick together, and in great
quantity, out of a piece of stone, which is fashioned like an hat or
small stony head, whereby it is fastened unto the rocks.

3. This third kind of Sea Moss is very well known in shops by the
name Corallina; it yieldeth forth a great number of shoots, in shape
much like unto Coral; being full of small branches dispersed here
and there, diversely varying his colour, according to the place
where it is found, being in some places red, in other some yellow,
and of an herby colour; in some gray, or of an ash colour, and in
other some very white.


Fig. 2190. Smallest Coralline (4)
Fig. 2191. Coral Moss (5)

4. The fourth kind of Sea Moss is somewhat like the former, but
smaller, and not so plentiful where it groweth, prospering always
upon shells, as of oysters, mussels, and scallops, as also upon
rolling stones, in the bottom of the water, which have tumbled down
from the high cliffs and rocks, notwithstanding the old proverb,
that rolling stones never gather moss.

5. There is found upon the rocks and mountains of France, bordering
upon the Mediterranean sea, a certain kind of Coralline, which in
these parts hath not been found: it groweth in manner like unto a
branch of Coral, but altogether lesser, of a shining red colour, and
of a stony substance.

I know not what our author meant by this description, but the plant
which here is figured out of Tabernamontanus (and by the same title
he hath it) is of a Moss growing upon Hampstead Heath, and most such
places in England: it grows up some two or three inches high, and is
divided into very many little branches ending in little thready
chives: all the branches are hollow, and of a very light white dry
substance, which makes it somewhat to resemble Coralline, yet is it
not stony at all.

Fig. 2192. Kinds of Sea Moss (6-9)

6. There is also found upon the rocks near unto Narbonne in France,
and not far from the sea, a kind of Coralline. it groweth up to the
form of a small shrub, branched diversely; whereon do grow small
grass-like leaves, very finely cut or jagged, like unto Fennel; yet
are they of a stony substance, as are the rest of the Corallines; of
a dark russet colour.

7. This grows also in the like places, having many small long
Fennel-like divided leaves upon stalks some foot long, with some
swelling eminences here & there set in the divisions of the leaves:
this is by Lobel called by the name I here give you it.

8. This also hath fine cut leaves like those of Fennel, but much
less & shorter, of a fair green colour: these grow up from round
tuberous roots, which together with the fibres they send forth are
of a blackish colour: the stalks also are tuberous and swollen, as
in other plants of this kind. It grows in the sea with the former.
Dodonæus calls this Fucus marinus virens tenuifolius.

9. This kind of Sea Moss grows some four or more inches long,
divided into many branches, which are subdivided into smaller, set
with leaves finely jagged, like those of Camomile; at first soft,
flexible, and transparent, green below, and purplish above; being
dried, it becometh rough and fragile, like as Coralline. It grows in
the Mediterranean sea.

Fig. 2193. Broad-Leaved Sea Moss (10)

10. This Sea Moss is a low little excrescence, having somewhat broad
cut leaves growing many from one root: in the whole face it
resembles the moss that grows upon the branches of Oaks and other
trees, and is also white and very like it, but much more brittle.
This by Dodonæus is called Muscus marinus tertius.

Fig. 2194. Clusius' Sea Fir (11)

11. Upon the rocks and shells of sea fishes are to be found divers
small plants, having resemblance to others that grow upon the land;
and Clusius saith, upon the coast of the Low countries he observed
one which very much resembled the Fir tree, having branches growing
orderly on both sides, but those very brittle and small, seldom
exceeding a handful in height, and covered as it were with many
small scales. He observed others that resembled Cypress trees, and
other branches that resembled Tamarisk or Heath.

The Place.

These Mosses grow in the sea upon the rocks, and are oftentimes
found upon oyster shells, mussel shells, and upon stones: I found
very great plenty thereof under Reculver and Margate, in the Isle of
Thanet; and in other places alongst the sands from thence unto
Dover.

The Time.

The time answereth the other Mosses, and are found at all times of
the year.

The Names.

Sea Moss is called in Latin, Muscus marinus: of the Apothecaries,
Italians, and Frenchmen, Corallina: in Spanish, Malharquiana yerva:
in High Dutch, Meermosz: in Low Dutch, Zee Mosch: in English, Sea
Moss, and of many Corallina, after the apothecaries' word, and it
may be called Coral Moss. The titles distinguish the other kinds.

The Temperature.

Corallina consisteth, as Galen saith, of an earthy and waterish
essence, both of them cold: for by his taste it bindeth, and being
applied to any hot infirmity, it also evidently cooleth: the earthy
essence of this Moss hath in it also a certain saltness, by reason
whereof likewise it drieth mightily.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides commendeth it to be good for the gout which hath need
to be cooled.

B. The later physicians have found by experience, that it killeth
worms in the belly; it is given to this purpose to children in the
weight of a dram or thereabouts.

C. That which cleaveth to Coral, and is of a reddish colour, is of
some preferred and taken for the best: they count that which is
whitish, to be the worser. Notwithstanding in the French Ocean, the
Britain, the Low Country, or else in the German ocean sea, there is
scarce found any other than the whitish Coralline, which the nations
near adjoining do effectually use.

CHAP. 166. Of Coral.


Fig. 2195. Red Coral (1)
Fig. 2196. Black Coral (2)

The Description.

1. Although Coral be a matter or substance, even as hard as stones;
yet I think it not amiss to place and insert it here next unto the
mosses, and the rather for that the kinds thereof do show
themselves, as well in the manner of their growing, as in their
place and form, like unto the Mosses. This later age wherein we live
hath found more kinds hereof than ever were known or mentioned among
the old writers. Some of these Corals grow in the likeness of a
shrub, or stony matter; others in a straight form, with crags and
joints, such as we see by experience: the which for that they are so
well known, and in such request for physic, I will not stand to
describe; only this remember, that there is some Coral of a pale
yellow colour, as there be some red, and some white.

2. The black Coral groweth upon the rocks near to the sea about
Marseilles, in manner of the former; herein differing from it, in
that this is of a shining black colour, and very smooth, growing up
rather like a tree, than like a shrub.

Fig. 2197. White Coral (3)

3. The white Coral is like to the former, growing upon the rocks
near the sea, and in the West parts of England, about Saint
Michael's Mount; but the branches hereof are smaller, and more
brittle, finelier dispersed into a number of branches, of a white
colour.


Fig. 2197. The Other White or Yellow Coral (4)
Fig. 2198. Whitish Bastard Coral (5)

4. The fourth groweth also upon the western rocks of the sea, and in
the place afore-named, and varieth his colour, sometimes waxing
white, sometimes yellow, and sometimes red,

5. This grows up with many branches some two or three handfuls high;
the inner part is a hard woody substance, which is covered over with
a white and hard stony matter, so that it resembleth White Coral,
but that it is neither so thick, hard, nor smooth, but is rough and
bends easily without breaking, which Coral will not do. Lobel calls
this Corallina alba, it grows in the Mediteranian sea, and upon the
coasts of Spain.

Fig. 2200. Kinds of Coral and Sponge (6-9)

6. This in all respects is like the last described, the colour
excepted, which is a dark red, and therefore better resembles the
red Coral. Clusius refers both these to the Quercus marina mentioned
by Theophrapus, Hist. plant. lib. 7. cap. 4.

7. There is found growing upon the rocks near unto the sea, a
certain matter wrought together, of the foam or froth of the sea,
which we call sponges, after the Latin name, which may very fitly be
inserted among the Sea Mosses, whereof to write at large would
greatly increase our volume, and little profit the reader,
considering we hasten to an end, and also that the use is so well
known unto all: therefore these few lines may serve until a further
consideration, or a second edition. Sponges are not like the
Alcyonium, that is, an accidental matter wrought together of the
froth of the sea, as our author affirms, but rather of a nobler
nature than plants, for they are said to have sense, and to contract
themselves at the approach of one's hand that comes to cut them up,
or for fear of any other harm-threatening object, and therefore by
most writers they are referred to the Zeophytai: which some render
Plantanimalia, that is, such as are neither absolute plants, nor
living creatures, but participate of both: they grow of divers
shapes and colours upon the rocks in the Mediterranian, as also in
the Archipelago, or Ægean Sea.

8. Clusius observed one yet adhering to the stone whereon it grew,
which in shape resembled a funnel, but in substance was like another
Sponge.

9. There is also to be found upon our English coast a small kind of
sponge cast up by the sea, and this is also of different shapes and
colour, for the shape it is always divided into sundry branches, but
that after a different manner; and the colour is oft-times brownish,
and otherwhiles gray or white. Lobel makes it Confervæ marinæ genus.

The Place.

The place of their growing is sufficiently spoken of in their
several descriptions.

The Time.

The time answereth the other kinds of Sea Mosses.

The Names.

Corallium rubrum is called in English, Red Coral. Corallium nigrum,
Black Coral. Corallium album, White Coral.

The Temperature.

A. Coral bindeth, and meanly cooleth: it cleareth the scars and
spots of the eyes, and is very effectual against the issues of
blood, and easeth the difficulty of making water.

The Virtues.

A. Coral drunk in wine or water, preserveth from the spleen; and
some hang it about the necks of such as have the falling sickness,
and it is given in drink for the same purpose.

B. It is a sovereign remedy to dry, to stop, and stay all issues of
blood whatsoever in man or woman, and the dysentery.

C. Burned Coral drieth more than when it is unburned, and being
given to drink in water, it helpeth the gripings of the belly, and
the griefs of the stone in the bladder.

D. Coral drunk in wine provoketh sleep: but if the patient have an
ague, then it is with better success ministered in water, for the
Coral cooleth, and the water moisteneth the body, by reason whereof
it restraineth the burning heat in agues, and represseth the vapours
that hinder sleep.

CHAP. 167. Of Mushrooms, or Toadstools.

The Kinds.

Some Mushrooms grow forth of the earth; other upon the bodies of old
trees, which differ altogether in kinds. Many wantons that dwell
near the sea, and have fish at will, are very desirous for change of
diet to feed upon the birds of the mountains; and such as dwell upon
the hills or champion grounds, do long after sea fish; many that
have plenty of both, do hunger after the earthy excrescences, called
Mushrooms: whereof some are very venomous and full of poison, others
not so noisome; and neither of them very wholesome meat; wherefore
for the avoiding of the venomous quality of the one, and that the
other which is less venomous may be discerned from it, I have
thought good to set forth their pictures with their names and places
of growth. Because the book is already grown too voluminous, I will
only give you the figures of such as my author hath here mentioned,
with some few others, but not trouble you with any more history, yet
distinguish between such as are eatable, and those that be
poisonous, or at least not to be eaten; so the first figured amongst
the poisonous ones, is that we call Jew's Ear, which hath no
poisonous facility in it. Clusius (all whose figures I could have
here given you) hath written a peculiar tract of these bastard
plants, or excrescences, where such as desire it may find them
sufficiently discoursed of.

Fig. 2201. Edible Mushrooms

The Description.

1. Ground Mushrooms grow up in one night, standing upon a thick and
round stalk, like unto a broad hat or buckler, of a very white
colour until it begin to wither, at what time it loseth his fair
white, declining to yellowness: the lower side is somewhat hollow,
set or decked with fine gutters, drawn along from the middle centre
to the circumference or round edge of the brim.

Fig. 2202. Inedible Mushrooms

2. All Mushrooms are without pith, rib, or vein: they differ not a
little in bigness and colour; some are great, and like a broad
brimmed hat; others smaller, about the bigness of a silver coin
called a dollar: most of them are red underneath; some more, some
less; others little or nothing red at all: the upper side which
beareth out, is either pale or whitish, or else of an ill-favoured
colour like ashes (they commonly call it ash colour) or else it
seemeth to be somewhat yellow.

Fig. 2203. Poisonous Mushrooms

There is another kind of Mushrooms called Fungi parvi lethales
galericulati: in English, deadly Mushrooms, which are fashioned like
unto an hood, and are most venomous and full of poison.

There is a kind of Mushroom called Fungus clypeiformis lethalis,
that is also a deadly Mushroom, fashioned like a little buckler.

There is another kind of Mushroom, which is also most venomous and
full of poison, bearing also the shape of a buckler, being called
Fungus venenatus clypeiformis: in English, the stinking venomous
Mushroom.

The Mushrooms or Toodstools which grow upon the trunks or bodies of
old trees, very much resembling Auricula Iudæ, that is Jew's ear, do
in continuance of time grow unto the substance of wood, which the
fullers do call touchwood, and are for the most half circled or half
round, whose upper part is somewhat plain, and sometime a little
hollow, but the lower part is plaited or pursed together. This kind
of Mushroom is full of venom or poison as the former, especially
those which grow upon the Ilex, Olive, and Oak trees.

Fig. 2204. Poisonous Mushrooms

Fig. 2205. Honeycomb Mushroom, Prick Mushroom, and Puffball

There is likewise a kind of Mushroom called Fungus favaginosus,
growing up in moist and shadowy woods, which is also venomous,
having a thick and tuberous stalk, an handful high, of a duskish
colour; the top whereof is compact of many small divisions, like
unto the honeycomb.

There is also found another, set forth under the title Fungus
virilis penis erecti forma, which we English, Prick Mushroom, taken
from his form.

3. Fungus orbicularis, or Lupi crepitus, some do call it Lucernarum
fungus: in English, Puffballs, Puck Fuss, and Bullfists, with which
in some places of England they use to kill or smolder their bees,
when they would drive the hives, and bereave the poor bees of their
meat, houses, and lives: these are also used in some places where
neighbours dwell far asunder, to carry and reserve fire from place
to place, whereof it took the name, Lucernarum Fungus: in form they
are very round, sticking and cleaving unto the ground, without any
stalks or stems; at the first white, but afterward of a duskish
colour, having no hole or breach in them, whereby a man may see into
them, which being troden upon do breathe forth a most thin and fine
powder, like unto smoke, very noisome and hurtful unto the eyes,
causing a kind of blindness, which is called purblind, or sand-
blind.

There is another kind of fungus, or Mushroom, which groweth in moist
mesdows, and by ditch sides, five or six inches high, covered over
with a skin like a piece of sheep's leather, of a russet colour;
which being taken away there appeareth a long and white stump, in
form not much unlike to an handle, mentioned in the title, or like
unto the white and tender stalk of Aron, but greater this kind is
also full of venom and poison.

There is likewise a kind of Mushroom, with a certain round
excrescence, growing within the earth, under the upper crust or face
of the same, in dry and gravelly grounds in Pannonia and the
provinces adjoining, which do cause the ground to swel, and be full
of hills like Mole-hills. The people where they grow, are
constrained to dig them up and cast them abroad like as we do Mole-
hills, spoiling their grounds, as Mole-hills are hurtful unto our
soil: these have neither stalks, leaves, fibres nor strings annexed
or fastened unto them, and for the most part are of a reddish
colour, but within of a whitish yellow: the Grecians have called
this tuberous excrescence, Idna, and the Latins Tubera: the
Spaniards do call them Turmas de tierra: in English we may call them
Spanish Puffballs.

The Place.

Mushrooms come up about the roots of trees, in grassy places of
meadows, and lea land newly turned; in woods also where the ground
is sandy, but yet dankish: they grow likewise out of wood, forth of
the rotten bodies of trees, but they are unprofitable and nothing
worth. Poisonsome Mushrooms, as Dioscorides saith, groweth where old
rusty iron lieth or rotten clouts, or near to serpents' dens, or
roots of trees that bring forth venomous fruit. Divers esteeme those
for the best which grow in meadows, and upon mountains and hilly
places, as Horace saith, Lib. Ser. 2. satyr. 4.

 pratensibus optima fungis
Natura est, aliis male creditur.
The Meadow Mushrooms are in kind the best.
It is ill trusting any of the rest.
Horace, Sermons II. 4. l. 20-21

The Time.

Divers come up in April, and last not till May, for they flourish
but whilst April continues: others grow later, about August; yet all
of them after rain; and therefore they are found one year sooner,
and another later. Mushrooms, saith Pliny, grow in showers of rain:
they come of the slime of trees, as the same author affirmeth.

The Names.

They are called in Latin; Fungi: in Italian, Fonghi: in Spanish,
Hungos, Cugumenos: in French, Campinion, which word the Low-Country
men also use, and call them Campernoellen: in High Dutch, Schwemme,
Pfifferling: in English, Mushrooms, Toadstools, and Paddock-stools.

The Mushrooms that come up in April are called in Latin of some,
Spongiolæ: of the Italians, Prignoli: and in High Dutch, Moschel.

They that are of a light red are called of some Boleti, among the
later ones which rise and fall away in seven days. The white, or
those which be somewhat yellow, are called in Latin, Suilli: which
the later physicians name Porcini, or Swine Mushrooms. Suilli, saith
Pliny, are dried, being hanged upon rushes, which are thrust through
them. The dry ones are in our age also eaten in Bohemia and Austria:
they that grow by the roots of Poplar trees are called of the
Latins, Populnei, Poplar Mushrooms.

Puffs-fists are commonly called in Latin, Lupi crepitus, or Wolf's
fists: in Italian, Vesci de Lupo: in English, Puff's-fists,
Puffballs, and Fuss-balls in the North. Pliny nameth them Pezicæ, as
though he should say, flat.

Tree Mushrooms be called in Latin, Fungi arborum, and Fungi arborei:
in English, Tree Mushrooms, or Touchwood: in High Dutch also
Schwemme. They are all thought to be poisonsome, being inwardly
taken. Nicander writeth, that the Mushrooms of the Olive tree, the
Ilex tree, and of the Oak tree bring death.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. Galen affirms, that they are all very cold and moist, and
therefore do approch unto a venomous and murdering faculty, and
engender a clammy, pituitous, and cold nutriment if they be eaten.
To conclude, few of them are good to be eaten, and most of them do
suffocate and strangle the eater. Therefore I give my advice unto
those that love such strange and new fangled meats, to beware of
licking honey among thorns, lest the sweetness of the one do not
countervail the sharpness and pricking of the other.

B. Fuss-balls are no way eaten: the powder of them doth dry without
biting: it is fitly applied to merry-galls, kibed heels, and such
like.

C. In divers parts of England where people dwell far from
neighbours, they carry them kindled with fire, which lasteth long:
whereupon they were called Lucernarum Fungi.

D. The dust or powder hereof is very dangerous for the eyes, for it
hath been often seen, that divers have been purblind ever after;
when some small quantity thereof hath been blown into their eyes

E. The country people do use to kill or smother Bees with these
Fuss-balls, being set on fire, for the which purpose it fitly
serveth.

F. The fungous excrescence of the Elder, commonly called a Jew's
Ear, is much used against the inflammations and all other sorenesses
of the throat, being boiled in milk, steeped in beer, vinegar, or
any other convenient liquor.

CHAP. 168. Of Great Toothwort, or Clowns' Lungwort.


Fig. 2206. Great Toothwort or Lungwort (1)
Fig. 2207. Little Toothwort or Lungwort (2)

The Description.

1. There is often found among the Mushrooms a certain kind of
excrescence consisting of a jelly or soft substance, like that of
the Mushrooms, and therefore it may the more fitly be here inserted:
it riseth forth of the ground in form like unto Orobanche, or the
Broomrape, and also in substance, having a tender, thick, tuberous,
or mis-shapen body, consisting as it were of scales like teeth
(whereof it took his name) of a dusty shining colour tending to
purple. The stalk riseth up in the middle, garnished with little
gaping hollow flowers like those of Satyrion; on the outside of an
overworn whitish colour: the whole plant resembleth a rude form of
that jelly, or slimy matter, found in the fields, which we call the
falling of stars: the root is small and tender.

2. There is also another sort hereof found, not differing from the
precedent: the chief difference consisteth in that, that this plant
is altogether lesser; and hath a root diversely divaricated like
Coral, white of colour, full of juice, and without any fibres
annexed thereto; in other respects like.

The Place.

These plants do grow at the bottom of Elm trees, and such like, in
shadowy places: I found it growing in a lane called East-Lane, upon
the right hand as ye go from Maidstone in Kent unto Cock's Heath,
half a mile from the town; and in other places thereabout: it doth
also grow in the fields about Croydon, especially about a place
called Groutes, being the land of a worshipful gentleman called Mr
Garth: and also in a wood in Kent near Crayford, called Rowhill, or
Rough-hill: it groweth likewise near Harwood in Lancashire, a mile
from Whalley, in a wood called Talbot Bank.

The Time.

They flower in May and June.

The Names.

There is not any other name extant, more than is set forth in the
description.

The Temperature and Virtues.

There is nothing extant of the faculties hereof; either of the
ancient or later writers: neither have we anything of our own
experience; only our country women do call it Lungwort, and do use
it against the cough, and all other imperfections of the lungs: but
what benefit they reap thereby I know not; neither can any of
judgement give me further instruction thereof.

CHAP. 166. Of Sanders.

The Kinds.

The ancient Greeks have not known the sorts of Sanders: Garcias and
others describe three, Album, Rubrum and Pallidum: which in shops is
called Citrinum.

The Description.

1. The Sanders tree groweth to the bigness of the Walnut tree,
garnished with many goodly branches; whereon are set leaves like
those of the Lentisk tree, always green; among which come forth very
fair flowers, of a blue colour tending to blackness; after cometh
the fruit of the bigness of a Cherry, green at the first, and black
when it is ripe; without taste, and ready to fall down with every
little blast of wind: the timber or wood is of a white colour, and a
very pleasant smell.

2. There is likewise another which groweth very great, the flowers
and fruit agree with the other of his kind: the wood is of a
yellowish colour, wherein consisteth the difference.

3. The third sort which we call Red Sanders is a very hard and solid
wood, having little or no smell, the colour thereof is very red, it
groweth not in those places where the others grow, neither is the
form of the tree described by any that I know of, it is frequently
used to colour sauces, and for such-like uses.
The Place.

The white and yellow Sanders grow naturally, and that in great
abundance, in an island called Timor, and also in the East Indies
beyond the river Sanges or rather Ganges, which the Indians call
Hanga, and also about Java, where it is of better odour than any
that groweth elsewhere.

The red Sanders grows within the river Ganges, especialiy about
Tanasarim, and in the marsh grounds about Coromandel: Avicenna,
Serapio and most of the Mauritanians call it by a corrupt name,
Sandal: in Timor, Malacca, and in places near adjoining, Chandama:
in Deccan and Gujerat, Sercanda: in Latin, Sandalum and Santalum,
adding thereto for the colour album, flavum or citrinum, and rubrum,
that is, white, yellow, and red Sanders.

The Time.

These trees which are the white and yellow Sanders grow green winter
and summer, and are not one known from another, but by the Indians
themselves, who have taken very certain notes and marks of them,
because they may the more speedily distinguish them when the mart
cometh.

The Names.

Their names have been sufficiently spoken of in their descriptions.

The Temperature.

Yellow and White Sanders are hot in the third degree, and dry in the
second. The Red Sanders are not so hot.

The Virtues.

A. The Indians do use the decoction made in water, against hot
burning agues, and the overmuch flowing of the menses, erysipelas,
the gout, and all inflammations, especially if it be mixed with the
juice of Nightshade, Houseleek, or Purslane.

B. The White Sanders mixed with rose-water, and the temples bathed
therewith, ceaseth the pain of the megrim, and keepeth back the
flowing of humours to the eyes.

C. Avicenna affirmeth it to be good for all passions of the heart,
and maketh it glad and merry, and therefore good to be put in
collises, jellies, and all delicate meats which are made to
strengthen and revive the spirits.

D. Red Sanders have an astrictive and strengthning faculty, but are
not cordial as the other two, they are used in divers medicines and
meats both for their faculty and pleasing red colour, which they
give to them.

CHAP. 170. Of Stony Wood, or Wood Made Stones.

Fig. 2208. Petrified Wood

The Description.

Among the wonders of England this is one of great admiration, and
contrary unto man's reason and capacity, that there should be a kind
of wood alterable into the hardness of a stone called Stony wood, or
rather a kind of water, which hardeneth wood and other things, into
the nature and matter of stones. But we know that the works of God
are wonderful, if we do but narrowly search the least of them, which
we daily behold; much more if we turn our eyes upon those that are
seldom seen, and known but of a few, and that of such as have
painfully travelled in the secrets of nature. This strange
alteration of nature is to be seen in sundry parts of England &
Wales, through the qualities of some waters and earth which change
such things into stone as do fall therein, or which are of purpose
for trial put into them. In the North part of England there is a
well near unto Knaresborough, which will change anything into stone,
whether it be wool, timber, leaves of trees, moss, leather gloves,
or such like. There be divers places in Bedfordshire, Warwickshire,
and Wales, where there is ground of that quality, that if a stake be
driven into it, that part of the stake which is within the ground
will be a firm and hard stone and all that which is above the ground
retaineth his former substance and nature. Also myself being at
Rugby (about such time as our fantastic people did with great
concourse and multitudes repair and run headlong unto the sacred
wells of Newnam Regis, in the edge of Warwickshire, as unto the
water of life, which could cure all diseases) I went from thence
unto these wells, where I found growing over the same a fair Ash
tree, whose boughs did hang over the spring of water, whereof some
that were sere and rotten, and some that of purpose were broken off,
fell into the water and were all turned into stones. Of these boughs
or parts of the tree I brought into London, which when I had broken
in pieces, therein might be seen, that the pith and all the rest was
turned into stones; yea many buds and flowerings of the tree falling
into the said water, were also turned into hard stones, still
retaining the same shape and fashion that they were of before they
were in the water. I doubt not but if this water were proved about
the hardening of some confections physical, for the preservation of
them, or other special ends, it would of fer greater occasion of
admiration for the health and benefit of mankind, than it doth about
such things as already have been experimented, tending to very
little purpose.

CHAP. 171. Of the Goose Tree, Barnacle Tree, or the Tree bearing
Geese.

Fig. 2209. The Goose Barnacle Tree

The Description.

Having travelled from the grasses growing in the bottom of the fenny
waters, the woods, and mountains, even unto Libanus itself; and also
the sea, and bowels of the same, we are arrived at the end of our
History; thinking it not impertinent to the conclusion of the same,
to end with one of the marvels of this land (we may say of the
world.) The history whereof to set forth according to the worthiness
and rarity thereof, would not only require a large and peculiar
volume, but also a deeper search into the bowels of nature, than my
intended purpose will suffer me to wade into, my sufficiency also
considered; leaving the history thereof rough hewn, unto some
excellent men, learned in the secrets of nature, to be both fined
and refined: in the mean space take it as it falleth out, the naked
and bare truth, though unpolished. There are found in the North
parts of Scotland and the islands adjacent, called Orchades, certain
trees whereon do grow certain shells of a white colour tending to
russet, wherein are contained little living creatures: which shells
in time of maturity do open, and out of them grow those little
living things, which falling into the water do become fowls, which
we call barnacles; in the North of England, brent geese; and in
Lancashire, tree geese: but the other that do fall upon the land
perish and come to nothing. Thus much by the writings of others, and
also from the mouths of people of those parts, which may very well
accord with truth.

But what our eyes have seen, and hands have touched we shall
declare. There is a small island in Lancashire called the Pile of
Foulders, wherein are found the broken pieces of old and bruised
ships, some whereof have been cast thither by shipwreck, and also
the trunks and bodies with the branches of old and rotten trees,
cast up there likewise; whereon is found a certain spume or froth
that in time breedeth unto certain shells, in shape like those of
the mussel, but sharper pointed, and of a whitish colour: wherein is
contained a thing in form like a lace of silk finely woven as it
were together, of a whitish colour, one end whereof is fanned unto
the inside of the shell, even as the fish of oysters and mussesl
are: the other end is made fast unto the belly of a rude masse or
lump, which in time cometh to the shape and form of a bird: when it
is perfectly formed the shell gapeth open, and the first thing that
appeareth is the foresaid lace or string; next come the legs of the
bird hanging out, and as it groweth greater it openeth the shell by
degrees, till at length it is all come forth, and hangeth only by
the bill: in short space after it cometh to full maturity, and
falleth into the sea, where it gathereth feathers, and groweth to a
fowl bigger than a mallard, and lesser than a goose, having black
legs and bill or beak, and feathers black and white, spotted in such
manner as is our magpie, called in some places a pie-annet, which
the people of Lancashire call by no other name than a tree goose:
which place aforesaid, and all those parts adjoining do so much
abound therewith, that one of the best is bought for threepence. For
the truth hereof, if any doubt, may it please them to repair unto
me, and I shall satisfy them by the testimony of good witnesses.

Moreover, it should seem that there is another sort hereof; the
history of which is true, and of mine own knowledge: for travelling
upon the shore of our English coast between Dover and Romney, I
found the trunk of an old rotten tree, which (with some help that I
procured by fishermen's wives that were there attending their
husbands' return from the sea) we drew out of the water upon dry
land: upon this rotten tree I found growing many thousands of long
crimson bladders, in shape like unto puddings newly filled, before
they be sodden, which were very clear and shining; at the nether end
whereof did grow a shell-fish, fashioned somewhat like a small
mussel, but much whiter, resembling a shell-fish that groweth upon
the rocks about Guernsey and Jersey, called a limpet: many of these
shells I brought with me to London, which after I had opened I found
in them living things without form or shape; in others which were
nearer come to ripenes I found living things that were very naked,
in shape like a bird: in others, the birds covered with soft down,
the shell half open, and the bird ready to fall out, which no doubt
were the fowls called barnacles. I dare not absolutely avouch every
circumstance of the first part of this history, concerning the tree
that beareth those buds aforesaid, but will leave it to a further
consideration; howbeit that which I have seen with mine eyes, and
handled with mine hands, I dare confidently avouch, and boldly put
down for verity. Now if any will object, that this tree which I saw
might be one of those before mentioned, which either by the waves of
the sea or some violent wind had been overturned, as many other
trees are; or that any trees falling into those seas about the
Orchades, will of themselves bear the like fowls, by reason of those
seas and waters, these being so probable conjectures, and likely to
be true, I may not without prejudice gainsay, or endeavour to
confute.

Thus saith our author. However, the barnacle, whose fabulous breed
my author here sets down, and divers others have also delivered,
were found by some Hollanders to have another original, and that by
eggs, as other birds have: for they in their third voyage to find
out the North-East passge to China, and the Moluccas, about the
eightieth degree and eleven minutes of Northerly latitude, found two
little islands, in the one of which they found abundance of these
Geese sitting upon their eggs, of which they got one goose, and took
away sixty eggs, &c. Vide Pontani, Rerum &c. Urb. Amstelodam. Hist.
lib. 2. cap. 22. Now the shells out of which these birds were
thought to fly, are a kind of Balanus marinus; and thus Fabius
Columna, in the end of his Phytobasanos, writing piscium aliquot
historia, ["the hoistopry of certain fishes"] judiciously proves: to
whose opinion I wholly subscribe, and to it I refer the curious. His
asseveration is this: Conchas vulgo anatiferas, non esse fructus
terrestres, neque ex iis anates oriri; sed Balani marinæ speciem.
["The shells commonly called goose-bearing, are not products of the
land, nor do geese come from them, but are a kind of shellfish
called barnacle"] I could have said somthing more hereof, but thus
much I think may serve, together with that which Fabius Columna hath
written upon this point.

The Place.

The borders and rotten planks whereon are found these shells wherein
is bred the Barnacle, are taken up in a small island adjoining to
Lancashire, half a mile from the mainland, called the Pile of
Foulders.

The Time.

They spawn as it were in March and April; the geese are formed in
May and June, and come to fullness of feathers in the month after.

And thus having through God's assistance discoursed somewhat at
large of grasss, herbs, shrubs, trees, and mosses, and certain
excrescences of the earth, with other things more, incident to the
history thereof, we conclude and end our present volume, with this
wonder of England. For the which God's name be ever honoured and
praised.

FINIS.


AN APPENDIX OR ADDITION of certain Plants omitted in the former
History.


The Preface.

Having run through the History of plants gathered by Mr Gerard, and
much enlarged the same both by the addition of many figures and
histories of plants not formerly contained in it, and by the
amending and increasing the history of sundry of those which before
were therein treated of; I find that I have forgotten divers which I
intended to have added in their fitting places: the occasion hereof
hath been, my many businesses, the troublesomeness, and above all,
the great expectation and haste of the work, whereby I was forced to
perform this task within the compass of a year. Now being constant
to my first resolution, I here have, as time would give me leave,
and my memory serve, made a brief collection and addition (though
without method) of such as offered themselves unto me; and without
doubt there are sundry others which are as fitting to be added as
those; and I should not have been wanting, if time would have
permitted me to have entered into further consideration of them. In
the meantime take in good part those that I have here presented to
your view.

CHAP. 1. Of the Maracoc or Passion-Flower.

Fig. 2210. Passion-Flower

The Description.

This plant, which the Spaniards in the West Indies call Granadilla,
because the fruit somewhat resembles a Pomegranate, which in their
tongue they term Granadilla, is the same which the Virginians call
Maracoc. The Spanish friars for some imaginary resemblances in the
flower, first called it Flos Passionis, the Passion Flower, and in a
counterfeit figure, by adding what was wanting, they made it as it
were an epitome of our Saviour's passion: thus superstitious persons
semper sibi somnium fingunt ["always imagine their own dreams"].
Bauhine desirous to refer it to some stock or kindred of formerly
known plants, gives it the name of Clematis trifolia: yet the
flowers and fruit pronounce it not properly belonging to their
tribe; but Clematis being a certain generic name to all woody
winding plants, this as a species may come under the denomination,
though little in other respects participating with them. The roots
of this are long, somewhat like, yet thicker than those of
Sarsaparilla, running up and down, and putting up their heads in
several places: from these roots rise up many long winding round
stalks, which grow two, three, four, or more yards high, according
to the heat and seasonableness of the year and soil whereas they are
planted: upon these stalks grow many leaves divided into three
parts, sharp pointed, and snipped about the edges: commonly out of
the bosoms of each of the uppermost leaves there groweth a clasping
tendril and a flower: the flower grows upon a little footstalk some
two inches long, and is of a longish cornered form, with five little
crooked horns at the top, before such time as it open itself; but
opened, this longish head divides itself into ten parts, and
sustains the leaves of the flower, which are very many, long, sharp
pointed, narrow, and orderly spread open one by another, some lying
straight, others crooked: these leaves are of colour whitish, but
thick spotted with a peach colour, and towards the bottom it hath a
ring of a perfect peach colour, and above and beneath it a white
circle, which give a great grace to the flower; in the midst whereof
rises a membrane, which parts itself into four or five crooked
spotted horns, with broadish heads: from the midst of these rises
another roundish head which carries three nails or horns, biggest
above, and smallest at their lower end: this flower with us is never
succeeded by any fruit, but in the West Indies, whereas it naturally
grows, it bears a fruit, when it is ripe of the bigness and colour
of pomegranates, but it wants such a ring or crown about the top as
they have; the rind also is much thinner and tenderer, the pulp is
whitish, and without taste, but the liquor is somewhat tart: they
open them as they do eggs, and the liquor is supped off with great
delight, both by the Indians and Spaniards, (as Monardus witnesseth)
neither if they sup off many of them shall they find their stomach
oppressed, but rather their bellies are gently loosened. In this
fruit are contained many seeds somewhat like pear kernels, but more
cornered and rough.

This grows wild in most of the hot countries of America, from whence
it hath been brought into our English gardens, where it grows very
well, but flowers only in some few places and in hot and seasonable
years: it is in good plenty growing with Mistress Tuggy at
Westminster, where I have some years seen it bear a great many
flowers.

CHAP. 2. Of Ribes or Red Currants.


Fig. 2211. Red Currants (1)
Fig. 2212. White Currants (2)

The Description.

1. The plant which carries the fruit which we commonly term
redcurrants, is a shrubby bush of the bigness of a Gooseberry bush,
but without prickles: the wood is soft and white, with a pretty
large pith in the middle: it is covered with a double bark, the
undermost, being the thicker, is green, and the uppermost, which
sometimes chaps and peels off, is of a brownish colour, and smooth:
the bark of the youngest shoots is whitish and tough: the leaves,
which grow upon footstalks some two inches long, are somewhat like
Vine leaves, but smaller by much, and less cornered, being cut into
three, and sometimes, but seldomer, into five parts, somewhat thick,
with many veins running over then, greener above than they are
below: of the branches in spring time grow stalks hanging down some
six inches in length, carrying many little greenish flowers, which
are succeeded by little red berries, clear and smooth, of the
bigness of the whortleberries, of a pleasant tart taste. Of this
kind there is another, only different from this in the fruit, which
is twice so big as that of the common kind.

2. The bush which bears the white currants is commonly straighter
and bigger than the former: the leaves are lesser, the flowers
whiter, and so also is the fruit, being clear and transparent, with
a little blackish rough end.

3. Besides these there is another, which differs little from the
former in shape, yet grows somewhat higher, and hath lesser leaves:
the flowers are of a purplish green colour, and are succeeded by
fruit as big again as the ordinary red, but of a stinking and
somewhat loathing savour: the leaves also are not without this
stinking smell.

The Place, Time, and Names.

None of these grow wild with us, but they are to be found
plentifully growing in many gardens, especially the two former, the
red and the white.

The leaves and flowers come forth in the spring, and the fruit is
ripe about midsummer.

This plant is thought to have been unknown to the ancient Greeks:
some think it the Ribes of the Arabian Serapio. Fuchsius,
Matthiolus, and some other deny it; notwithstanding Dodonæus affirms
it: neither is the controversy easily to be decided, because the
author is brief in the description thereof, neither have we his
words but by the hand of a barbarous translator. However the shops
of late time take it (the faculties consenting thereto) for the true
Ribes, and of the fruit thereof prepare their Rob de Ribes. Dodonæus
calls it Ribesium, Grossularia rubra, & Grossularia transmarina; and
they are distinguished into three sorts, Ribesia Rubra, Alba, Nigra,
Red, White, and Black Currants: the Germans call them S. Johans
traubell, or traublin, and S. Johanns Beerlin: the Dutch, Besikins
over Zee: the Italians, Uvetta rossa: the French, Groiselles,
Groiselles d'outre mer: the Bohemians, Jahodi S. Jana: the English,
Red Currants: yet must they not be confounded with those Currants
which are brought from Zante, and the continent adjoining thereto,
and which are vulgarly sold by our Grocers; fot they are the fruit
of a small Vine, and differ much from these.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The berries of red Currants, as also of the white, are cold and
dry in the end of the second degree, and have some astriction,
together with tenuity of parts.

B. They extinguish and mitigate feverish heats, repress choler,
temper the overhot blood, resist putrefaction, quench thirst, help
the dejection of the appetite, stay choleric vomitings and
scourings, and help the dysentery proceeding of an hot cause.

C. The juice of these boiled to the height of honey, either with or
without sugar (which is called Rob de Ribes) hath the same
qualities, and conduces to the same purposes.

CHAP. 3. Of Parsley Break-Stone, and Bastard Rupturewort.

I Thought it was not altogether inconvenient to couple these two
plants together in one chapter; first, because they are of one
stature; and secondly, taken out of one and the same history of
plants, to wit, the Adversaria of Pena and Lobel.


Fig. 2213. Parsley Break-Stone (1)
Fig. 2214. Bastard Rupturewort (2)

The Description

1. The first of these, which the authors of the Adversaria set forth
by the name of Percepier, (and rather assert, than affirm to be the
Scandix of the ancients) is by Tabernamontanus called Scandix minor
and by Fabius Columna, Alchimilla montana minima. It hath a small
woody yellowish fibrous root from which rise up one, two, or more
little stalks, seldom exceeding the height of an handful, and these
are round and hairy, and upon them grow little roundish leaves, like
the tender leaves of Chervil, but hairy, and of a whitish green
colour, fastened to the stalks with short footstalks, and having
little ears at their setting on: the flowers are small, green, and
five-cornered, many clustering together at the setting on of the
leaves: the seed is small, smooth, and yellowish: the stalks of this
plant grow sometimes upright, and otherwhiles they lean on the
ground: it is to be found upon divers dry and barren grounds, as in
Hyde Parke, Tothill Fields, &c. It flowers in May, and ripens the
seed in June and July. It seems by the authors of the Adversaria,
that in the West country about Bristol they call this herb
Percepier; but our herb women in Cheapside know it by the name of
Parsley Breakstone.

A. This is hot and dry, and of subtle parts: it vehemently and
speedily moves urine, and by some is kept in pickle, and eaten as a
salad.

B. The distilled water is also commended to be effectual to move
urine, and cleanse the kidneys of gravel.

2. The history of this, by the forementioned authors, Adversaria.
pag. 404. is thus set forth under this title, Polygonium herniariæ
foliis & facie, perampla radice astragalitidi: Neither (say they)
ought this to be despised by such as are studious of the knowledge
of plants; for it is very little known, being a very small herb
lying along upon the ground, and almost overwhelmed or covered with
the grass, having little branches very full of joints: the little
leaves and seeds are whitish, and very like those of Herniaria, or
Rupturewort: the whole plant is white, having a very small and male
flower: the root is larger than the smallness of the plant seemeth
to require, hard, branched, diversely turning and winding, and
therefore hard to be plucked up: the taste is dry and hottish. It
grows upon a large plain in Provençe, between the cities Arles and
Selon. Thus much Pena and Lobel. I am deceived, if some few years
agone I was not showed this plant, gathered in some part of this
kingdom, but where, I am not able to affirm.

CHAP. 4. Of Heath Spurge and Rock Rose.


Fig. 2215. Heath Spurge (1)
Fig. 2216. 2nd Heath Spurge (2)

The Description.

1. These plants by right should have followed the history of
Thymelæa, for in shape and faculty they are not much unlike it. The
first is a low shrub, sending from one root many branches of some
cubit long, and these bending, flexible, and covered with an outer
blackish bark, which comprehends another within, tough, and which
may be divided into fine threads: the leaves are like those of
Chamælea, yet lesser, shorter and thicker, a little rough also, and
growing about the branches in a certain order: if you chew them they
are gummy, bitter at the first, and afterwards hot and biting: the
flowers grow amongst the leaves, longish, yellowish, and divided at
the end into four little leaves: the fruit is said to be like that
of Thymelæa, but of a blackish colour, the root is thick and woody.
It grows frequently in the kingdom of Grenada and Valencia in Spain,
it flowers in March and April. The herbarists there name it
Sanamunda, and the common people, Mierda-cruz, by reason of the
purging faculty.

2. The other is a shrub some cubit high, having tough flexible
branches covered with a dense and thick bark, which, the outward
rind being taken away, over all the plant, but chiefly next the
root, may be drawn into threads like Flax or Hemp: the upper
branches are set with thick, short, fat, rough sharp pointed leaves,
of somewhat a saltish taste at the first, afterwards of a hot &
biting taste: the flowers are many, little and yellow: the root is
thick and woody like as that of the former: this grows upon the sea
coast of Spain, and on the mountains nigh Grenada, where they call
it Sanamunda, and the common people about Gibraltar call it
Burhalaga, and they only use it to heat their ovens with. It flowers
in February. Anguillara called this, Empetron: Cæsalpinus, Cneoron,
and in the Historia Lugdunensis it is the Cneoron nigrum myconi:
Sesamoides minus: Dalechampii, and Phacoides, Oribasii quibusdam.


Fig. 2217. The 3rd Heath Spurge (3)
Fig. 2218. Rock Rose (4)

3. This is bigger than either of the two former, having whiter and
more flexible branches, whose bark is unmeasurably tough and hard to
break: the upper branches are many, and those very downy, and
hanging down their heads, set thick with little leaves like
Stonecrop, and of the like hot or burning faculty: the flowers are
like those of the former; sometimes greenish, otherwhiles yellow:
Clusius did not observe the fruit, but saith, it flowered at the
same time with the former, and grew in all the sea coast from the
Straits of Gibraltar, to the Pyrennean mountains. Alphonsus Pantius
called this Cneoron: Lobel and Tabernamontanus call it Erica
alexandrina.

4. This also may not unfitly be joined to the former, for it hath
many tender flexible tough branches commonly leaning or lying along
upon the ground, upon which without order grow leaves green, skinny,
and like those of the true Thymelæa; at first of an ungrateful, and
afterwards of a bitter taste, yet having none or very little
acrimony (as far as may be perceived by their taste): the flowers
grow upon the tops of the branches six, seven or more together,
consisting of four little leaves of a reddish purple colour, very
beautiful and well smelling, yet offending the head if they be long
smelt unto: these are succeeded by small berries, of colour white,
containing a round seed, covered with an ash-coloured skin. The root
is long, of the thickness of one's little finger, sometimes
blackish, yet most commonly yellowish, tough, and smallest at the
top where the branches come forth. It flowers in April and May and
ripens the fruit in June: it flowers sometimes thrice in the year,
and ripens the fruit twice; for Clusius affirms that twice in one
year he gathered ripe berries from one and the same plant. It grows
plentifully upon the mountainous places of Austria about Vienna,
whither the country women bring the flowers to the market in great
plenty to sell them to deck up houses: it grows also in the dry
meadows by Frankfort on the Main, where there is observed a variety
with white flowers. Matthiolus would have this to be the Cneoron
album of Theophrstus: Cordus calls it Thymælia minor: it is the
Cneoron alterum matthioli, and Oleander sylvestre avicennæ myconi,
in the Hist. Lugd. The Germans call it Stein Roselin: and we may
call it Rock Rose, or dwarf Oleander.

Fig. 2219. White Rock Rose (5)

5. This plant by Bauhine is called Cneorum album folio oleo argenteo
molli: and by Dalechampius, Cneorum album, which hath been the
reason I have put it here, although Cæsalpinus, Imperatus, and
Plateau, who sent it to Clusius, would have it to be and call it
Dorycnium: It is a shrubby herb sending from one root many single
stalks some half cubit or better high: the leaves which grow upon
the stalks without order, are like those of the Olive, but somewhat
narrower, and covered over with a soft downiness: at the top of the
stalks grow many flowers clustering together, of the shape of those
of the lesser Bindweed, but white of colour. This grows wild in some
parts of Sicily, whence Cæsalpinus calls it Dorychnium ex Sicilia.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The three first are very hot, and two first have a strong purging
faculty, for taken in the weight of a dram with the decotion of
Cicers they mightily purge by stool, both phlegm, choler, and also
waterish humours, and they are often used for this purpose by the
country people in some parts of Spain. The faculties of the rest are
not known, nor written of by any as yet.

CHAP. 5. Of Bastard Dwarf Box.

Fig. 2220. Bastard Dwarf Box

The Description.

This which Clusius for want of a name calls anonymos flore coluteæ,
Gesner called Chamæbuxus, to which Bauhine adds flore coluteæ; and
Besler in his Hortus Eysettensis, agreeable to the name I have given
it in English, calls it Pseudochamæbuxus. It is a small plant having
many creeping woody tough roots, here and there sending forth small
fibres; from these arise many tough bending branches some span long,
having thick sharp pointed green leaves, almost like those of Box;
and these grow upon the stalks without any order, and when you first
chew them they are of an ungrateful taste, afterwards bitter and
hot; at the tops of the branches, do come forth amongst the leaves
three or four longish flowers, for the most part without smell; yet
in some places they smell sweet, like as some of the Narcisses; they
consist of three leaves apiece; two whereof are white, and spread
abroad as wings, a whitish little hood covering their lower ends:
the third is wrapped up in form of a pipe, with the end hollow &
crooked, and this is of a yellow colour, which by age oft-times
becomes wholly red: after those flowers succeed cods, broad and
flat, little less than those of the broad-leaved Thlaspi, and green
of colour, rough, and in each of these cods are commonly contained a
couple of seeds, of the bigness of little Chichlings, of a blackish
ash colour, rough, and resembling a little dug.

This is sometimes found to vary, having the two winged leaves yellow
or red, and the middle one yellow.

The Time, Place and Virtues.

It flowers in April and May, and ripens the seed in June; it grows
upon most of the Austrian and Styrian Alps, and in divers places of
Hungary. It is neither used in physic, nor the faculties thereof in
medicine known.

CHAP. 6. Of Winged Bindweed, or Quamoclit.

Fig. 2221. Winged Bindweed

The Description.

The first that writ of and described this plant was Cæsalpinus, &
that by the name of Gelsimium rubrum alterum: after him Camerarius
gave a descriptian and figure thereof in his Hortus Medicus, by the
name of Quamoclit: and after him Fabius Canova both figured and
described it more accurately, whose description is put to the figure
of it (we here give) in Clusis his Curæ Posteriores. It is so tender
a plant that it will not come to any perfection with us, unless in
extraordinary hot years, and by other artificial helps, wherefore I
will borrow the description thereof out of Fabius Columna. This
exotic plant, saith he, cannot more fitly be referred to any kind,
than to the family of the Convolvuli or Bindweeds, for in the nature
and whole habit it is almost like them, excepting the shape of the
winged leaves: it is stored with less milk: the flowers are long,
hollow, but parted into five at the top, of a pleasing red colour,
with streaked lines or folds, standing upon long stalks one or two
together coming out of the bosoms of the leaves at each joint of the
branches, and they have in them five yellowish pointels; then
succeeds a longish fruit standing in a scaly cup, ending in a sharp
pointel, and covered with a tough skin, as that of the common
Convolvulus, but lesser, having within it four longish black hard
seeds, of a biting taste. The leaves grow alternately out of the
joints of the purple winding branches, being winged and finely
divided, twice as small as the common Rheseda, of a dark green
colour, but the young ones are yellowish, first having a few
divisions, but afterwards more, till they come to have thirteen on a
side, and one at the top: but the lower ones are oft-times forked:
by reason of the great plenty of leaves and flowering stalks or
branches, winding themselves about artificial hoops, crossings, or
other fashioned works of reeds or the like, set for winding herbs to
climb upon, it much delights the eye of the beholder, and is
therefore kept in pots in gardens of pleasure. The seed sown in the
beginning of the spring grows up in June, and the first leaves
resemble the winged fruit of the Maple: it flowers in the end of
August, and ripens the seed in the end of September.

CHAP. 7. Of the Sensitive Herb.


Fig. 2222. The Sensitive Herb.
Fig. 2223. A better figure of the Sensitive Herb.

The Description.

This which I here call the sensitive herb; is that which Christopher
Acosta sets forth by the name of Herba mimosa, or the Mocking Herb,
because when one puts his hand thereto it forthwith seems to wither
and hang down the leaves; but when you take it away again it
recovers the pristine greenness and vigour. I will here give you
that which Acosta writes thereof, & the figure & history which
Clusius gives in his notes upon him; and also another figure better
expressing the leaves and manner of growing. There is found (saith
Acosta) in some gardens another plant some five handfuls long,
resting upon the neighbouring shrubs or walls, having a slender
stalk of a fresh green colour, not very round, set at certain spaces
with small and pricking thorns: the leaves are not unlike the
former, [That is, the Herba viva, which in condition is little
different from this] being somewhat lesser than those of the Female
Fern. It loves to grow in moist and stoney places, and is called
Herba mimosa, for the reason formerly given. The nature hereof is
much different from that of Arbor tristis, for every night at sunset
it as it were withers and dries, so that one would think it were
dead, but at sunrise it recovers the former vigour, and by how much
the sun grows hotter, by so much it becomes the greener, and all the
day it turns the leaves to the sun.

A. This plant hath the smell and taste of Liquorice, and the leaves
are commonly eaten by the Indians against the cough, to cleanse the
chest, & clear the voice: it is also thought good against the pains
of the kidneys, and to heal green wounds. Thus much Acosta.

Now, saith Clusius, the leaves of many plants, especially pulses,
use to contract or shrink up their leaves in the night time. Now I
received a dry plant, which was sent to me by the name of Herba
mimosa, by James Garret in the end of October, 1599, which he writ
he had of the right Honourable the Earl of Cumberland, who returning
from Saint John de Puerto Rico in the West Indies, brought it put in
a pot with some earth, but could not preserve it live. But I caused
the figure of that dried plant to be expressed as well as it might,
so to fit it to the description following, made also by the dried
plant. This plant which was wholly dry and without leaves had a
single root, and that not thick, but hard and woody, with few
fibres, from whence arose three or four short stalks, which straight
divided themselves into slender branches, which spread themselves
round about upon the ground, at each joint putting forth many long
and slender fibres, like as in the branches of the common Woodbine,
which lie upon the ground: these branches were a cubit long, and
sometimes more, round, tough, with some prickles, broader at their
setting on, as you may see in the common bramble, yet lesser, fewer,
& less firm; these again were divided into other more slender
branches set with many little prickles, out of whose joints betwixt
two little leaves grew forth footstalks, bedecked with their little
leaves, which were many, set in order, with other to answer to them
on the other side, but having no single leaf at the end: they were
tender & green, not unlike the little leaves of Acacia, & these (at
the first coming out) covered with a thin whitish hairiness, as I
gathered by a little branch retaining the footstalk and leaves
thereon (which he sent with the former) and it had also some fibres
coming forth thereof. He also added to the former two little heads,
which growing upon the same plant, he writ he received of the
forementioned right honourable Earl, with some branches yet
retaining the leaves. These little heads consisted of many slender,
narrow, and as it were prickly little leaves; amongst which lay hid 
round seeds, smooth, black, and somewhat swollen in the middle: the
flowers I saw not, neither know I whether they were brought with the
rest: but whether the leaves of this plant being green, & yet
growing on the ground, do wither at the approch of one's hand, as
Christopher Acosta writes, and for that cause imposes the name
thereon, they best know who have seen the green and yet growing
plant: for the faculties you may have recourse to that which Acosta
hath set down. Thus much out of Clusius.

November 7, 1632. I being with Mr Job Best at the Trinity House in
Ratcliffe; among other varieties, he showed me a dry plant hereof,
which I heedfully observed, and carefully opening out some of the
fairest leaves, which (as also the whole plant besides) were
carelessly dried, I found the leaves grew usually some dozen or more
on a footstalk, just as many on one side as on the other; & they
were covered over with a little downiness, which standing out on
their edges made them look as if they had been snipped about the
edges, which they were not: also I found at every joint two little
hooked prickles, & not two little leaves or appendices at the
setting on of the footstalks, but three or four little leaves, as
the rudiment of a young branch, coming forth at the bosom of each
footstalk: the longest branch (as far as I remember) was not above a
span long; I then drew as perfect a figure as I could of the
perfectest branch thereof, drawing as near as I could the leaves to
their full bigness, the which I here present you withal. There are
two figures formerly extant, the one of Clusius which I here give
you, and the other in the 18th Book and 44th Chapter out of Acosta,
and this seeems to be so far different from that of Clusius, that
Bauhine in his Pinax saith, Clusius notis suis in Acosta diversam
plane figuram proposuit, herbam mimosam nominans:["Clusius in his
notes on Acosta gives an entirely different figure, calling it
mimicking herb"] but he did not well consider it, for if he had, he
might have found these so much different, thus far to agree; they
both make the branches prickly & weak: the leaves many on one rib,
one opposite to another without an odd one at the end: but Clusius
figures the leaves so close together, that they seem but one leaf,
and Acosta makes them too far asunder, and both of them make them
too sharp pointed; Clusius made his be taken from a dried plant, and
Acosta I judge made his by the idea thereof which he had in his
mernory, and after this manner, if my judgement fail me not, are
most of the figures in him expressed: but of this enough, if not too
much.

CHAP. 8. Of the Staff Tree, and Evergreen Privet.


Fig. 2224. Staff Tree (1)
Fig. 2225. Clusius' Mock-Privet (2)

The Description.

1. The history and figure of this tree are set forth in Clusius his
Curæ Poster., and there it is asserted to be the Kelasros or
Kelasron of Theophrastus, for by divers places in Theophrastus there
collected, it is evdent that his Celastus was evergreen, grew upon
very high and cold mountains, yet might be transplanted into plain
and milder places, that it flowered exceeding late and could not
perfect the fruit by reason of the nigh approch of winter, and that
it was fit for no other use but to make staves on for old men.

Now this tree grows but to a small height, having a firm and hard
body, dividing itself at the top into sundry branches, which being
young are covered with a green bark, but waxing old with a brownish
one; it hath many leaves, growing always one against another, and
thick together, of a deep shining green above, and lighter
underneath, keeping their verdure both winter and summer: they are
of the bigness of those of Alaternus, not snipped about the edges,
but only a little nicked, when they are yet young; at the top of the
tenderest branches among the leaves, upon footstalks of some inch
long, grow five or six little flowers consisting commonly of five
little leaves of a yellowish green colour, and these show themselves
in the end of autumn, or the beginning of winter, and also in the
beginning of the spring; but if the summer be cold and moist it
shows the buds of the flowers in October; the fruit grows on a short
stalk and is a berry of the bigness of the Myrtle, first green, then
red, of the colour of that of Asparagus, and lastly black when it is
withered: the stone within the berry is little, and as it were
three-cornered, containing a kernel covered with a yellow film.
Where this grows wild I know not, but it was first taken notice of
in the public garden at the University of Leyden, from whence it was
brought into some few gardens of this kingdom.

2. The first Phyllyria of Clusius, may fitly be referred to the rest
of the same tribe and name described formerly in the 59th chapter of
the the third book. It grows somewhat taller than the Scarlet Oak,
and hath branches of the thickness of one's thumb or somewhat more,
and those covered with a green bark marked with whitish spots; the
leaves somewhat resemble those of the Scarlet Oak, but greater,
greener, thicker, somewhat prickly about the edges, of an astringent
taste, but not ungrateful. The flower thereof Clusius did not see,
the fruit is a little black berry, hanging down out from the bosom
of the leaves, and containing a kernel or stone therein. It grows
wild in many wild places of Portugal, where they call it Azebo.

The temperature and virtues are referred to those set down in the
formerly mentioned chapter.

CHAP. 9. Of Mock Willow.

Fig. 2226. Mock Willow

The Description.

This Willow-Leaved shrub, which Clusius conjectures may be referred
to the Speiræa mentioned by Theophrastus, lib. 1. cap. 23. Hist.
Plant., I have named in English, Mock Willow, how fitly I know not;
but if any will impose a fitter name I sball be well pleased
therewith; but to the thing itself. It is a shrub, (saith Clusius)
some two cubits high, having slender branches or twigs covered over
with a reddish bark, whereon grow many leaves without order, long,
narrow, like those of the Willow, snipped about the edges, of a
light green above, and of a bluish green underneath, of a drying
taste conjoined with some bitterness. The tops of the branches for
some fingers' length carry thick spikes of small flowers clustering
together, and consisting of five leaves apiece, out of whose middle
come forth many little threads of a whitish red or flesh colour,
together with the flower, having no peculiar smell, but such as is
in the flower of the Olive tree; these flowers fading there succeed
small five-cornered heads, which coming to full maturity contain a
small and yellowish dusty seed: it flowers in July, and ripens the
seed in the end of August. Clusius had this plant from Frederick
Sebisius physician to the Duke of Briga, and that from Briga in
Silesia, and he (as I said) refers it to the Speiraia of
Theophrastus, which he reckons amongst the shrubs that carry spike-
fashioned flowers.

This is not used in medicine, nor the temperature and faculties
thereof as yet known.

CHAP. 10. Of the Strawberry Bay.

Fig. 2227. Strawberry Bay

The Description.

The figure and history of this were sent by Honorius Bellus out of
Candy to Clusius, from whom I have it. It is that which Theophrastus
calls Adrachne or (as most of the printed books have it), Andrachne,
but the former seems the righter, and is the better liked by Pliny,
lib. 1, cap. 22. At this day in Candy where it plentifully grows, it
is called Adracla. It is rather a shrub than a tree, delighting in
rocky and mountainous places, and keeping green winter and summer,
having leaves so like those of Bays, that they are distinguishable
only by the smell, which these are destitute of. The bark of the
bole and all the branches is so smooth, red and shining, that they
show like branches of Coral, this bark cracks or breaks off in
summer, and peels off in thin flakes, at which time it is neither
red nor shining but in a mean between yellow and ash colour. It hath
flowers twice in a year like as the Arbutus, or Strawberry tree, and
that so like it, that you can scarce know the one from the other;
yet this differs from it in that it grows only in the mountains,
hath not the leaves jagged, neiher a rough bark; the wood hereof is
very hard, and so brittle that it will not bend, and they use it to
burn and to make whorls for their women's spindles. Theophrastus
reckons up this tree amongst those which die not when their barks
are taken off, and are always green, and retain their leaves at
their tops all winter long: which to be so Honourius Bellus
observed. Bellonius also observed this tree in many places of Syria.

The fruit in temperature, as in shape, is like that of the
Strawberry Tree.

CHAP. 11. Of the Cherry-Bay.


Fig. 2228. The Cherry-Bay in flower
Fig. 2229. The Cherry-Bay with fruit

The Description.

The Cherry-Bay is one of the evergreen trees: it rises up to an
indifferent height, and is divided into sundry branches, covered
over with a swart green bark: that of the younger shoots is wholly
green, the leaves alternately engirt the branches, & they are long,
smooth, thick, green, and snipped also lightly about the edges: when
the tree is grown to some height, at the tops of the branches among
the leaves of the former year's growth, upon a sprig of some
finger's length, it puts forth a great many little white flowers,
consisting of five leaves apiece, with many little chives in them:
these flowers quickly fall away, and the fruit that succeeds them is
a berry of an oval figure, of the bigness of a large Cherry or
Damson, and of the same colour, and of a sweet and pleasant taste,
with a stone in it like to a Cherry stone. This flowers in May, and
ripens the fruit in August or September: it was first sent to
Clusius from Constantinople, and that by the name of Trabison
curmasi. i.e. Trapezuntina dactylus, the Date of Trabizond; but it
hath no affinity with the Date. Dalechampius refers it to the second
Lotus mentioned by Theophrastus, Hist Plant. lib. 4. cap. 4, but
therewith it doth not agree. Clusius and most since, call it fitly
Laurocerasus or Laurino cerasus folio. It is now got into many of
our choice English gardens, where it is well respected for the
beauty of the leaves and their lasting or continual greenness.

The fruit hereof is good to be eaten, but what physical virtues the
tree or leaves thereof have, it is not yet known.

CHAP. 12. Of the Evergreen Thorn.

This plant which Lobel and some other late writers have called by
the name of Pyracantha, is the Oxyacantha mentioned by Theophrastus,
lib. 1. cap. 15 & lib. 3. cap. 4. Hist. Plant., among the evergreen
trees, and I think rather this than our Whitethorn to be the
Oxyacantha of Dioscorides lib. 1. c. 123; and certainly it was no
other than this Thorn which Virgil makes mention of by the name of
Acanthus, lib. 2. Georg. in these words, Et baccas semper frondentis
Acanthi. That is, And the berries of the Evergreen Thorn.

Fig. 2230. Evergreen Thorn

The Description.

This grows up like a bush, unless you keep it with pruning, and then
it will in time grow to the height of a small tree, as the Hawthorn,
whereto it is of affinity, for the wood is white and hard, like it,
and covered over with the like bark; but the leaves are somewhat
like those of the Damson tree, longish, sharp pointed, and snipped
about the edges: & they grow alongst the branches, without any
order, yet sometimes they keep this manner of growing: at each knot,
where commonly there is a sharp prickle, grows out one of the larger
leaves, which may be some inch and half long, and some three
quarters of an inch broad: then upon the prickle, and at the coming
out thereof are three or four, more or less, much smaller leaves:
now these leaves are of a fair and shining green above, but paler
underneath, and they keep on all the year: At the ends, and oft-
times in the middles of the branches, come forth clusters or umbels
of little whitish-blush coloured flowers, consisting of five leaves
apiece, with some little chives in their middles: then follow
clusters of berries, in shape, taste, and bigness like those of the
Hawthorn, and of the same, but much more orient and pleasing colour,
and containing in them the like seed: now these berries hang long
upon the tree, & make a gallant show amongst the green leaves, and
chiefly then, whenas the autumn blasts have deprived other trees of
their wonted verdure. This flowers in May and June, and ripens the
fruit in September and October: it grows wild in sundry places of
Italy, and Provençe in France, but is kept in gardens with us, where
it is held in good esteem for his ever greenness and pliableness to
any work or form you desire to impose upon him.

The fruit have the same faculties that are formerly attributed to
Haws, in the foregoing book, and therefore I will not here repeat
them.

CHAP. 13. Of the Egyptian Nap, or Great Jujube Tree.

Fig. 2231. Great Jujube Tree

The Description.

This tree, which for his leaves and manner of growing I think may
fitly be referred to the Jujube tree, is of two sorts; that is, the
one prickly, and the other not prickly, in other respects they are
both alike, so that one figure and history may serve for them both;
which I will give you out of Clusius, who received this figure
together with a description thereof from Honorius Bellus, and also
added thereto that which Prosper Alpinus hath written of it in his
De Plant. Ægypt. 5th chap. It grows to the height of an indifferent
Pear tree, and the body and branches thereof are covered with a
whitish ash-coloured bark: the leaves are like those of the Jujube
tree, two inches long, and one broad, with three nerves running
alongst them; of a deep shining green above, and more whitish
underneath: and they grow alternately upon the branches: and at
their coming forth grow tufts of little white flowers hanging upon
single long footstalks: after these follows the fruit like unto a
small apple, of the bigness for the most part of a large cherry, and
sometimes as big as a walnut, of a sweet taste, containing therein a
kernel or stone like that of an olive. It bears fruit twice a year,
for it hath ripe fruit both in the spring and fall; yet the vernal
fruit seldom comes to good, by reason of the too much moislure of
the season, which causes it to become worm-eaten. The thorny kind is
described by Alpinus, who rightly judges it the Connarus of
Athenæus, but the figure he gives is not very accurate. That which
wants prickles grows (as well as the prickly one) in Egypt and
Syria, as also in the city Rethymno in Candy, whither it was brought
out of Syria.

The history of both these trees is in Serapio by the name of Sadar:
but he, according to his custom confounds it with the Lotus of
Dioscorides, from which it very much differs. Bellonius in his
second book, and 79th chap. of his Observations, reckons up Napeca
amongst the trees that are always green: which is true, in those
that grow in Egypt and Syria; but false in such as grow in Candy.
That tree in Egypt and Syria is called Nep, or Nap. Alpinia calls it
Paliurus athenæi, or Nabca ægyptorum, thinking it (as I formerly
said) the Connarus mentioned in the 14th book of Athenæus his
Deipnosophists.

The Virtues out of Alpinus.

A. The fruit is of a cold and dry faculty, and the unripe ones are 
frequently used to strengthen the stomach, and stop lasks: the juice
of them being for this purpose either taken by the mouth, or
injected by clyster: of the same fruit dried and macerated in water
is made an infusion profitable against the relaxation and ulceration
of the guts.

B. The decoction or infusion of the ripe dried fruit, is of a very
frequent use against all pestilent fevers: for they affirm that this
fruit hath a wonderful efficacy against venenate qualities, and
putrefaction, and that it powerfully strengthens the heart.

C. Also the juice of the perfectly ripe fruit is very good to purge
choler forth of the stomach and first veins: and they willingly use
an infusion made of them in all putrid fevers to mitigate their heat
or burning.


CHAP. 14. Of the Persian Plum.

Fig. 2231. Persian Plum

The Description.

This tree is thought by Clusius (to whom I am beholden for the
history and figure) to be the Persea arbor mentioned by Pliny and
Plutarch, but he somewhat doubts whether it be that which is
mentioned by Theophrastus. Dioscorides also, Galen and Strabo make
mention of the Persea arbor, and they all make it a tree always
green, having a longish fruit shut up in the shell and coat of an
almond: with which how this agrees you may see by this description
of Clusius.

This tree (saith he) is like to a Pear tree, spreading itself far
abroad, and being always green, having branches of a yellowish green
colour. The leaves are like those of the broadest-leaved Bay tree,
green above, and of a grayish colour underneath, firm, having some
nerves running obliquely, of a good taste and smell, yet biting the
tongue with a little astriction. The flowers are like those of the
Bay, growing many thick together, and consist of six small whitish
yellow leaves. The fruit at the first is like a plum, and afterwards
it becomes pear-fashioned, of a black colour, and pleasant taste: it
hath in it a heart-fashioned kernel, in taste not unlike a chestnut,
or sweet almond. I found it flowering in the spring, and I
understood the fruit was ripe in autumn, by the relation of Sig.
John Placa, physician and professor of Valencia, who showed me the
tree growing in the garden of a monastery a mile from Valencia,
brought thither, as they say, out of America; and he said they
called it Mamay; but the Spaniards who have described America give
this name to another tree. But divers years after, I understood by
the most learned Simon de Tovar, a physician of Seville, who hath
the same tree in his garden, with other exotic plants, that it is
not called Mamay, but Aguacate. Thus much out of Clusius; where such
as are desirous, may find more largely handled the question, whither
this be the Persea of the ancients or no? Rariorum Plant. Hist. lib.
1. c. 2.

CHAP. 15. Of Gesner's Wild Quince.

Fig. 2233. Gesner's Wild Quince

The Description.

The shrub which I here figure out of Clusius, is thought both by him
and others to be the Cotonastrum or Cidonago mentioned by Gesner in
his Epistles, lib. 3. pag. 88. It hath branches some cubit long,
tough, and bare of leaves in their lower parts, covered with a black
bark: and towards the tops of the branches grow leaves somewhat like
those of Quinces: of a dark green above, and whitish underneath,
snipped about the edges: at the tops of the branches grow usually
many flowers, consisting of five purplish coloured leaves apiece,
with some threads in their middles: these decaying, under them grow
up red dry berries without any pulp or juice, each of them
containing four triangular seeds. Clusius found this flowering in
June upon the tops of the Austrian Alps, and he questions whether it
were not this which Bellonius found in the mountains of Candy, and
called Agriomælea, lib. 1. cap. 17. This is not used in physic, nor
the faculties thereof known.

CHAP. 16. Of Tamarind.


Fig. 2234. Tamarind
Fig. 2235. Tamarind Fruit

The Description.

Tamarinds, which at this day are a medicine frequently used, and
vulgarly known in shops, were not known to the ancient Greeks, but
to some of the later, as Actuarius, and that by the name of
Oxyphnicæ, that is, sour dates, drawn as it may seem from the
Arabic appellation, Tamarindi, that is, Indian Date: but this name
is unproper, neither tree nor fruit being of any affinity with the
Date, unless the Arabic Tamar be a word used in composition for
fruits of many kinds, as the Greek melon, the Latin malum, and apple
with us in English; for we call the cone of the Pine, and
excrescence of the Oak leaf, by the name of Pine apple, and Oak
apple. But howsoever it be, it is no matter for the name, whether it
be proper or no, if so be that it serve to distinguish the thing 
from others, and we know what is denoted by it. In Malabar they call
it Puti: in Gujerat, Amibili, by which name it is known in most
parts of the East Indies. This tree is thus described by Prosper
Alpinus, De Plant. Ægypt. Cap. 10. The Tamarind (saith he) is a tree
of the bigness of a Plum tree, with many boughs and leaves like
those of the Myrtle, many standing upon one rib, one against
another, with a single one at the end: it carrieth white flowers
very like those of the Orange tree: out of whose middle comes forth
some white and very slender threads: after these come thick and
large cods, at first green, but when they are ripe of an ash colour;
and within these are contained thick, hard, brownish, cornered
seeds, and a black acid pulp. These trees grow in some few gardens
of Egypt, whither they have been brought out of Arabia and Ethiopia.
This plant hath this strange quality that the leaves always follow
the sun, and when it sets they all contract themselves, and open out
themselves again at the rising thereof; and there is observed to be
such force in this motion, that they closely shut up and hold their
cods (if any be on the tree) and then at the rising of the sun they
forgo them again. But I have observed this folding up of the leaves
to be common to divers other Egyptian plants, as Acacia, Abrus,
Absus, and Sesban. Thus much out of Alpinus.

The figure I here give in the first place out of Lobel, is of a
plant some six months old, arisen of a seed, and such sowing of
seeds I have seen growing in the garden of my deceased friend Mr
Tuggy, but they still died at the first approch of winter. The other
figure expresses the cods, and some of the seeds apart, taken forth
of the cods: now the cods are never brought whole to us, but the
outer rinds are taken off, and the strings or nerves that run
alongst the cods: the pulp and seeds in it are close thrust together
and so are brought to us in pots and such like vessels.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The fruit or pulp of Tamarinds is cold and dry in the third
degree: it is of good use in choleric diseases as burning fevers,
tertians, and the like: it is a lenitive and very gently purging
medicine and theerefore used to be put into medicines serving to
that purpose.

B. They use (saith Alpinus) the leaves of Tamarinds to kill worms,
in young children; and also their infusion or decoction to loosen
the belly: the leaves are acid, and not unpleasant unto the taste.

C. The Arabians preserve the small and yet green cods of this tree,
as also the ripe ones, either with sugar, or the honey boiled out of
the fruit of the Carob tree: they also mix the pulp with sugar,
which travellers carry with them in their journeys through the
desert places of Africa, wherewith they being dry or overheated, may
quench their thirst, cool and refresh theinselves, and also evacuate
many hot humours by stool.

D. In pestilent and all other burning putrid fevers they drink the
water with sugar wherein a good quantity of Tamarinds have been
infused; for it is a drink very pleasant to such as are thirsty by
reason of too much heat, for it powerfully cools and quenches
thirst.

E. They are also used in all putrid fevers caused by choleric and
adust humours, and also against the hot distempers and inflammations
of the liver and reins, and withal against the gonorrha.

F. Some also commend them against obstructions, the dropsy,
jaundice, and the hot distempers of the spleen: they conduce also to
the cure of the itch, scab, leprosy, tetters, and all such
ulcerations of the skin which proceed of adust humours.

G. They are not good for such as have cold stomachs, unless their
coldness be corrected by putting to them mace, anise seeds,
Squinanth, or such like.

CHAP. 17. Of the Mamoera, the Male and Female.


Fig. 2236. Male Dug Tree or Mamoera
Fig. 2237. Female Dug Tree or Mamoera

The Description.

The history of these two trees, together with the figures I here
give you, are in the Curæ Posteriores of Clusius, from whence I will
take as much as concerns their history, and briefly here give it
you.

That of the poet (saith he) is most true, Non omnis fert omnia
tellus:["not every land brings forth every thing" Virgil, Eclogues.
IV. l.39] for I think there is no province to be found, which
produces not some peculiar plant not growing in other regions, as
they can testify who have travelled over foreign countries,
especially if they have applied themselves to the observation of
plants. Amongst such I think I may reckon that honest and courteous
man John Van Ufele, who returning out of that part of America called
Brazil, showed me in the year 1607 a book, wherein he in lively
colours had expressed some plants and living creatures: for as he
told me, when he purposed to travel he learned to paint, that so he
might express in colours, for his memory and delight after he was
returned home, such singularities as he should observe abroad. Now
amongst those which he in that book had expressed, I observed two
very singular, and of a strange nature, whose figures without any
difficulty he bestowed upon me, as also the following history.

These two trees, whose figures you see here expressed, are of the
same kind, and differ only in sex; for the one of them, to wit the
male, is barren, and only carries flowers, without any fruit; but
the female only fruit, and that without flower: yet they say they
are so loving, and of such a nature, that if they he set far
asunder, and the female have not a male near her, she becomes
barren, and bears no fruit: of which nature they also say the Palm
is.

Now the bole or trunk of that tree which bears the fruit is about
two foot thick, and it groweth some nine foot high before it begin
to bear fruit; but when it hath acquired a just magnitude, then
shall you see the upper part of the tree laden with fruit, and that
it will be as it were thick girt about therewith for some nine foot
high more: the fruit is round and globe-fashioned, of the shape and
magnitude of a small gourd, having when it is ripe a yellowish pulp,
which the inhabitants use to eat to loosen their bellies: this fruit
contains many kernels of the bigness of a small pea, black and
shining, of no use that he could learn, but which were cast away as
unnecessary; the leaves come forth amongst the fruit, growing upon
long footstalks, and they in shape much resemble the Plane tree or
great Maple.

What name the Brazilians give it he could not tell, but of the
Portugals that dwelt there it was called Mamoera, and the fruit
mamaon, of the similitude I think they have with dugs, which by the
Spaniards are called Mamas and Tetas.

There is no difference in the form of the trunk or leaves of the
male and female, but the male only carries flowers hanging down,
clustering together upon long stalks like to the flowers of Elder,
but of a whitish yellow colour, and these unprofitable, as they
affirm.

Both these trees grow in that part of America wherein is situate the
famous bay called by the Portugals, Baya de todos los santos, lying
about thirteen degrees distant from the Equator towards the
Antarctic pole.

CHAP. 18. Of the Clove-Berry Tree.

Fig. 2238. Clove-Berry Tree

The Description.

I must also abstract the history of this out of the works of the
learned and diligent Clusius, who sets it forth in his Exoticks,
lib. 1. cap. 17, in the next chapter after Cloves.

I put (saith he) the description of this fruit next after the
history of Cloves, both for the affinity of smell it hath with
cloves, as also for another cause, which I will show hereafter.
James Garret in the year 1601 sent me from London this round fruit,
commonly bigger than peppercorns, yet some less, wrinkled, of a
brownish colour, sufficiently fragile; which opened, I found
contained a seed round, black, which might be divided into two
parts, of no less aromatic taste and smell than the fruit itself,
and in some sort resembling that of cloves; it grows in bunches or
clusters, as I conjectured by many berries which yet kept their
stalks, & two or three which stuck to one little stalk: to these
were added leaves of one form, but of much different bigness, for
some of them were seven inches long, and three broad; some only five
inches long, and two and a half broad; others did not exceed 3
inches in length, and these were not two inches broad; and some also
were much less and narrower than these, especially those that were
found mixed with the berries, differing according to the place in
the boughs or branches which they possessed. I observed none among
them which had snipped leaves, but smooth, with many small veins
running obliquely from the middle rib to the sides, with their
points now narrower, otherwhiles broader, and roundish: they were of
a brownish ash colour, of a sufficient acrid taste: the branches
which were added to the rest were slender, quadrangular, covered
with a bark of an ash colour, and those were they of a year's
growth; for those that were of an after growth were brownish, and
they had yet remaining the prints where the leaves had grown, which
for the most part were one against another, and these also were of
an acrid taste, as well as the leaves, and of no ungrateful smell.

I received the same fruit some years before, but without the stalks,
and with this question propounded by him which sent it, An Amomum?
["Is this Amomum?"] And certainly the faculties of this fruit are
not very much unlike those which Dioscorides attributes to his
Amomum; for it hath an heating astrictive and drying faculty, and I
think it may perform those things whereto Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap.
14, saith his is good; yet this wanteth some notes which he gives
unto his, as the leaves of Bryony, &c.

But I more diligently considering this exotic fruit, find same prime
notes which do much move me (for I will ingenuously profess what I
think) to judge it the Garyophyllon of Pliny; for he, Hist. Nat.
lib. 12. cap. 7, after he hath treated of Pepper adds these words:
There is besides in the Indies a thing like to the peppercorn, which
is called Garyophyllon, but more great and fragile; they affirm it
grows in an Indian grove; it is brought over for the smell's sake.
Though this description be brief and succinct, neither contains any
faculties of the fruit itself, yet it hath manifest notes, which,
compared with those which the fruit I here give you possess, you
shall find them very like; as comparing them to peppercorns, yet
bigger and more fragile, as for the most part these berries are:
their smell is also very pleasing, and coming very near to that of
cloves, and for the smell's sake only they were brought over in
Pliny's time. I found, this fruit being chewed made the breath to
smell well: and it is credible, that it would be good for many other
purposes, if trial were made.

CHAP. 19. Of Guaiacum, or Indian Pockwood.

Fig. 2239. A Branch of the Guiacum Tree

The Description.

Guaiacum, which some call Lignum sanctum: others, Lignum vitæ, is a
well known wood, though of a tree unknown, or at least not certainly
known; for this figure which I here give you out of Clusius, was
gotten, and the history framed as you shall hear by his own words,
taken out of his Scholia upon the 21st Chapter of Monardus. About
the beginning (saith he) of the year 1601 I received from Peter
Garret a branch of a foot long, which he writ was given him by a
certain surgeon lately returned from America, for a branch of the
tree Guaiacum: which if it be a branch of the true Guaiacum, then
hath Nicolas Monardus sleightly enough set down the history of this
tree. I thus described this branch which was sent me.

This branch was a foot long, very writhen, and distinguished with
many knots, scarce at the lower end equalling the thickness of a
writing pen or goose quill, having an hard and yellowish wood, and a
wrinkled bark of an ash colour: at the upper end it was divided into
slender branches, whereof some yet retained their leaves, and other
some the flowers and the rudiment of the fruit: the leaves, or more
truly the wings or footstalks of leaves grew upon slender branches
one against another, each winged leaf having four or six little
leaves, always growing by couples one against other, as in the
Mastic tree; and these were thickish, round, and distinguished with
many veins which by reason of their dryness (as I observed) would
easily fall off, leaving the footstalks naked, and only retaining
the marks whereas the leaves had been. In the knots of the upper
branches there grew as it were swellings, out of which together grew
six, eight, ten, or more slender footstalks, some inch long, each
carrying a flower not great, consisting of six little leaves (but
whether white, yellow, or blue, I could not by reason of the dryness
judge): out of the middle of the flower grew many little threads,
and in some the rudiment of the fruit began to appear; having two
cells, almost shaped like the seed-vessel of the common Shepherd's
Purse.

Thus much Clusius, who afterwards received the fruit from two or
three, but the most perfect from the learned apothecary John Pona of
Verona: they are commonly parted into two parts or cells, yet he
observed one with three: he found longish stones in them almost like
those of Euonymus, and they consisted of a very hard and hairy
substance like to that of the Date stones, containing a smooth
kernel of a yellowish colour.

Now will I give you the descriptions of Monardus; then, what I have
observed myself of this wood, which I must confess is very little,
yet which may give some light to the ignorant. Of this wood (saith
Monardus) many have written many ways, saying that it is either
Ebony, or a kind of Box, or calling it by some other names. But as
it is a new kind of tree, not found in these regions, or any other
of the whole world described by the ancients, but only those of late
discovered; so this shall be a new tree to us: however it be, it is
a large tree of the bigness of the Ilex, full of branches, having a
great matrix or blackish pith, the substance of the wood being
harder than Ebony: the bark is thick, gummy or fat, and when the
wood is dry falleth easily off: the leaves are small and hard: the
flower yellow: the which is followed by a round solid fruit,
containing in it seeds like those of the Medlar.

It grows plentifully in the isles of Santo Domingo.

Another kind of this was afterwards found in the island of St. Juan
de Puerto Rico, near to the former; it is also like the last
described, but altogether less, and almost without matrix or pith,
smelling stronger, and being bitterer than the former; which being
left, this is now in use, and of the wondrous effects it is called
Lignum sanctum; neither without desert, being (experience giving
testimony) it excels the other: yet both their faculties are
admirable in curing the French disease, and therefore the water or
decotion of both of them are drunk, either mixed together, or
severally, both for the cure of the forementioned disease, as also
against divers other affects. Thus much for Monardus his
description.

The wood which is now in use with us is of a large tree, whose wood
is very heavy, solid, and fit to turn into bowls or the like, and
all that I have yet seen hath been wholly without matrix or pith,
and commonly it is of a dark brownish colour, somewhat inclining to
yellow, having a ring of white ingirting it next to the bark; I have
observed a tree whose diameter hath been two foot and a quarter, to
have had as little or less of this white wood as one whose diameter
was thirteen inches; and this which was thirteen inches had only a
white circle about it of one inch in breadth: I think the younger
the tree is, the bigger the white circle is: the best wood is dense,
heavy, brownish, leaving a quick and biting taste in the decoction,
as also his smell and colour. The bark of this wood is also dense
and heavy, of a hard substance and yellowish colour within, but
rough and greenish, or else grayish without, and of somewhat a
bitterish taste. Thus much for the description of the wood and his
bark. Now let me say somewhat briefly of the temperature and
qualities.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. It is judged to be hot and dry in the second degree: it hath a
drying, attenuating, dissolving, and cleansing faculty, as also to
move sweat, and resist contagion and putrefaction.

B. The decoction of the bark or wood of Guaiacum, made either alone
or with other ingredients, as shall be thought most fit for the
temper and age of the patient, is of singular use in the cure of the
French poxes, and it is the most ancient and powerful antidote that
is yet known against that disease. I forbear to specify any
particular medicine made thereof, because they are well enough known
to all to whom this knowledge belongs, and they are abundantly set
down by all those that have treated of that disease.

C. It also conduceth to the cure of the dropsy, asthma, epilepsy,
the diseases of the bladder and reins, pains of the joints,
flatulences, crudities, and lastly all chronical diseases proceeding
from cold and moist causes: for it oftentimes works singular effects
whereas other medicines little prevail.

D. It doth also open the obstructions of the liver and spleen, warms
and comforts the stomach and all the entrails, and helps to free
them of any gross viscous matter which may be apt to breed diseases
in them.

CHAP. 20. Of the Guava, or Orange-Bay.

Fig. 2240. Guava or Orange-Bay

The Description.

Simon de Tovar sent Clusius a branch of the tree which the Spaniards
call Guayavas, from which he drew this figure, and thus describes
it. This branch (saith Clusius) whose upper part together with the
fruit I caused to be drawn, was some foot long, four square,
alternately set with leaves growing by couples, being four inches
long, and one and a half or two broad, of the form of Bay leaves,
very firm, having a swelling rib running alongst the lower side,
with veins running obliquely from thence to the sides, of an ash or
grayish colour beneath, but smooth above, with the veins less
appearing; which broken, though old, yet retained the smell of Bay
leaves, and also after some sort the taste: the fruit was smooth,
yet shriveled, because peradventure it was unripe, of the bigness of
a small apple, longish, blackish on the outside like a ripe plum,
but within full of a reddish pulp, of an acid taste; and in the
middle were many whitish seeds of the bigness of Millet, or those
that are in figs.

Nicolas Monardus (as he is turned into Latin by Clusius) thus gives
us the history of Guayavas, in his 64th Chapter. It is a tree, saith
he, of an indifferent bigness) and hath spreading branches, the leaf
of the Bay, and a white flower, like that of the Orange, yet
somewhat bigger, and well smelling; it easily grows, wheresoever it
be sown, and so spreads and creeps that it is accounted as a weed,
for it spoils the grass of many pastures, with the too much
spreading as brambles do; the fruit is like to our apples, of the
bigness of those the Spaniards call Camuesas, green at the first,
and of a golden colour when they be ripe, with their inner pulp,
white, and sometimes red; divided: it hath four cells wherein lie
the seeds, like those of the medlars, very hard, of a brownish
colour, wholly stony, without kernel and taste.

A. The fruit is usually eaten, the rind being first taken off; it is
pleasing to the palate, wholesome and easy of concoction; being
green it is good in fluxes of the belly, for it powerfully binds;
and over, or throughly ripe it looseth the belly; but between both,
that it is neither too green, nor over-ripe, if roasted, it is good
both for sound and sick; for so handled it is wholesomer, and of a
more pleasing taste; that also is the better which is gathered from
domestic and husbanded trees. The Indians profitably bathe their
swollen legs in the decoction of the leaves; and by the same they
free the spleen from obstructions. The fruit seems to be cold,
wherefore they give it roasted to such as are in fevers. It grows
commonly in all the West Indies. Thus much Monardus.

CHAP. 21. Of the Coral Tree.

Fig. 2241. A Branch of the Coral Tree

The Description.

The same last mentioned Simon de Tovar a learned and prime physician
of Seville sent Clusius three or four branches of this tree, from
whence he framed this history and figure. He writ (saith Clusius)
that this tree grew in his garden, sprung up of seeds sent from
America, which had the name of Coral imposed on them, by reason the
flowers were like Coral, but he did not set down their shape;
writing only this in his letter: That he had two little shrubs,
which had borne flowers, and that the greater of them bore also cods
full of large beans, but in the extreme winter, which they had the
year before, he lost not only that tree, and others sprung up of
Indian seeds but also many other plants. Now seeing that this tree
carries cods, I conjecture the flowers were in form not unlike to
those of Peas, or of the tree called Arbor iudæ, but of another
colour, to wit, red like Coral, especially seeing that in the
catalogue of his garden which he sent me the year before, he had
writ thus: Arbor indica dicta Coral, ob eius florem simile corallo,
&c. that is, An Indian tree called Coral, by reason of the flower
like to Coral, whose leaves are very like those of the Arbor iudæ,
but this hath thorns, which that wants. And verily the branches
which he sent (for he writ he sent the branches with the leaves, but
the tree brought out some twice or thrice as big) had leaves not
much unlike those of Arbor iudæ, but fastened to a shorter footstalk
and growing one against another, with a single one at the end of the
branch, which was here and there set with sharp and crooked
prickles; but whether these branches are only the stalks of the
leaves, or perfect branches, I doubt, because all that he sent had
three leaves apiece; I could easily persuade myself, that they were
only leaves, seeing the upper part ended in one leaf; and the lower
end of one among the rest, yet showed the place where it seemed it
grew to the bough. But I affirm nothing, seeing there was none
whereof I could inquire, by reason of his death who sent them me,
which happened shortly after; yet I have made the form of the leaves
with the manner as I conjectured they grow, to be delineated in the
figure which I here give you. Whether Matthiolus in his last edition
of his Commentaries upon Dioscorides would have expressed this, by
the icon of his first Acacia, which is prickly, and hath leaves
resembling those of Arbor iudæ, I know not; but if he would have
expressed this tree, the painter did not well play his part.

After that Clusius had set forth thus much of this tree in his Hist.
Rariorum Plant. the learned Dr. Castaneda a physician also of
Seville certified me, saith he, that the flowers of this tree grow
thick together at the tops of the branches, ten, twelve, or more
hanging upon short footstalks, growing out of the same place: whose
figure he also sent, but so rudely drawn, that I could not thereby
have come to any knowledge of the flowers, but that he therewith
sent me two dried flowers, by which I partly gathered their form.
Now these flowers were very narrow, 2 inches long or more,
consisting of three leaves, the uppermost of which much exceeded the
two narrow ones on the sides both in length and breadth, and it was
doubled; but before the flower was opened it better resembled a horn
or cod, than a flower, and the lower end of it stood in a short
green cup, in the midst of the flower under the upper leaf that was
folded, but open at the top; there came forth a smooth pointel,
divided at the top into nine parts or threads, whose ends of what
colour they were, as also the threads, I know not, because I could
not gather by the dry flower, whose colour was quite decayed, and
the picture itself expressed no separation of the leaves in the
flower, no form of threads, but only the flowers shut, and
resembling rather cods than flowers, and those of a deep red colour.
But if I could have seen them fresher, I should have been able to
have given a more exact description: wherefore let the reader take
in good part that which I have here performed. Thus much Clusius.

CHAP. 22. Of the Sea Lentil.


Fig. 2242. Narrow-Leaved Sea Lentil (1)
Fig. 2242. Cut-Leaved Sea Lentil (2)

The Description.

Some call this Uva marina, and others have thought it the Lenticula
marina of Serapio, but they are deceived, for his Lenticula marina
described in his 245th chapter, is nothing else than the Moscus
marinus or Bryon thalassion, described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap.
99, as any that compares these two places together may plainly see.

1. The former of these hath many winding stalks, whereon grow short
branches set thick with narrow leaves like those of Belvidere, or
Besom Flax, and among these grow many skinny, hollow, empty round
berries of the bigness and shape of lentils, whence it takes the
name: this grows in divers places of the Mediterranian and Adriatic
seas.

2. This differs little from the former, but that the leaves are
broader, shorter, and snipped about the edges. But this being in
probability the Sargasso of Acosta, you shall here what he says
thereof. In that famous and no less to be feared navigation del
Sergazo (for so they which sail into the Indies call all that space
of the Ocean from the 18th to the 34th degree of Northerly latitude)
is seen a deep and spacious sea covered with an herb called
Sargasso, being a span long, wrapped with the tender branches as it
were into balls, having narrow and tender leaves some half inch
long, much snipped about the edges, of colour reddish, of taste
insipid, or without any sensible biting, but what is rather drawn
from the salt water, than naturally inherent in the plant. At the
setting on of each leaf grows a seed round like a peppercorn, of a
whitish colour, and sometimes of white and red mixed, very tender
whenas it is first drawn forth of the water, but hard when it is
dried, but by reason of the thinness very fragile, and full of salt
water: there is no root to be observed in this plant, but only the
marks of the breaking off appears; and it is likely it grows in the
deep and sandy bottom of the sea, and hath small roots; yet some are
of opinion that this herb is plucked up and carried away by the
rapid course of waters that fall out of many islands into the Ocean.
Now the Master of the ship wherein I was did stiffly maintain this
opinion; and in the sailing here we were becalmed; but as far as
ever we could see we saw the sea wholly covered with this plant, and
sending down some young sailors which should drive the weeds from
the ship, and cleanse the water, we plainly saw round heaps thereof
rise up from the bottom of the sea where by sounding we could find
no bottom.

A. This plant pickled with salt and vinegar hath the same taste as
Samphire, and may be used instead thereof, and also eaten by such as
sail, in place of capers. I willed it should be given newly taken
forth of the sea, to goats which we carried in the ship, and they
fed upon it greedily.

B. I found no faculties thereof; but one of the sailors troubled
with a difficulty of making water, casting out sand and gross
humours, ate thereof by chance both raw and boiled, only for that
the taste thereof pleased him: after a few days he told to me that
he found great good by the eating thereof, and he took some of it
with him, that so he might use it when he came ashore. Hitherto
Acosta.

CHAP. 23. Of the Sea Feather.

Fig. 2244. Sea Feather

The Description.
This elegant plant, which Clusius received from Cortusus by the name
of Myriophyllum pelagicum, is thus described by him: As much (saith
he) as I could conjecture by the picture, this was some cubit high,
having a straight stalk, sufficiently slender, divided into many
branches, or rather branched leaves, almost like those of Fern, but
far finer, bending their tops like the branches of the Palm, of a
yellowish colour: the top of the stalk adorned with lesser leaves,
ended in certain scales or cloves framed into a head; which are
found to contain no other seed than tender plants already formed, in
shape like to the old one: which falling, sink to the bottom of the
sea, and there take root and grow, and so become of the same
magnitude as the old one from whence they came. The stalk is
fastened with most slender and more than capillary fibres, instead
of a root, not upon rocks and oyster shells, as most other sea
plants are, but upon sand or mud in the bottom of the sea: this
stalk when it is dry is no less brittle than glass or Coralline; but
green and yet growing it is as tough and flexible as Spartum or
Matweed.

The Place.

It groweth in the deeper streams of the Illyrian sea, whence the
fishermen draw it forth with hooks and other instruments which they
call sperne. The whole plant, though dried, retains the faculties.

The Names.

The Italian fishermen call it Penachio delle Ninfe, and Palma de
Nettuno: some also, Scettro di Nettuno.

The Virtues.

A. They say it is good against the virulent bites of the sea
serpents, and the venomous stings or pricks of fishes.

B. Applied to small green wounds it cures them in the space of 24
hours.

C. Cortusus writ, that he had made trial thereof for the killing and
voiding of worms, and that he found it to be of no less efficacy
than any Coralline, and that given in less quantity.

CHAP. 24. Of the Sea Fan.

Fig. 2245. Sea Fan

The Description.

This elegant shrub groweth upon the rocks of the sea (where it is
sometimes covered with the water) in divers places; for it hath been
brought both from the East and West Indies, and as I have been
informed it is to be found in great plenty upon the rocks at the
Bermuda Isles. Clusius calls it Frutex marinus elegantissimus, and
thinks it may be referred to the Palma marina of Theophrastus.
Bauhine hath referred it to the Corallinæ, calling it Corallina
cortice reticulata maculoso purpurascente. It grows up sometimes to
the height of three foot, having a stalk some handful or two high
before it part into branches: then is it divided into three, four,
or more branches, which are subdivided into infinite other lesser
strings, which are finely interwoven and joined together as if they
were netted, yet leaving sometimes bigger, otherwhiles lesser holes: 
and these twiggy branches become smaller and smaller, the farther
they are from the root, and end as it were in small threads: these
branches grow not up on every side, as in other plants, but flat one
besides another, so that the whole plant resembles a fan, or a
cabbage leaf eaten full of holes; yet sometimes upon the sides come
forth other such fan-like branches, some bigger, some less,
sometimes one or two, otherwhiles more. The inner substance of this
Sea Fan is a blackish tough, and hard wood, and it is all covered
over with a rough Coral-like stony matter, of a reddish or purplish
colour, and this you may with your nail or a knife scrape off from
the smooth and black wood.

I know no use of this, but it is kept for the beauty and rarity
thereof, by many lovers of such curiosities, amongst which for the
rareness of the structure this may hold a prime place.

CHAP. 25. Of China, and Bastard China.

This root which is brought from the remotest parts of the world, and
is in frequent use with us, hath not been known in Europe little
above fourscore and ten years: for Garcias ab Orta the Portugal
physician writes, That he came to the first knowledge thereof in the
East Indies, in the year 1535, and that by this means, as he relates
it: It happened (saith he) that about that time a merchant in the
isle Diu told the noble gentleman Sr. Mart. Alfonso De Sousa my
patron, by what means he was cured of the French poxes, which was by
a certain root brought from China; whose faculties he much extolled,
because such as used it needed not observe so strict a diet as was
requisite in the use of guaiacum, but should only abstain from beef,
pork, fish, and crude fruits; but in China they do not abstain from
fish, for they are there great gluttons. When the report of this
root was divulged abroad, every man wonderfully desired to see and
use it, because they did not well like of the strict diet they were
forced to observe in the use of guaiacum. Besides, the inhabitants
of these countries, by reason of their idle life are much given to
gluttony. About this time the China ships arrive at Malacca,
bringing a small quantity of this root for their own use. But this
little was sought for with such earnestness, that they gave an
excessive rate for it; but afterwards the Chinois bringing a greater
quantity, the price fell, and it was sold very cheap. From this time
guaiacum began to be out of use, and banished the Indies, as a
Spaniard that would famish the natives. Thus much Garcia concerning
the first use thereof in the East Indies.


Fig. 2246. True China (1)
Fig. 2247. Bastard China (2)

The Description.

1. The China now in use is a root of the largeness of that of the
ordinary Flag, or Iris palustris and not much in shape unlike
thereto, but that it wants the rings or circles that are imprinted
in the other: the outer coat or skin of this root is thin, sometimes
smooth, otherwhiles rugged, of a brownish red colour, and not to be
separated from the substance of the root, which is of an indifferent
firmness, being not so hard as wood, but more solid than most roots
which are not of shrubs or trees: the colour is sometimes white,
with some very small mixture of redness; otherwhiles it hath a
greater mixture of red, and some are more red than white: it is
almost without taste, yet that it hath is dry, without any
bitterness or acrimony at all. The best is that which is
indifferently ponderous, new, firm, not worm-eaten, nor rotten, and
which hath a good and fresh colour, and that either white, or much
inclining thereto. The plant whose root this is (if we may believe
Christopher Acosta) hath many small prickly and flexible branches,
not unlike the Smilax aspera, or the prickly Bindweed: the biggest
of these exceedeth not the thickness of one's little finger. The
leaves are of the bigness of those of the Broad-Leaved Plantain: the
roots are as large as one's hand, sometimes less, solid, heavy,
white, and also sometimes red, and many oft-times gtowing together.

It groweth aboundantly in the territory of China, and is also found
in Malabar, Cochin, Cranganore, Quilon, Tanor, and other places.

The Chinois call it Lampatan: in Deccan they call it Lampatos: in
Canarin, Bouti: the Arabians, Persians, and Turks term it Choph-
china.

2. This other root, whose figure you see here expressed, was sent
from London to Clusius in the year 1591, by James Garret, being
brought out of Wingandecaow, or Virginia, with this inscripion,
Chinæ species, a kind of China. Clusius caused this figure thereof
to be drawn, and thus describeth it. This root (saith he) was very
knotty, and formed with outgrowings, or bunches handing out, of a
reddish colour, and it yet retained at the top some part of the
stalk, being somwhat like unto that of Smilax aspera, or common
Rough Bindweed, hard, woody, and full of veins, as the stalks of
Smilax aspera: the substance of the root was also reddish, as the
root of the common Flag, at the first of a saltish taste it being
old, (for so it was when I received it) and then drying. Now I judge
this the same that the writer of the Virginian History mentions in
his chapter of roots, and saith, it was brought into England for
China, though the natives knew no use thereof: but they use another
root very like China, which they call Tsinaw, of which being cut,
beaten, and pressed out with water, they draw a juice wherewith they
make their bread. Thus much Clusius, to whose words I think it not
amiss to add that which Mr Thomas Hariot (who was the writer of the
Virginian History, here mentioned by Clusius) hath set down
concerning this thing.

Tsinaw (saith he) is a kind of root much like unto that which in
England is called the China root, brought from the East Indies. And
we know not anything to the contrary but that it may be of the same
kind. These roots grow many together in great clusters, and do bring
forth a Brier stalk, but the leaf in shape is far unlike: which
being supported by the trees it groweth nearest unto, will reach or
climb to the top of the highest. From these roots whilst they be new
or fresh, being chopped into small pieces and stamped, is strained
with water a juice that maketh bread, and also being boiled, a very
good spoon-meat in manner of a jelly, and is much better in taste,
if it be tempered with oil. This Tsinaw is not of that sort which by
some was caused to be brought into England for the China root; for
it was discovered since, and is in use as is aforesaid; but that
which was brought hither is not yet known, neither by us, nor by the
inhabitants, to serve for any use or purpose, although the roots in
shape are very like. Thus much Hariot.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. China is thought to be moderately hot and dry: the decoction
thereof made alone or with other things, as the disease and symptoms
shall require, is much commended by Garcias, for to cure the French
pox, but chiefly that disease which is of some standing: yet by most
it is judged less powerful than Guaiacum, or Sarsaparilla.

B. It attenuates, moves sweat, and dries, and therefore resists
putrefaction: it strengthens the liver, helps the dropsy, cures
malign ulcers, scabs, and lepry. It is also commended in
consumptions.

C. The decotion of this root, saith Garcias, besides the diseases
which have community with the pox, conduces to the cure of the
palsy, gout, sciatica, scirrhus and oedematous tumours. It also
helps the King's evil. It cureth the weakness of the stomach, the
inveterate headache, the stone and ulceration of the bladder; for
many by the use of the decoction hereof have been cured, which
formerly received help by no medicine.

CHAP. 26. Of Costus.

This simple medicine was briefly described by Dioscorides, who
mentions three kinds thereof, but what part of a plant, whether
root, wood, or fruit, he hath not expressed: but one may probably
conjecture it is a root, for that he writes toward the end of the
chapter where he treats thereof, lib. 1 cap. 15, that it is
adulterated by mixing therewith the roots of Helenium commagenum;
now a root cannot well be adulterated but with another. Also Pliny,
lib. 12. cap. 12, calls it a root; but neither any of the ancient or
modern writers have deliniated the plant, whose root should be this
Costus. Dioscorides makes three sorts, as I have said: the Arabian
being the best; which was white, light, strong, and well smelling:
the Indian, which was large, light, and black: the Syrian, which was
heavy, of the colour of Box, and strong smelling. Now Pliny makes
two kinds, the black, and the white, which he saith is the better;
so I judge his black to be the Indian of Dioscorides, and his white,
the Arabian. Much agreeable to these (but whether the same or no, I
do not determine) are the two roots whose figures I here present to
your view, and they are called by the names of Costus dulcis (I
think they should have said odoratus) and Costus amarus.


Fig. 2248. Indian or Sweet Costus (1)
Fig. 2249. Bitter Costus

The Description.

1. The first of these, which rather from the smell, than taste, is
called sweet, is a pretty large root, light, white, and well
smelling, having the smell of orris, or a violet, but somewhat more
quick and piercing, ecpecially if the root be fresh, and not too
old: it is oft-times divided at the top into two, three, or more
parts, from whence several stalks have grown, and you shall
sometimes observe upon some of them pieces of these stalks some two
or three inches long, of the thickeness of one's little finger,
crested, and filled with a soft pith, like as the stalks of Elder,
or more like those of the Burdock: the taste of the root is bitter,
with some acrimony, which also Dioscorides requires in his, for he
saith, the taste should be biting and hot; thus much for the first,
being Costus dulcis of the shops.

2. The second, which is the Costus amarus, and it may be the Indian
of Dioscorides and niger of Pliny, is a root black both within and
without, light, yet very dense. It seems to be of some large root,
for that it is brought over cut into large pieces, of the bigness of
one's finger, sometimes bigger, sometimes less, which it seems is
for the more convenient drying thereof for a large root, unless it
be cut into pieces can scarcely be well dried: the taste of this is
bitter, somewhat clammy and ingrate: the smell is little or none.

There are some other roots which have been set forth by late writers
for Costus, but because they are neither in use, known here with us,
nor more agreeable to the descriptions of the ancients, I hastening
to an end, am willing to pass them over in silence.

The Temperature and Virtues out of the ancients.

A. It hath a heating and attenuating faculty, and therefore was used
in oil to anoint the body against the cold fits of agues, the
sciatica, and when it was needful to draw anything to the
superficies of the body.

B. It is also convenient to move urine, to procure the terms, to
help strains, convulsions, or cramps and pains in the sides; and by
reason of the bitterness it kills worms.

C. It is good to be drunk against the bite of the viper: against
pains of the chest, and windiness of the stomach taken in wine with
wormwood: and it is used to be put into sundry antidotes.

CHAP. 27. Of Drake's Root, or Contrayerva.


Fig. 2250. Contrayerva (1)
Fig. 2251. Another Kind of Contrayerva. (2)

The Description.

1. That root which of late is known in some shops by the Spanish
name Contrayerva, is the same which Clusius hath set forth by the
title of Drakena radix: wherefore I will give you the history of
Clusius, and thereto add that which Monardus writes of the
Contrayerva. For though Bauhine, and the author of the Historia
Lugdunensis seem to make these different, yet I find that both
Clusius, his figure and history exactly agree with the roots sent us
from Spain by that title, wherefore I shall make them one, till some
shall show me how they differ: and Clusius seems to be of this mind
also, who desired but the degree of heat which Monardus gives these,
and that is but the second degree: now these have no taste at the
first, until you have chewed them a pretty while, and then you than
find a manifest heat and acrimony in them, which Clusius did also
observe in his.

In the year (saith Clusius) 1581 the generous knight Sir Francis
Drake gave me at London certain roots, with three or four Peruvian
bezoar stones, which in the autumn before (having finished his
voyage, wherein passing the Straits of Magellan, he had encompassed
the world) he had brought with him, affirming them to be of high
esteem amongst the Peruvians: now for his sake that bestowed these
roots upon me, I have given them the title Drakena radix, or Drake's
root, and have made them to be expressed in a table, as you may here
see them.

These roots were for the most part some half inch thick, longish,
now and then bunching out into knots and unequal heads, and their
tops looked as if they were composed of thick scales, almost like
those of the Dentaria enneaphyllos; blackish without, wrinkled, and
hard, because dried: their inner part was white; they had slender
fibres here and there growing out of them, and some more thick and
large, hard also and tough, at which hung other knots: I observed no
manifest smell they had, but found them to have a taste somewhat
astringent, & drying the tongue at the first; but being long chewed,
they left a quick and pleasing acrimony in the mouth.

It seemed to have great affinity with the Radix S. Helenæ, whereof
Nic. Monardus speaks in his book Of the Simple Medicines brought
from the West Indies: but seeing N. Eliot (who accompanied Sir
Francis Drake in that voyage, said, that the Spaniards in Peru had
them in great request; and they could not easily be got of them, and
that he had learned by them, that the leaves were present poison,
but the root an antidote, and that not only against the same poison,
but also against other; and that it strengthened the heart and vital
faculties, if it were beaten to powder, and taken in the morning in
a little wine; and given in water, it mitigated the heat of fevers.
By reason of these faculties it should much agree with the Radix
contrayerva, whereof Monardus writes in the same book: yet in these
I required the aromatic taste and degree of heat, which he
attributes unto these roots. Thus much Clusius.

A. From Charcis, a province of Peru, saith Monardus, are brought
certain roots very like the roots of Iris, but less, and having the
smell of Fig leaves. The Spaniards that live in the Indies call them
Contrayerva, as if you should say an antidote against poison;
because the powder of them taken in white wine is a most present
remedy against all poison of what kind soever it be (only sublimate
excepted, whose malignity is only extinguished by the drinking of
milk) it causes them to be cast up by vomit, or evacuated by sweat.
They also say that philtres or amorous potions are cast forth by
drinking this powder. It also killeth worms in the belly. The root
chewed hath a certain aromatic taste joined with acrimony; wherefore
it seems hot in the second degree. Thus far Monardus.

2. Clusius Exot. lib. 4. cap. 11, being the next after Drakena
radix, describes this root, whose figure I give you in the 2nd
place, & that by the same title as it is here set forth. These
roots, saith he, seem somewhat like the Drakena radix which were
found in the great ship which brought back the Viceroy from the East
Indies, and was taken by the English; for they were tuberous, and as
much as one may gather by their form, crept upon the surface of the
earth, having upon them many hairs and fibres, and being of a sooty
colour, yet somewhat inclining to yellow, drying the spittle in
chewing them and being bitter: they as yet retained footstalks of
the leaves, but of what fashion they were no man can easily guess.
But it was likely they were of great use among the Indians, seeing
that the Viceroy brought them together with other precious medicines
growing in the East Indies. James Garret sent this to Clusius with
the little plant dried, whose figure you see expressed by it.

CHAP. 28. Of Lignum Aloes.

Fog. 2252. Lignum Aloes

The Description.

It is a question whether the Agallochum described in the lib. 1 cap.
21 of Dioscorides be the same which the later Greeks and shops at
this time call Xyloaloe, or Lignum Aloes, many make them the same:
others, to whose opinion I adhere, make them different, yet have,
not the later, show what Agallochum should be, which I not
withstanding will do; and though I do not now give you my arguments,
yet I will point at the things, & show positively my opinions of
them.

The first and best of these is that which some call Calumbart:
others, Calumba, or Calambec: this is of high esteem in the Indies,
& seldom found but amongst the princes, and persons of great
quality; for it is sold oft-times for the weight in gold; I have not
seen any thereof but in beads; it seems to be a whiter wood than the
ordinary, of a finer grain, not so subject to rot, and of a more
fragrant smell, and but light.

The second sort, which is usually brought over, and called in shops
by the name of Lignum Aloes, is also a precious and odoriferous
wood, especially burnt: the sticks of this are commonly knotty &
unsightly: some parts of them being white, soft, and doted: other
some, dense, blackish, or rather intermixed with black and white
veins, but much more black than white, and this put to the fire will
sweat out an oily moisture, and burnt, yield a most fragrant odour.
This I take to be the true Xyloaloe of the late Greeks; and the
Agalugen of Avicenaa, and that they call Palo d'Agula in the Indies.

The third is a wood of much less price than the former: and I
conjecture it might well be substituted for Thus: and this I take to
be the Agallochion of Dioscorides; the Lignum Aloes silvestre of
Garcias; and Agula brava of Linscoten. It is a firm and solid wood,
somewhat like that of the Cedar, not subject to rot or decay: the
colour thereof is blackish, especially on the outside; but on the
inside it is oft-times brownish and speckled, containing also in it
an oily substance, and yielding a sweet and pleasing smell when it
is burnt, but not like that of the two former: the taste also of
this is bitterer than that of the former: and the wood (though dense
and solid) may be easily cleft longways; it is also a far handsomer
and more sightly wood than the former, having not many knots in it.

Garcia ab Orta thus describes the tree that is the Lignum Aloes (I
judge it's that I have set forth in the second place): it is (saith
he) like an Olive tree, sometimes larger: the fruit or flower I
could not yet see, by reason of the difficulties and dangers which
are to be undergone in the accurate observation of this tree (Tigers
frequently there seeking their prey.) I had the branches with the
leaves brought me from Malacca. Now they say that the wood new cut
down hath no fragrant odour, nor till it be dried: neither the smell
to be diffused over the whole matter of the wood, but in the heart
of the tree; for the bark is thick, and the matter of the wood
without smell. Yet may I not deny, but the bark and wood putrefying
that oily and fat moisture, may betake itself to the heart of the
tree, and make the more odoriferous: but there is no need of
putrefaction to get a smell to the Lignum Aloes: for there are
sundry so expert and skilful in the knowledge thereof, that they
will judge of that which is new cut down, whither it will be
odoriferous or no. For in all sorts of wood some are better than
other some: thus much out of Garcias; where such as are desirous may
see more upon this subject.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. It is of temperature moderately hot and dry, and also of somewhat
subtle parts. Chewed it makes the breath smell sweet, and burnt it
is a rich perfume.

B. Taken inwardly it is good to help the stomach that is too cold
and moist, as also the weak liver.

C. It is commended likewise in dysenteries and pleurisies: and put
also into divers cordial medicines and antidotes as a prime
ingredient.

CHAP. 29. Of Gedwar.


Fig. 2253. Gedwar (1)
Fig. 2254. A better figure of Zedoary (2)

In the chapter of Zedoary (which I made the 28th of the first book)
I might fitly have given you this history of Gedwar, which is
thought to be that described by Avicenna, lib. 2, cap. 734, and a
kind of Zedoary: Garcias saith, Gedwar is at a high rate, and not
easily to be found, unless with the Indian mountebanks and jugglers,
which they call yogis, which go up and down the country like rogues,
and of these the kings and noblemen buy Gedwar: it is good for many
things, but chiefly against poisons, and the bites and stings of
venomous creatures.

1. Clusius in his Auctuarium at the end thereof gives this figure,
with the following history. Because Garcias, lib. 1. cap. 42,
Aromatum Hist. treating of Zedoary writes, that Avicenna calls it
Gedwar; and saith that it is of the magnitude of an acorn, and
almost of the same shape, I in my notes at the end of that chapter
affirmed that it was not known in Europe, and hard to be known. But
in the year 1605 John Pona sent me from Verona together with other
things two roots written on by the name of Gedwar verum. They were
not much unlike a longish acorn, or (that I may more truly compare
them)the smaller bulbs of an Asphodel, or Anthora: the one of them
was whole and not perished: the other rotten and broken, yet both of
them very hard and solid, of an ash colour without, but yellowish
within: which tasted, seemed to possess a heating faculty and
acrimony.

But although I can affirm nothing of certainty of this root, yet I
made the figure of the wholer of them to be expressed in a table,
that so the form might be conceived in one's mind more easily, than
by a naked description. Let the studious thank Pona for the
knowledge hereof. Thus much Clusius.

2. In the 28th chapter of the first book I gave the figure of
Zedoary out of Clusius, having not at that time this figure of
Lobel, which presents to your view both the long and the round, with
the manner how they grow together, being not several roots, but
parts of one and the same.

CHAP. 30. Of Rosewood.


Fig. 2255. White Rosewood
Fig. 2256. Red Rosewood

The Description.

Both these as also some other woods are referred to the Aspalathus
described by Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 19. But the later of these I
take to be the better of the two sorts there mentioned. The first of
them is whitish without, having a yellowish or citrine-coloured
round in the middle: the taste is hottish, and smell somewhat like
that of a white Rose.

The other hath also a small ring of white, next the thick and rugged
bark, and the inner wood is of a reddish colour, very dense, solid
and firm, as also indifferent heavy: the smell of this is also like
that of a Rose, whence they vulgarly call it Lignum rhodium,
Rosewood, rather than from Rhodes the place where the later of them
is said to grow.

The Faculties out of Dioscorides.

A. It hath a heating faculty with astriction, whence the decoction
thereof made in wine is convenient to wash the ulcers of the mouth,
and the eating ulcers of the privities and such unclean poxes as the
ozæna (a stinking ulcer in the nose so called.)

B. Put up in a pessary it draws forth the child, the decoction
thereof stays the looseness of the belly, and drunk it helps the
casting up of blood, the difficulty of making water, and windiness.

CHAP. 31. Of Divers Other Plants Previously Omitted.

At the end of this Appendix I have thought good to give you divers
descriptions of plants, which I received from my often mentioned
friend Mr Goodyer, which also were omitted in their fitting places,
partly through haste, and partly for that I received some of them
after the printing of those chapters wherein of right they should
have been inserted. They are most of them of rare and not written of
plants, wherefore more grateful to the curious.

Hieracium stellatum boelii.

This plant is in round, hairy, streaked, branched stalks, and long,
rough, blunt indented leaves like to Hieracium falcatum, but scarce
a foot high: the flowers are also yellow, three times smaller: which
past, there succeed long crooked slender sharp pointed cods or
husks, near an inch long, spreading abroad, star-fashion, wherein a
long seed is contained: this hath no heads or woolly down like any
of the rest, but only the said crooked cods which do at the first
spread abroad. The root is small, thready, full of milky juice, as
is also the whole plant; and it perisheth when the seed is ripe.

Hieracium medio nigrum flore maiore boelii.

This hath at the first spreading upon the ground many long, narrow,
green, smooth leaves bluntly indented about the edges, like those of
Hieracium falcatum, but smaller: amongst which rise up three, four,
or more, small, smooth, streaked, round stalks, divided into other
branches, which grow longer than the stalks themselves leaning or
trailing near the ground: the flowers grow on the tops of the
stalks, but one together, composed of many pale yellow leaves, the
middle of each flower being of a blackish purple colour.

Hieracium media nigrum flore minore boelii.

This is altogether like the last before described in stalks and
leaves: the flowers are also of a blackish purple in the middle, but
they are three times smaller.

Hieracium lanosum

There groweth from one root three, four or more round upright soft
cottony stalks, of a reasonable bigness, two foot high, divided into
many branches, especially near the top, whereon groweth at each
division one broad sharp-pointed leaf, divided into corners, and
very much crumpled, and also very soft cottony and woolly, as is the
whole plant: the flowers are small, double, of a pale yellow colour,
very like those of Pilosella repens, growing clustering very many
together at the tops of the stalks and branches, forth of small
round soft cottony heads: these four plants grew from seed which I
received from Mr Coys, 1620, and I made these descriptions by the
plants the 22nd August, 1621.

Blitum spinosum: est Beta cretica fmine aculeato bauhini matthioli.

This sendeth forth from one root many round green trailing, jointed,
small branches, about a foot long: the leaves are of a light green
colour, and grow at every joint one, somewhat like the leaves of
great Sorrel, but they are round topped without barbs or ears below,
or any manifest taste or smell, very like the leaves of Beets, but
much smaller: the flowers grow cluttering together about the joints,
and at the tops of the branches small and greenish, each flower
containing five or six very small blunt-topped leaves, and a few
dusty chives in the middle: which past, there cometh great prickly
shrivelled seed, growing even close to the root, and upwards on the
joints, each seed having three sharp pricks at the top growing
sideways, which indeed may be more properly called the husk; which
husk in the inside is of a dark reddish colour, and containeth one
seed in form like the seed of Flos adonis, round at the lower end,
and cornered towards the top, and sharp pointed, covered over with a
dark yellowish skin; which skin pulled away, the kernel appeareth
yellow on the outside, and exceeding white within, and will with a
light touch fall into very small powder like meal.

Geranii bæticæ species boelii.

This hath at the beginning many broad leaves, indented about the
edges, somewhat divided, like those of Geranium creticum, but of a
lighter green colour, and smaller: amongst which grow up many round
hairy kneed trailing branches, divided into many other branches,
bearing leaves like the former, but smaller, and no more divided.
The flowers are small like those of Geranium moschatum, but of a
deeper reddish colour, each flower having five small round-topped
leaves: after followeth small long hairy seed, growing at the lower
end of a sharp pointed beak like that of Geranium moschatum: the
whole plant perisheth when the seed is ripe.

Boelius a Low-Country man gathered the seeds hereof in Bætica a part
of Spain, and imparted them to Mr William Coys, a man very skilfull
in the knowledge of simples, who hath gotten plants thereof, and of
infinite other strange herbs, and friendly gave me seeds hereof; and
of many other, Anno 1620.

Antirrhinum minus flore linariæ luteum inscriptum.

This hath at the first many very small, round, smooth branches from
one root, trailing on the ground, about four or five inches long,
set with many small green short sharp-pointed leaves, like those of
Serpillum, but that these are longer, smooth, and three or four
growing opposite one against another: amongst which rise up five or
six, sometimes ten or twelve upright round smooth little stalks a
cubit high, divided into branches bearing small long smooth green
leaves, growing without order, as narrow as the upper leaves of
Oenanthe angustfolia: at the tops of the stalks and branches grow
clustering together five, six or more small yellow flowers,
flowering upwards, leaving a long spike of very small husks, each
husk having a small line or chink as though two husks were joined
together, the one side of the husk being a little longer than the
other, wherein is contained exceeding small blackish seed. The root
is very short, small, and white, with a few threads, and perisheth
at winter.

This plant is not written of that I can find. I received seed
thereof from Mr William Coys often remembered.

Linaria minor æstiva.

The stalks are round, smooth, of a whitish green colour, a foot
high, weak, not able to stand upright: whereon grow long narrow
sharp pointed leaves, most commonly bending or turning downwards.
The flowers grow in spikes at the tops of the branches, yet not very
near together, and are very small and yellow, with a small tail: the
seed of this plant is small, flat, and of a blackish gray colour
enclosed in small round husks, and you shall commonly have at one
time flowers and ripe seed on a stalk. The whole plant is like to
the common Linaria, but that it is a great deal lesser, and the
flowers are six times as small, and perish at winter. I also
received seeds thereof from M. William Coys.

Scorpioides multiflora boelii.

This plant is in creeping branches and leaves like the common
Scorpioides bupleuri folio: the flowers are also alike, but a little
bigger, and grow four or five together on one footstalk: the cods
are rougher, and very much turned round, or folded one within
another: in all things else alike.

Scorpioides siliqua crassa boelii.

This is also like the other in creeping branches and leaves: the
flowers are something bigger than any of the rest, and grow not
above one or two together on a footstalk: the cods are crooked,
without any rough hair, yet finely chequered, and seven times bigger
than any of the rest, fully as big as a great palmer-worm, wherein
is the difference: the seed is almost round, yet extending somewhat
in length, almost as big as small field pea, of a brown or yellowish
colour. This also perisheth when the seed is ripe. Sept 1 1621.

Silibium minus flore nutante boelii.

This Thistle is in stalks and leaves much smaller than Our Lady's
Thistle, that is to say, the stalks are round, straked, somewhat
woolly, with narrow skinny prickly edges, three or four foot high,
divided into many branches, whereon grow long leaves, deeply
divided, full of white milk-like streaks and sharp prickles by the
edges: the flowers grow on the top of the stalks and branches full
of small heads, commonly turning downwards, of the bigness of an
olive, set with very small slender sharp pricks, containing nothing
but small purple chives, spreading abroad like those of Iacca, with
some bluish chives in the middle: the seed followeth, enclosed in
down, and is small and grayish like the seed of other Thistles, but
it is as clammy as bird-lime. The whole plant perisheth at winter,
and reneweth itself by the falling of the seed. I find not this
written of. It was first gathered by Boelius in Spain, and imparted
unto Mr William Coys, who friendly gave me seeds thereof.

Aracus major bæticus boelii.

It hath small weak four-square streaked trailing branches, two foot
high, lesser, but like those of Vetches; whereon grow many leaves
without order, and every several leaf is composed of six, seven, or
more small sharp pointed leaves, like those of Lentils, set on each
side of a middle rib, which middle rib endeth with clasping
tendrils: the flowers grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves, but
one in a place, almost without any footstalks at all, like those of
Vetches, but of a whitish colour, with purple streaks, and of a
deeper colour tending to purple towards the nails of the upper
cornering leaves: after which follow the cods, which are little
above an inch long, not fully so big as those of the wild bean,
almost round, and very hairy: wherein is contained about four peas,
seldom round, most commonly somewhat flat, and sometimes cornered,
of a blackish colour, near as big as field pea, and of the taste of
Vetches: the whole herb perisheth when the seed is ripe. This plant
Boelius sent to Mr William Coys, who hath carefully preserved the
same kind ever since, and friendly imparted seeds to me in Anno
1620.

Legumen pallidum ulissiponensi, nonii brandonii.

This plant is very like, both in stanlks, leaves, and cods, to
Aracus major bæticus, but the flowers of this are of a pale yellow
or Primrose colour, and the whole herb smaller, and nothing so
hairy. It perisheth also when the seed is ripe. I received the seeds
likewise from Mr Coys.

Vicia indica fructo albo. Pisum indicum gerardo.

This Vetch differeth not in anything at all, either in stalks,
leaves, cods, fashion of the flowers, or colour thereof, from our
common manured Vetch, but that it groweth higher, and the fruit is
bigger and rounder, and of a very clear white colour, more like to
Peas than Vetches. Mr Gerard was wont to call this Vetch by the name
of Pisum indicum, or Indian Pea, gotten by him after the publishing
of his Herbal, as Mr Coys reported to me. But the said Mr Coys hath
in my judgement more properly named it Vicia fructu albo: which name
I thought most fit to call it by, only adding indica to it, from
whence it is reported to have been gotten. Jul. 30, 1621.

Astragalus marinus lusitanicus boelii.

This hath five, six, or more round streaked reddish hairy stalks or
branches, of a reasonable bigness, proceeding from one root,
sometimes creeping or leaning near the ground, and sometimes
standing upright, a cubit high, with many green leaves, set by
certain distances, out of order like those of Glaux vulgaris but
lesser, every leaf being composed of fourteen or more round-topped
leaves, a little hairy by the edges, set on each side of a long
middle rib, which is about nine or ten inches in length, without
tendrils: the flowers grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves, near
the tops of the stalks, on long round streaked hairy footstalks, of
a very pale yellow colour, like those of Securidaca minor, but
bigger, growing close together in short spikes, which turn into
spikes of the length of two or three inches, containing many small
three-cornered cods about an inch long, growing close together like
those of Glaux vulgaris, each cod containing two rows of small flat
four-cornered seeds, three or four in each row, of a dark yellowish
or leadish colour, like to those of Securidaca minor, but three or
four times as big, of little taste: the root is small, slender,
white, with a few threads, and groweth downright, and perisheth when
the seed is ripe. I first gathered seeds of this plant in the garden
of my good friend Mr John Parkinson an apothecary of London, Anno
1616.

Faba veterum serratis foliis boelii.

This is like the other wild Bean in stalks, flowers, cods, fruit and
clasping tendrils, but it differeth from it in that the leaves
hereof (especially those that grow near the tops of the stalks) are
notched and indented about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The
root also perisheth when the seed is ripe. The seeds of this wild
Bean were gathered by Boelius, a Low-country man, in Bætica a part
of Spain, and by him sent to Mr William Coys, who carefully
preserved them, and also imparted seeds thereof to me, in Anno 1620. 
July 31, 1621.

Pisum maculatum boelii.

They are like to the small common field Peas in stalks, leaves, and
cods; the difference is, the flowers are commonly smaller, and of a
whitish green colour: the peas are of a dark gray colour, spotted
with black spots in show like to black velvet; in taste they are
also like, but somewhat harsher. These peas I gathered, in the
garden of Mr John Parkinson, a skilful apothecary of London; and
they were first brought out of Spain by Boelius a Low-country man.

Lathyrus æstivus flore luteo.

July 28, 1621. This is like Lathyrus latiore folio lobelii, in
stalks, leaves, and branches, but smaller: the stalks are two or
three foot long, made flat with two skins, with two exceeding small
leaves growing on the stalks, one opposite against another: between
which spring up flat footstalks, an inch long, bearing two exceeding
narrow sharp pointed leaves, three inches long: between which grow
the tendrils, divided into many parts at the top, and taking hold
therewith: the flowers are small, and grow forth of the bosoms of
the leaves: on each footstalk one flower, wholly yellow, with purple
streaks. After each flower followeth a smooth cod, almost round, two
inches long, wherein is contained several round peas, somewhat
rough, but after a curious manner, of the bigness and taste of field
peas, and of a dark sand colour.

Lathyrus æstivus bæticus flore cæruleo boleii.

This is also like Lathyrus latiore folio lobelii, but smaller, yet 
greater than that with yellow flowers, having also adjoining to the
flat stalks, two eared sharp pointed leaves, and also two other
slender sharp pointed leaves, about four inches long, growing on a
flat footstalk between them, an inch and an half long, and one
tendril between them divided into two or three parts: the flowers
are large, and grow on long slender four-square footstalks from the
bosoms of the leaves, on each footstalk one: the upper great
covering leaf being of a light blue, and the lower smaller leaves of
a deeper blue: which past, there come up short flat cods, with two
films, edges, or skins on the upper side, iike those of Ervilia
lobelii, containing within, four or five great flat cornered peas,
bigger than field peas, of a dark sand colour.

Lathyrus æstivus edulis bæticus flore albo boelii.

This is in flat skinny stalks, leaves, footstalks, and cods, with
two skins on the upper side, and all things else like the said
Lathyrus with blue flowers; only the flowers of this are milk white:
the fruit is also like.

Lathyrus æstivus flore miniato.

This is also in skinny flat stalks and leaves like the said Lathyrus
latiore folio, but far smaller, not three foot high: it hath also
small sharp-pointed leaves growing by couples on the stalk, between
which grow two leaves, about three inches long, on a flat footstalk
half an inch long: also between those leaves grow the tendrils: the
flowers are coloured like red lead, but not so bright, growing on
smooth short footstalks, one on a footstalk: after which follow cods
very like those of the common field pea, but lesser, an inch and a
half long, containing four, five or six-cornered peas, of a sand
colour, or dark obscure yellow, as big as common field peas, and of
the same taste.

Lathyrus palustris lusitanicus boelii

Hath also flat skinny stalks like the said Lathyrus latiore folio,
but the pair of leaves which grow on the stalk are exceeding small
as are those of Lathyrus flore luteo, and are indeed scarce worthy
to be called leaves: the other pair of leaves are about two inches
long, above half an inch broad, and grow from between those leaves,
on flat footstalks, an inch long: between which leaves also grow the
tendrils: the flowers grow on footstalks which are five inches long,
commonly two on a footstalk, the great upper covering leaves being
of a bright red colour, and the under leaves are somewhat paler:
after cometh flat cods, containing seven or eight small round peas,
no bigger than a peppercorn, gray and black, spotted before they are
ripe, and when they are fully ripe of a black colour, in taste like
common peas: the stalks, leaves, footstalks and cods are sornewhat
hairy and rough.

Lathyrus æstivus dumetorum bæticus boelii.

Hath also flat skinny stalks like the said Lathyrus latiore folio,
but smaller, and in the manner of the growing of the leaves
altogether contrary. This hath also two small sharp pointed leaves,
adjoining to the stalk: between which groweth forth a flat middle
rib with tendrils at the top having on each side (not one against
another) commonly three blunt-topped leaves, sometimes three on the
one side, and two on the other, and sometimes but four in all about
an inch and a half long; the flowers grow on footstalks, about two
or three inches long, each footstalk usually bearing two flowers,
the great covering leaf being of a bright red colour; and the two
under leaves of a bluish purple colour: after which follow smooth
cods, about two inches long, containing five, six or seven smooth
peas, of a brown chestnut colour, not round but somewhat flat, more
long than broad, especially those next both the ends of the cod, of
the bigness and taste of common field peas.

Iuniperus sterilis.

This shrub is in the manner of growing altogether like the Juniper
tree that beareth berries, only the upper part of the leaves of the
youngest and tenderest boughs and branches are of a more reddish
green colour: the flowers grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves, of
a yellowish colour, which never exceed three in one row, the number
also of each row of leaves: each flower is like to a small bud, more
long than round, never growing to the length of a quarter of an 
inch, being nothing else but very small short crudely chives, very
thick and close thrust together, fastened to a very small middle
stem, in the end turning into small dust, which flieth away with the
wind, not much unlike that of Taxus sterilis: on this shrub is never
found any fruit. 15 May, 1621.

Additional Notes by Mr John Redman

When the last sheets of this work were on the press, I received a
letter from Mr Roger Bradshaw, wherein he sent me enclosed a note
concerning some plants mentioned by our author which I have thought
fitting here to impart to the reader: he writ not then who it was
that writ it, but since hath certified me that it was one Mr John
Redman a skilful Herbarist, to whom, though unknown, I give thanks,
for his desire to manifest the truth and satisfy our doubts in these
particulars.

Because you write that Gerard's Herbal is upon a review, I have
thought good to put you in mind what I have observed touching some
plants which by him are affirmed to grow in our Northern parts:
first the plant called Pyrola, which he saith groweth in Lansdale, I
have made search for it the space of twenty years, but no such is to
be heard of.

Sea Campion with a red flower was told him groweth in Lancashire: no
such hath ever been seen by such as dwell near where they should
grow.

White Foxgloves grow naturally in Lansdale, saith he: it is very
rare to see one in Lansdale.

Garden Rose he writes groweth about Leyland in Glover's Field wild:
I have learned the truth from those to whom this Glover's Field did
belong, and I find no such thing, only abundance of red wild Poppy,
which the people call Corn-Rose, is there seen.

White Whortles, as he saith, grow at Crosby in Westmorland, and upon
Wendle hill in Lancashire: I have sought Crosby very diligently for
this plant and others, which are said to grow there, but none could
I find, nor can I hear of any of the country people in these parts,
who daily are labouring upon the mountains where the Whortleberries
abound, that any white ones have been seen, saving that those which
Gerard calls Red Whortles, and they are of a very pale white green
until they be full ripe, so as when the ripe ones look red, the
unripe ones look white. Cloudberry assuredly is no other than
Knoutberry.

Hesketh's Primrose groweth in Clapdale. If Mr Hesketh found it there
it was some extraordinary luxurious flower; for now I am well
assured no such is there to be seen, but it is only cherished in our
gardens.

Gerard saith many or these Northern plants do grow in Crag Close. In
the North every town and village near unto any craggy ground both
with us and in Westmorland have closes so called, whereby Gerard's
Crag Close is kept close from our knowledge.

Chamæmorus, seu Vaccinia nubis. Knot, or Knout-berry, or Cloudberry.

This Knot, Knout, or Cloudberry (for by all these names it is known
by us in the North, and taketh the names from the high mountains
whereon it groweth; and is perhaps, as Gerard saith, one of the
brambles, though without any prickles) hath roots as small as pack-
thread, which creep far abroad under the ground, of an overworn red
colour, here and there thrusting more fastly into the mossy hillocks
tufts of small thready strings, and at certain joints putting up
small stalks rather tough than woody, half a foot high, somthing
reddish below, on which do grow two or three leaves of a reasonable
sad green colour, with footstalks an inch long, one above another
without order: the highest is but little, and seldom will spread
open; they are something rugged, crispy, full of nerves in every
part, notched about the edges, and with some gashes a little deeper
than the rest, whereby the whole leaf is lightly divided into five
portions. On the top of the stalk cometh one flower consisting of
four, sometimes of five leaves apiece, very white and tender, and
rather crumpled than plain, with some few short yellow threads in
the midst: it standeth in a little green husk of five leaves, out of
which when the flower fades, cometh the fruit, composed of divers
grains like that of the bramble, as of eight, ten, or twelve,
sometimes of fewer, and perhaps through some mischance but of three
or two, so joined, as they make some resemblance of a heart, from
whence (it may be) hath grown that error in Gerard of dividing this
plant into two kinds: the fruit is first whitish green, after
becometh yellow, and reddish on that side next the sun.

It groweth naturally in a black moist earth or moss, whereof the
country maketh a fuel we call turf, and that upon the tops of wet
fells and mountains among the heath, moss, and brake: as about
Ingleborough in the West part of Yorkshire, on Graygreth a high fell
on the edge of Lancashire, on Stainmore such a like place in
Westmorland, and other such like high places. The leaves come forth
in May, and in the beginning of June the flowers: the fruit is not
ripe till late in July.

The berries have a harsh and something unpleasant taste.

Heath Matweed

Fig. 2259. Heath Matweed

In August whilst this work was in the press, and drawing to an end,
I and Mr William Broad were at Chislehurst with my oft mentioned
friend Mr George Bowles, and going over the heath there I observed
this small Spartum whose figure I here give, and whereof you shall
find mention, in the place noted under the title of the figure; but
it is not there described, for that I had not seen it, nor could
find the description thereof in any author, but in Dutch, which I
neither had, nor understood. Now this little Matweed hath some small
creeping stringy roots: on which grow somewhat thick heads,
consisting of three or four leaves, as it were wrapped together in
one skin, biggest below, and so growing smaller upwards, as in
Schænanth, until they grow up to the height of half an inch, then
these rushy green leaves (whereof the longest scarce exceeds two
inches) break out of these whitish skins wherein they are wrapped,
and lie along upon the ground, and amongst these grows up a small
grassy stalk some handful or better high, bending back the top,
which carries two rows of small chaffy seeds. It is in the
perfection about the beginning of August.

Some Figures previously Omitted

This work was begun to be printed before such time as we received
all the figures, from beyond the seas, which was the occasion I
omitted these following in their fitting places: but thinking it not
fit to omit them wholly, having them by me, I will give you them
with their titles, and the references to the places whereto they
belong.


Fig. 2257. Turmeric
Fig. 2258. Club-Rush
Fig. 2260. Flowers of Camel's-Hay

FINIS

Glossary

Of obsolete words, or words used in an obsolete sense

Abstersion: Cleaning or scouring
Abstersive: Having a cleansing or purging nature
Acin: One of the individual sections of which a fruit like the blackberry 
is formed. 
Adjutories: Substances added to a medicine in order to increase or assist 
the action of another ingredient.
Adust: Scorched or dried by heat
Adustion: Scorching or drying by heat
Ægilops: An ulcer in the inner corner of the eye
Ague: Malaria
Alexipharmical: Being an antidote against poisons
Allay: To dilute
Allege: To advance as evidence or in argument.
Almonds in the throat: Tonsils
Ancome: A small sore or boil
Angina: Tonsilitis or swollen neck glands
Aposteme: An abscess
Argema: An ulcer on the eyeball
Astonied: Numbed 
Astriction: Binding together
Available: Effective
Axungia: Goose grease
Baggage: Filth or refuse
Banquet: A sweetmeat
Barrow: A castrated pig
Bastard: A strong sweet Spanish wine
Beach: Shingle, pebbles by the seashore
Bear-worm: A centipede or hairy caterpillar
Bewray: To expose or reveal
Bezoar-stone: A hard stone-like deposit found in the digestive system of 
certain ruminants, as goats, llamas, etc.; believed to have great effect 
as an antidote to poisons.
Bifid: Divided into two parts
Bird-lime: A sticky substance used for catching birds, by smearing it on 
twigs on which they perch, and are stuck fast.
Bletch: Shoe blacking
Blowing: Blossoming
Blunket: Greyish blue
Bole Armeniac: An astringent clay from Armenia, used as an antidote and 
styptic.
Bombast: Cotton-wool
Botch: A swelling, wen or tumour
Bray: To crush in a mortar
Buckler: A shield
Bunny: A lump or soft watery swelling of a joint
Burgundian cross: A St. Andrew's cross, one in the shape of the letter X
Bursting: Hernia
Calcitheos: Litharge (Lead oxide)
Calends: The first of the month
Candia, Candy: Crete
Capillary: Hair-like
Caria: A region now in south-western Turkey
Carinated: Having a central ridge, like the keel of a boat
Carole: A syphilitic sore
Caudle: A warm drink consisting of thin gruel, mixed with wine or ale, 
sweetened and spiced.
Cellar: A store room
Censure: To decide definitively
Cerecloth: A cloth impregnated with wax or ointment.
Cerot: A mixture of wax and tallow used as a basis for ointments
Ceruse: White lead, a mixture of lead monoxide and lead carbonate
Chamfered: Grooved
Champion: Fertile open country
Chap: A jaw
Cheer: Face, appearance
Chiches: Chickpeas
Chimetla: Chilblains
Chincough: Whooping cough or pertussis
Chirurgeon: A surgeon
Chirurgery: Surgery
Chives: (If not the herb of the onion family) Thread-like stamens or 
pistils of a flower. 
Chrada: The swellings of scrofula or King's evil
Choler: Bile
Chylisma: The juice of a plant boiled until thick
Cimolia: A kind of soft clay like fuller's earth
Classis: A group of plants classed together; what modern botanists call a 
taxon
Clog: A tuber
Clout: A piece of cloth
Clown: A peasant or countryman
Clyster: An enema
Cod: Of a plant, a seed-pod; of a man, a testicle. 
Collyrium, Collyrie: An eye-wash
Commodity: Ease of being obtained
Concocted: Digested
Cony-berry: A rabbit warren
Copperas: Sulphate of iron
Courses: (Of a woman) Menstrual flow
Cousin german: A first cousin
Crag: A projecting rough piece of stone or the like
Crambling: Twisting about while creeping along the ground
Cray: A disease of hawks, whose symptoms are severe constipation.
Cross Week: The sixth week after Easter, the Thursday of which is the 
Feast of the Ascension of Jesus Christ
Crudities: Defined as "Imperfect concoction of the humours"
Cubit: About 18 inches or 45 centimetres
Cuit: Sweet wine boiled down until it is thick
Degree: As in e.g. Galen maketh them hot in the third degree, and dry in 
the second degree &c.: 
"Upon the subject both of simple medicines, and of compounding them, 
Galen wrote many treatises; and he exercised the utmost stretch of 
imagination in determining the properties of simples. For these 
properties were deduced from the four primary qualities of hot, cold, 
moist, and dry, and were conceived by him to exist each in four different 
degrees. Thus the quality of hot, for instance, was possessed by 
different substances in the first, second, third, or fourth degree. 
Chicory was believed to be cold in the first degree, and pepper to be hot 
in the fourth degree. By the different combinations of these qualities, 
in their different degrees, he supposed that all medicines operated; and 
he even explained the sensible qualities of certain substances, such as 
sour, salt, acrid, &c. as depending upon the primary qualities just 
mentioned. Thus saltiness, he said, originated in the principle of heat:  
bitterness he deduced from dryness; sourness from cold; &c."
From The Cyclopædia, Or, Universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and 
Literature by Abraham Rees (1824)
Delay: To dilute
Delayed: Weakened or diluted
Deletery: Noxious, deleterious
Depured: Purified
Desired sickness: Menstruation, in cases of amenorrhoea or delayed 
menarche.
Dial: A navigator's compass
Discuss: To dissolve, disperse or drive away.
Divers: Several
Dodkin: A bud or shoot
Doted: Decayed internally
Dram: One eighth of an apothecary's ounce, or about 3.9 g. 
Earsh: A stubble field
Electuario Aromaticum: A medicine compounded of aromatic herbs and 
spices, with honey
Electuary: A medicine made by mixing a drug with honey or thick syrup
Empiric: A quack doctor
Emplastic: Adhesive, glutinous 
Enterocele: A internal hernia where the small intestine has ruptured 
through its containing membrane
Epinyctides: Pustules which appear only at night
Eschar: A dry brown dead patch on the skin, caused by a burn or some 
corrosive substance.
Falked: Curved
Falling sickness: Epilepsy
Feculent: Polluted with filth
Fell: The skin of an animal
Felon: A sore on the skin, like a boil, but smaller
Ferulous: Resembling or related to Fennel
Flash: Watery
Floating: Having scum floating on the top
Flowers: (Of a woman) Menstrual flow
Flux: A discharge; if substance is not specified, of bloody excrements 
i.e. dysentery
Foggy: Mossy or marshy
French pox, French disease: Syphilis
Friezed: Covered with a downy coating
Fuliginous: Sooty
Fundament: The anus
Gagate Lapide: Jet, a black semiprecious stone
Galbineous: Yellowish in colour
Gallipot: A small glazed pot used for holding medicine etc. 
Gang Week: The sixth week after Easter, the Thursday of which is the 
Feast of the Ascension of Jesus Christ
Gargarise: To gargle
Gargarism: A gargle
Garner: A storehouse for grain or other food. 
Garum: A salty condiment prepared from fish offal; Thai fish sauce is the 
modern equivalent.
Good-morrow: Something trifling or unimportant
Grain: (Measure) One 480th of an apothecary's ounce, or about 65 mg.
Graver: A maker of engravings or woodcuts.
Grim the Collier: A character in old songs, plays and nursery rhymes; he 
sold coal in Croydon and was involved in various adventures
Gum elemi: The resin of various tropical trees used for making plasters, 
ointments and varnish. It has a piny and lemony smell. 
Handful: 4 inches, or approximately 10.2 cm 
Haw: (Of the eye) a film-like growth on the cornea
Helvetian: Swiss
Hicket: Hiccups
Hippocras bag: A conical cloth bag used as a strainer
Horse-leech: A horse doctor
Hose: The sheath enclosing a seed-head or inflorescence
Hoven: Swollen
Huckle: The hips
Hydromel: Honey and water mixed
Imbibed: Steeped in liquid until it has been absorbed
Impertinent: Irrelevant
Impostume: An abscess
Incarnative: Promoting the growth of flesh
Inoculated: Propagated by bud-grafting
Jade: A worn-out horse
Joan Silver Pin: According to Marriam-Webster "probably from English 
dialect Joan's silver pin, an article of beauty in a sordid setting; from 
the fact that this showy flower is often found among weeds. " Also a 
character in Thomas Middleton's The Black Book; she was "Fair without and 
foul within"
Keel: A brewing vessel
Kernel: An enlarged lymph gland in the neck or groin. 
Kex: The hollow stem of a plant
Kibed: Afflicted with chilblains
Kine: Cattle, specifically bovine
King's Evil: Scrofula, an infection of the lymph nodes in the neck by the 
tuberculosis bacterium. It was so called because it was believed that 
being touched by a King would cure it.
Knop: A flower-bud
Lady Day: One of the feasts of the Virgin Mary:  March 25th, the 
Annunciation; Aug. 15th, the Assumption; Sep. 8th, the Nativity; or Dec. 
8th, the Immaculate Conception
Lask: Diarrhoea
Leasing: Telling lies
Lenitive: Soothing
Lentils: Freckles
Lepry: Leprosy
Lichen: A skin disease involving patches of reddish bumps which itch 
intensely.
Liefland, Livland: An area on the eastern shore of the Gulf of Riga, in 
the Baltic Sea, now divided between Latvia and Estonia.
Lieger: An ambassador
Limner: A manuscript illuminator
Link: A torch made of tow and pitch, used for guiding people on  the 
street at night 
Litharge of gold: A mixture of white lead (lead carbonate) and red lead 
(lead tetroxide)
Lithy: Pliable
Loafed : Having a compact head, resembling a loaf of bread.
Loam: A mixture of clay, sand and straw, used for plastering and making 
bricks
Loblolly: A kind of thick soup
Lohoch: A cough syrup
Lousy evil: An ailment which causes the body to be infested with great 
numbers of lice.
Marchpane: Marzipan
Massicot: Yellow lead oxide
Massilia: Marseille
Massilians: People of Marseille and surrounding districts
Matrix: The womb. Sickness of the matrix = hysteria
Mattering: Oozing pus
Medullous: Pithy
Merry-gall: A sore caused by chafing of the skin
Mesaraic, Mesaraical: Relating to the mesentery, a membrane surrounding 
the intestines. 
Metheglin: Mead flavoured with spices
Midland Sea: The Mediterranean
Milt: The spleen
Mithridate: A compound of many different ingredients, believed to be a 
universal antidote against all poisons. 
Morphew: A scurfy or leprous skin condition, usually of the face. 
Mother: The womb
Mucronata cartilago: The xiphoid process
Mundify: To clean a wound or sore of noxious matter.
Murr: Excessive production of mucus from the nose
Murrey: A purplish red colour
Muscatel: A strong sweet wine made from Muscat grapes
Nail: The narrower part of a petal, which is joined to the stalk or base 
of the flower
Nave: The central hub of a wooden wheel, into which the axle is inserted
Neeze: To sneeze
Nemausium: N?mes, a city in the South of France
Nervous: (Of a leaf) Having prominent veins
Nitre: Sodium carbonate, not potassium nitrate 
Node: A hard swelling, especially on a joint afflicted with arthritis or 
gout. 
Norembega: A vaguely defined area somewhere in eastern Canada or USA.
Nugament: A small or trivial thing
demata: Fluid-filled swellings or tumours
Oil of vitriol: Concentrated sulphuric acid
Olivet: An olive grove
Oppilation: A stopping or obstruction
Orient: Brilliant or brightly shining
Ounce: The apothecary's ounce was approximately 31 grams, which is about 
10% heavier than the avoirdupois ounce of 28.35 g. used today.
Overflown: Flooded
Oxycrate: Vinegar diluted with water
Oxymel: A mixture of vinegar and honey
Painful: Painstaking
Pale: A fence
Palmer-worm: A large hairy caterpillar
Pamphylia: A region now in south-eastern Turkey
Panicle: A spike of flowers
Pantofles: Slippers
Pappose: Of a seed, having a feather-like appendage to allow it to be 
carried away by the wind
Parbreak: Vomit
Pearl: (Of the eye) a cataract
Peevish: Stupid or crazy
Pennyweight: One twentieth of an apothecary's ounce, or approximately 1.5 
grams
Per accidens: Accidentally
Perting: Standing upright
Phlegmon: A boil or similar inflammatory tumour
Phthisis: Tuberculosis of the lungs
Phymata: Tuberculous swellings
Physic: Medicine
Physical: Medicinal
Pilled: Skinned or peeled
Pilling: The skin or bark
Pineapple: A pine-cone
Pituitous: Caused by or containing excess of phlegm
Pointel: A pistil (or sometimes, a stamen) of a flower
Pomander: A small cloth bag, or a box with many small holes, filled with 
aromatic herbs, and carried on the person or hung in a room or wardrobe 
to perfume the air.
Pontic: a) Sour and astringent or
b) Of Pontus, a region in Asia Minor
Populeon: An ointment made from Poplar buds.
Pose: A cold in the head
Posset: A warm drink consisting of rich milk, mixed with wine or ale, 
sweetened and spiced.
Precious: Afflicted with carbuncles or similar swellings
Pretermit: To omit
Privy maim: An injury to the private parts
Pterygium: A (usually harmless) growth of pink tissue in the corner of 
the eye. Also called a haw
Pugil: A small handful
Pullen: Poultry
Pulsy: Tasting like peas or beans
Purples: Purpura, an ailment characterised by purple spots, caused by 
bursting of small blood vessels under the skin
Pursy: Asthmatic, short-winded
Push: A boil or pustule
Quacksalver: A quack doctor
Quartan: A fever recurring every third (fourth, by inclusive reckoning 
which is no longer used) day
Quickset: A hedge
Quitter: Pus
Rankle: To fester, become ulcerated
Rathe: Early
Rear: (Of eggs) very lightly cooked. 
Reds: Menstrual flow
Reins: Kidneys
Remove: To transplant
Rhaetia: Eastern Switzerland and nearby areas of Bavaria and Austria
Rim: The peritoneum, a membrane surrounding the abdominal organs
Rogation Week: The sixth week after Easter, the Thursday of which is the 
Feast of the Ascension of Jesus Christ
Rosinniness: Resinousness
Ruby: A large, bright red boil or pimple on the face
Saint Anthony's Fire: Erysipelas, a streptococcal infection causing 
reddish inflamed patches on the skin; or any similar ailment
Saintonge: A former province of France, between the rivers Gironde and 
Loire
Sal gemmæ, Salgem: Rock salt
Salve colour: Dark brown
Sandarac: Red arsenic sulphide
Sanguine: Of, or resembling, blood; blood-coloured
Sanguinolent: Bloody
Sanguis draconis: "Dragon's blood: " the resin of the dragon tree 
(Dracæna draco); also used of other red juices.
Sanies: A thin pus or fluid discharge
Sanious: Oozing a thin pus or fluid discharge
Saucefleme: A swelling of the face accompanied by inflammation
Saunders: Red sandalwood
Scab of Naples: Syphilis
Scirrhus: A hard and painless tumour
Scoggin's heirs: Farts
Scolopender: A centipede
Scouring: Violent diarrhoea
Scruple: One twenty-fourth of an apothecary's ounce, or about 1.3 grams
Searced: Sieved
Secondine: The afterbirth or placenta
Sere: Withered
Serpigo: Ringworm (Tinea), a fungal disease of the skin
Several: Separate
Share: The groin
Shiver: A splinter of stone
Siege: Excrement or excretion
Simple: A medicinal herb
Simpling: Collecting plants for medical use
Sith: Since
Sleightly: Skilfully
Smitted: Infected with smut disease
Sod, Sodden: Boiled
Soluble: Not constipated
Sound of a fish: A swim-bladder
Span: Nine inches, or approximately 23 cm
Spather: A spatula
Spature: A spatula
Spittle: A hospital
Squat: A violent jolt or jar.
Squinancy, squincy: Illness:  Tonsilitis; Plant:  Blackcurrant
Stammel: Red
Staphyloma: An inflammation of the eye which results in it bulging out of 
its socket
Stean: A large earthenware pot with two handles
Stones: Testicles
Strangury: Slow and painful flow, or complete stoppage, of urine.
Stripe: A blow with a whip, cane, or similar weapon; the welt produced by 
it.
Stufe: A piece of cloth etc. made very hot with boiling water, for 
applying to a sore or swelling.
Sub præputio: Under the foreskin
Succade, sucket: Fruit or nuts preserved in sugar or syrup.
Succedaneum, (pl. Succedanea): A substitute
Sugar roset: A sweetmeat of crystallised sugar flavoured with rose-water
Surculous: Having or producing shoots
Surname: A nickname
Swart: Blackish or dark-coloured
Tansy: (If not the name of a plant) A custard pudding
Tare: The common vetch (Vicia sativa) or its seed
Temperature: Degree of "hotness" or "coldness"  see Degree above
Terms: (Of a woman) Menstrual flow
Terra Sigillata: A reddish astringent clay from Lemnos
Tertian: A fever recurring every second (third, by inclusive reckoning 
which is no longer used) day 
Testern: A sixpenny piece
Tetter: An itchy skin rash
Thrum: A bunch of loose threads, or the stamens of a flower resembling 
such
Treacle: Generally, any kind of medicine; more specifically, a salve 
composed of a number of different ingredients, regarded as useful against 
a wide variety of ailments
Treacle of Vipers: A medicine containing, amongst other ingredients, 
viper's flesh. It was believed to be a sovereign antidote against 
poisons, and especially snakebite
Trochisk: A tablet or pastille
Tunned: Brewed
Tympany: Swelling of the abdomen caused by gas in the digestive tract.
Unsavoury: Tasteless and scentless
Untoiled: Uncultivated
Vallesians: Inhabitants of the Valais, an area in Southern Switzerland 
and the contiguous part of Italy
Venenate: Poisonous
Verjuice: Sour apple or grape juice
Vindelicia: An area now in southern Germany, east of the Black Forest
Vulnerary: A medicine used for healing wounds
Wamble: Of the belly, to seem to move about within the body, as happens 
with acute nausea.
Wambling: Nausea
Warden: A large variety of pear
Watchet: A light blue colour
Welt: A narrow strip of material put on the edge of a garment, etc., as a 
border, binding, or hem; a frill, fringe, or trimming. (OED)
Whites: Leucorrhoea, a whitish purulent discharge from a woman's 
genitals.
Whitlow: An inflamed sore beside or under the fingernail or in a finger 
joint.
Wimble: A gimlet or drill-bit
Writhen: Twisted
Yard: The penis. Conduit of the yard:  The urethra
Yexing: Hiccuping


Glossary of Latin descriptive words in plant names.

Gerard and Johnson wrote before Linnaeus' binomial system, 
but the standard way of naming plants in their day was 
(name of plant in Latin) + (descriptive words, often several
of them.) For example in Chap. 6 of Book 2, Rapistrum flore
albo erucæ foliis means Rapistrum (Radish) with white flowers,
and leaves like Eruca (Rocket). This glossary gives the
meanings  of the descriptive words. 
Names of other plants (as Rocket in the example above)
are not shown.
Note that the endings of many of these words change to agree
with the gender or case of the preceding word; for example, 
albus, alba, album, albo all mean white.
Also that -que added to the end of a word means and,
-ior means more and -issimus 
means most.

Abortiva: Premature
Acaulis: Without a stem
Acetabulum: Of the hip-socket
Acetosa: Sour-tasting
Acroschiston: Split at the top
Aculeis: Stinging
Acutum: Sharp
Adulterina: False
Ægyptius: Of Egypt
Æstivalis, æstiva: Of summer
Agrestis: Of the fields or countryside
Agria: Wild
Alba: White
Albida: Whitish
Aldroandi: Of Ulisse Aldrovandi, an Italian botanist (d. 1605)
Alopecuri: Of foxes
Alpinum: Of the Alps
Alterum: Other
Altilis: Fat
Altissimus: Highest
Amarum: Bitter
Ambarvalis: Relating to the ceremony of Rogation, a Church procession and 
service 
celebrated during the three days before Ascension Thursday. This is forty 
days after Easter, 
and so falls in May or early June. 
Amerina: Of Ameria, (modern name Amelia), a town in central Italy
Amno: Delightful
Amoris: Of love
Amygdaloides: Almond-like
Anglica, anglicana , anglorum: Of England
Angustifolia: Narrow-leaved
Apulei: Of Apuleius, author of a herbal about 400 AD.
Aquaticus, aquatile: Of water
Arborea , arborescens: Tree-like
Arenolis: Of sand
Arvensis, arvorum: Of tillage fields
Asininus: Of a donkey
Asper: Rough
Asperior: More rough or jagged
Assurgens: Rising up
Atrarubente: Blackish red
Atropurpurescens: Blackish purple
Atticus: Of Attica, the area around Athens in Greece
Attollens: Rising up
Aurea: Golden
Auricomus: Golden-haired
Auriculae: Ears
Austriacus: Of Austria
Aut: Or
Aut potius: Or rather
Avicennæ: Of Abu Sina, known in the West as Avicenna, a Persian physician 
and naturalist 
of the 10th & 11th Centuries. 
Bacca: Berry
Bacciferum: Berry-bearing
Bætica: Of Boeotia, an area of Greece north of Athens 
Barbarum: Of Barbary, strictly North Africa west of Egypt, but often used 
in a more general 
sense to mean any Arab country 
Batrachioides: Frog-like
Belgarum: Of the Belgians
Biflorum: Two-flowered or twice-flowering
Boelii: Of Boelius, a Dutch contemporary of Johnson.
Borussicum: From Prussia
Bosci: Of the woods
Botryodes: Like a bunch of grapes
Brabantica: Of Brabant, an area now divided between France, Belgium and 
the Netherlands
Brevioribus: With shorter
Bubonium: Of buboes, which are swellings of inflamed lymph glands in the 
groin
Bubula: Of a cow or ox
Bulbosa: Bulbous in shape or having bulbs
Bursa: A purse
Cæli: Of the sky
Cærulea: Blue
Calamistrato: Curled
Calicuthium: Of Calicut, a city in India, also called Kozhikode 
Cameraria: Climbing
Campestris: Of the fields
Candido: Pure white
Caninum: Of dogs
Cantabrica: Of Cambridge
Capillaris: Hairy, hair-like
Capitata: Headed
Capite: Head
Cardamantica: Like Cress
Cardiaca: Of the heart
Castoris: Of a beaver
Caulis: With a stem
Cava: Hollow
Centunculi: A patchwork of different colours
Ceratites: Horned
Cerebrum: Of the brain
Cervi: Of deer
Chalcedonica: Of Chalcedon, a suburb of Istanbul now called Kadikoy
Chamæ-: Dwarf
Chela: A claw
Chironium: Of Chiron the centaur
Cilicia: Of Cilicia, a Roman province encompassing what is now the 
eastern part of the south 
coast of Turkey
Citrina: Lemon-yellow
Clavellata, Clavatus: Club-shaped
Clusii: Of Carolus Clusius (15261609) a French/Dutch botanist who wrote 
extensively on 
plants.
Clypeatum: Resembling a round shield
Cocciger, Coccifera: Scarlet-bearing
Coccinia: Scarlet coloured
Cognata: Known as
Cognatum: Related to
Columbinum: Of doves
Comoso: Long-haired
Concava: Hollow
Constantinopolitanum: Of Istanbul
Convallium: Of the valley
Cordatum: Heart-shaped
Cordi: Of the heart, or of Valerius Cordus, (1515-1544) whose 
Dispensatorium, one of the 
greatest early modern pharmacopoeias was published in 1546.  
Corniculatum: Horned
Corymbifera: Having berries like Ivy
Coxendicum: Of the hips
Crassus: Thick, fleshy
Crenato: Notched
Creticum: Of Crete
Crispum: With curled leaves
Cruciata: Crossing or cross-shaped
Cuculi: Of the cuckoo
Culinaria: Used in cooking
Cypria: Of Cyprus
Dæmonum: Of demons
Dalechampii: Of Jacobus Dalechampius (Jacques Dalechamp), 1513-1588, a 
French 
physician, botanist and scholar.
Damascena: Of Damascus
Daphnoides: Like Bay or Laurel
Decima: Tenth
Denticulatus: Toothed
Diaboli: Of the Devil
Dioscoridis: Of Dioscorides, a 1st Century AD Greek medical writer
Dissectis: Deeply cut
Distincta: Separate
Domestica: Of the household
Dulcis: Sweet
Dumetorum: Of thorn bushes or hedges
Duracina: Having hard fruit
Durius: Harder
Echinata : Prickly
Edulis: Edible
Effigio: Shaped like
Elegantissimus: Most elegant
Enneaphyllos: Having nine leaves
Erectior: More upright
Erraticum: Wandering
Excelsa: Very high
Exigua: Slender
Exoticum: Foreign
Fabago: Like beans
Facie: Appearance
Falcata: Like a scythe-blade
Fatua, fatuina: Simple, foolish
Ferens: Bearing
Ferruginea: Iron-coloured
Ferulaceum: Like Fennel
Fibrinum: Of a beaver
Fimbriatis: Fibrous
Fistula: Having a tube
Flammeus: Flaming, fiery
Flandrorum: Of Flanders, an area making up the northern part of modern 
Belgium
Flavo: Yellow
Florens: Flowering
Flos, Flore: Flower
Flosculis: With little flowers
Fluidum: Flowing
Fmina: Female. The old herbarists regarded some plants as male and 
others as female, on 
what basis is unclear.
Ftida: Stinking
Ftidagarum: Stinking of rotten fish
Foliis: Leaves; in (name of other plant) foliis = having leaves like the 
other plant
Forficulum: A scissors or shears
Fortis: Strong
Fragiferum: Strawberry-bearing
Frisicum: Of Frisia, an area now in Northern Holland.
Fructum: Fruit
Fruticosior: More shrubby 
Fruticosum, frutescens: Shrubby, having many shoots.
Fuchsii: Of Leonhard Fuchs or Fuchsius, (15011566), a German physician 
and botanist 
whose New Herbal was the first to use accurate and detailed illustrations 
to identify the 
plants. 
Fugax: Fleeting
Fullonum: Of fullers (workers who clean and prepare cloth after it has 
been woven)
Furcatum: Forked
Fuscum: Dark-coloured
Galericulata: Having a skull-cap
Galli, Gallica: Of France
Gallinæ: Of hens
Galloprovinciæ: Of Provençe, in Southeastern France
Gallorum: Of the French
Geminata: Twinned
Germanicum: Of Germany
Giganteum: Giant
Glabrum: Smooth
Globosus: Globe-shaped
Græcum: Of Greece
Grandius: Great
Gruinale: Crane-like
Guttata: Speckled
Hæmatoides: Like blood
Hederaceum: Like Ivy
Helvetica: Of Switzerland
Heptaphyllos: Seven-leaved
Heraclea, herculea: Of Hercules
Heracleotica: Of Hercules, or of one of the several towns called 
Heracleia or Heracleum
Herbariorum: Of herbarists
Herbido : Grass-like
Hibernum: Of winter
Hiericontea: Of Jericho
Hierosolymitanus: Of Jerusalem
Hirci, hircinus: Of a billy-goat
Hirsutum: Hairy
Hirundinariæ: Of swallows, swallow-tailed
Hispanica: Of Spain
Hispanorum: Of the Spanish
Hispido: Prickly or bristly
Hortensis: Of the garden
Humilis: Low-growing
Hyemale: Of winter
Illyricus: Of Illyria, the eastern shore of the Adriatic
Ilva: Of Elba, an island in the Mediterranean between Corsica and Italy. 
Improbus: Bad, false
Incanum: Grey or hoary
Indium, Indicum: Of India
Iners: Inactive
Infectoria: Used in dyeing
Infernalis: Of Hell
Inguinalis: Of the groin
Inodora: Scentless
Inutilis: Useless
Inversa: Upside-down
Irriguam: Watered, irrigated
Iudaica: Jewish
Laciniatis: Having flaps
Laconia: Of Sparta
Lactea, lactescens: Milky
Lactifica: Milk-making
Lacustris: Of lakes
Læthale: Deadly
Lævis: Light
Lanuginoso: Downy or woolly
Lassulata: Worn out
Latifolium: Broad-leaved
Latiore: Wider
Latissimo: Widest
Lato: Wide
Leguminosa: Pod-bearing, leguminous
Leporina, Leporis: Of hares
Leptophyllon: Slender-leaved
Liburnica: Of Liburnia, an area on the Adriatic coast of Croatia. 
Lignosum. Lignea: Woody
Lingua: A tongue
Littoreum: Of the seashore
Lobelii: Of Matthias de Lobel or Lobelius, a Flemish Botanist (d. 1616)
Longissimo: Longest
Lunaris: Of the Moon
Lupina: Of wolves
Lusitanica: Of Lusitania, a Roman province corresponding roughly to 
modern Portugal.
Lutea: Golden yellow
Lutetiana: Of Paris
Lycnhites: A candle wick
Lycocotonon: Wolf-slayer
Macrorhizon: Large-rooted
Maculostum, maculatum: Stained or marked
Magnus, maius: Large
Major: Larger
Malus: An apple
Maniacum: Insane
Mansue: Soft, gentle
Mansuefacta: Tame
Mariæ, Marianus: Of (the Virgin) Mary
Marina: Of the sea or the seaside
Mas: Male. The old herbarists regarded some plants as male and others as 
female, on what 
basis is unclear.
Massiliensium: Of Marseille, in France
Mater: Mother
Matronalis: Of the mother
Matthioli: Of Matthiolus, or Pietro Andrea Mattioli, an Italian botanist 
and physician of the 
16th Century, who translated and expanded Disocorides' Materia Medica
Maxima: Largest
Mechliniesne: Of Mechelen, a city in Belgium.
Media: Medium, middle
Mellita: Of honey
Mesuæ: Of Mesua, or Masawaiyh, an 8th-century Persian medical writer. 
Mexicanum: Of Mexico
Miniato: Painted with red lead
Minimum: Smallest
Minor: Smaller
Minus: Small
Mirabile: Wonderful
Mithridate: An antidote
Mitius: Mild
Mollior: Softer
Monachi: Of monks
Monspeliensium: Of Montpellier, a city in the South of France
Montanus: Of the mountains
Montis Ceti: Of Mons Cetium, a hill and region in Lower Austria
Mordax: Biting or stinging
Mortua: Dead
Moschata: Smelling like musk
Moysis: Of Moses
Multifido: Divided into many parts
Multiplex: Double-flowered
Muralis, murorum: Of walls
Muricatum: Pointed
Muris, murinum: Of mice
Muscoso: Mossy
Myrsinitis: Resembling or smelling of myrrh
Napifolia: Turnip-leaved
Narbonense : Of Narbonne, a city in the South of France
Nemorum, nemorosus: Of open woodland
Niger, Nigro: Black
Nigricans: Blackish
Niveum: Snowy, of snow
Noctu: By night
Nodosa: With nodes or joints on the stem
Nonum: Ninth
Nostras: Our
Nothum: Bastard
Nutante: Nodding
Obsoniorum: Used for sauces
Obtuso: Blunt
Odoratum: Strong-smelling
Odoriferum: Aromatic
Officinarium, officinalis: Used in medicine
Olens: Smelling
Omnium: Of everything
Opii odore vehementi: Smelling strongly of opium
Ornans: Decorating, adorning
Pagana: Rustic, of the countryside
Pallida: Pale or colourless
Palustris: Of the swamp
Pannonicum: Of Pannonia, a Roman province encompassing present-day 
western Hungary, 
eastern Austria, northern Croatia, north-western Serbia, northern 
Slovenia, western Slovakia 
and northern Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Paralius: Growing by the seaside
Pardalianches: Leopard-killing
Parvum: Small
Passerina: Of a sparrow
Pastoris: Of shepherds
Patavinum: Of Padua, a city in Italy
Pelagicum: Of the sea
Peleponnense: Of the Peleponnese, the southern part of mainland Greece
Peltatum: Half-moon shaped
Penæ: Of Pierre Pena, a 16th Century French herbarist.
Pentagonia: Five-sided
Pentaphylla: Five-leaved
Perampla: Very large
Perdicium: Of partridges
Peregrina: Wandering
Perfoliata: Through the leaf
Perpusillum: Extremely small
Persicum: Of Persia
Perticalis: Used for poles
Peruana, peruviana: Of Peru, or South America generally
Pes: A foot
Petræum: Of stones, either meaning growing in stony ground, or used for 
treating kidney or 
bladder stones
Phacoides: Like a lentil
Pinnula: A little plume
Planum: Flat
Plebia: Lowly
Pleno: Full
Plinii: Of Pliny the Elder, a 1st Century AD Roman writer, author of an 
encyclopædic 
Natural History
Poetarum: Of the poets
Polyanthemum, polyanthus: Having many flowers
Polyschides: Having many narrow strips
Polyspermon: Having many seeds
Pomiferum: Apple-bearing
Pompeiana: Of Pompeii
Ponticum: Of Pontus, an area now in Turkey on the south coast of the 
Black Sea
Porcellia: Of little pigs
Porcinum: Of pigs
Praæmorsa: Bitten off at the end
Præcox: Early appearing or flowering
Prænestina: Of Prænestis, now called Palestrina, a town about 35 
kilometres east of Rome. 
Praestantiore: More excellent
Pratense, Pratorum: Growing in meadows
Primum: First; either the first described, or else the earliest flowering 
or appearing
Prior: Earlier
Proveniens: Arising from
Pulcherrima: Most beautiful
Pulchrum: Beautiful
Pullo: Blackish or very dark-coloured
Pumilum: Dwarf
Pumulum: Of wild vines
Punctus: A point or prick
Pungens: Strong-smelling
Punica, Punicea: Of Carthage, an area corresponding to modern Tunisia.
Purpurascens: Purplish
Purpurea: Purple
Pusilla: Very small
Putei: Of a well
Pyriformis: Pear-shaped
Pyxidatus: Like a box or cup
Quartus: Fourth
Quasi: As if
Quernis: Of Oak leaves
Quorundam: Of certain things or people
Radicatum: Rooted
Radice, Radix: Root
Ramosa: Branched
Recentiorum: Fresher
Recta: True, right
Rectum: Upright
Regalis, Regia: Royal
Repens: Creeping
Retuso: Blunt
Rhas: Flowing
Risus: Laughter
Romana: Of Rome
Romanorum: Of the Romans
Rotundifolium: Round-leaved
Rotundioribus: Rounder
Rubrum, Rubente, Rubellum: Red
Rustica, Rusticanus: Of the countryside
Sacerdotis: Holy
Salamanticum, salamanticensium: Of Salamanca, a city in Spain
Salictarius: Growing among willows
Salutaris: Useful for health
Sanguineum: Bloody
Sanguis draconis: Dragon's Blood, the resin of the Dragon Tree, native to 
Madeira and the 
Canary islands; also used of similar substances
Sanguisorba: Blood-stanching
Sardoa: Of Sardinia
Sarracenica: Of Saracens i.e. Muslim Arabs
Sativa: Cultivated
Saxatile: Found among rocks
Scabro: Rough
Scaligeri: Of Scaliger
Scansoria: Climbing
Secundum: Second
Segetum: Of cornfields
Semine: With seeds
Sempervirens: Evergreen
Sempervivum: Everlasting
Senescens: Growing old
Septentrionale: Of the North
Seriphium: Of Seriphos, a small rocky island in the Ægean Sea
Serotinus: Late ripening or flowering
Serpentis: Of snakes
Serratifolia: Having toothed leaves
Sessilis: Having no footstalk
Seu: Also called . . 
Silesiacum: Of Silesia, a province now in southwestern Poland
Siliqua: A pod or seed-vessel
Siliquastrum, siliquosus: Pod-bearing
Silvarum: Of the woods
Simiana: Of monkeys or apes
Simplex: Single-flowered
Sive: Also called . . 
Solutivus: Loosening, purging
Somniferum: Causing sleep
Species: A kind of
Spinosum: Prickly
Spumeum: Foaming or frothy
Spuria: False
Stans: Standing upright
Stella, Stellaria, Stellatum: Star-like
Sterilis: Sterile, not having seeds
Striatum: Striped
Studiosorum: Of scholars
Styriaca: Of Styria, or Steiermark, a province in Austria
Subrubens: Reddish
Suilla: Of pigs
Supercilium: An eyebrow
Supinum: Lying flat
Surrecta: Upright
Sylvaticus: Of the forest
Sylvestris: Wild
Tauricum: Of bulls, or of the Taurus, a mountain range in southern Turkey
Taurinensium: Of Turin, a city in northern Italy.
Tectorum: Of roofs
Tenerior: More delicate
Tenuifolia: Narrow-leaved
Tenuis: Narrow
Terræ: Of the earth
Terrestris: Of the land
Tertium: Third
Tetragonolobus: Having four lobes in the form of a square
Tetraphyllum: Four-leaved
Tinctoria: Used for dyeing
Torminalis: Used for treating colic
Tragi: Of Tragus, pen name of Hieronymus Bock, a 16th Century German 
botanist and 
physician
Tridentinum: Of Trent or Trento, a city in Northern Italy
Trimestris: Three-month
Trollius: Globe-shaped
Tuberosa: Having a swollen root, tuber or bulb(s)
Tunctanus: Of Tunis
Tunica: A tunic or undershirt
Umbellatum: Having flowers in an umbel
Umbilicum: Of the navel
Unguentaria: Used for ointments
Urceolaris: Of pitchers
Urens: Burning
Ursi: Of bears
Valdensium: Of the Waldensian Valleys, an area in the Alps in north-
western Italy 
Valentina: Of Valencia, in Spain
Vel: Or else
Veneris: Of the Goddess Venus, or physical love
Venti: Of the wind
Vermiculata: Full of worms
Verna, vernis: Of spring
Verrucaria: Of warts
Verum: True
Vesicarium: Of the bladder or having bladders
Via: A path or road
Vidua: Bereft
Villoso: Hairy
Viminalis: Used for basket-weaving
Vinciendo: Binding or wrapping around
Virens: Green
Virgata: Staff or stick-like
Virginianus: Of Virginia, or more generally, anywhere in North America
Viridis: Green
Viscosa: Sticky, used for birdlime or glue
Vitæ: Of life
Vitium: Imperfect
Vitraria: Of glass vessels
Vituli: Of a calf
Vulgare, Vulgatis: Common
Vulgatior: More common
Vulgatissimum: Most common
Vulneraria: Of wounds



