THE ADVENTURES OF GIL BLAS OF SANTILLANE

BY ALAIN-RENE LESAGE

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY TOBIAS SMOLLETT



BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTE AND ACKNOWLEGDEMENTS

The text of this version is taken from
The Adventures of Gil Blas by A.R. LeSage. Translated from the
French by Tobias Smollett with an introduction by William Morton
Fullerton. George Routledge & Sons. 1913
We wish to acknowledge the courtesy and helpfulness of Ms. Sally
Sweet of ITPS in clearing copyright for this publication.



THE AUTHOR'S DECLARATION.

THERE are some people in the world so mischievous as not to read 
a work without applying the vicious or ridiculous characters it
may happen to contain to eminent or popular individuals. I
protest publicly against the pretended discovery of any such
likenesses. My purpose was to represent human life historically 
as it exists: God forbid I should holdmyself out as a portrait-painter. 
Let not the reader then take to himself public property; for if he
does, he may chance to throw an unlucky light on his own character:
as Phaedrus expresses it, Stulte nudabit animi conscientiam.

Certain physicians of Castille, as well as of France, are
sometimes a little too fond of trying the bleeding and lowering
system on their patients. Vices, their patrons, and their dupes,
are of every day's occurrence, To be sure, I have not always
adopted Spanish manners with scrupulous exactness; and in the
instance of the players at Madrid, those who know their
disorderly modes of living may reproach me with softening down
their coarser traits: but this I have been induced to do from a
sense of delicacy, and in conformity with the manners of my own
country.


GIL BLAS TO THE READER.

READER! hark you, my friend! Do not begin the story of my life
till I have told you a short tale.
Two students travelled together from Penafiel to Salamanca.
Finding themselves tired and thirsty, they stopped by the side of
a spring on the road. While they were resting there, after having
quenched their thirst, by chance they espied on a stone near
them, even with the ground, part of an inscription, in some
degree effaced by time, and by the tread of flocks in the habit
of watering at that spring. Having washed the stone, they were
able to trace these words in the dialect of Castille; Aqui esta
encerrada el alma del licenciado Pedro Garcias. "Here lies
interred the soul of the licentiate Peter Garcias."

Hey-day! roars out the younger, a lively, heedless fellow, who
could not get on with his deciphering for laughter: This is a
good joke indeed: "Here lies interred the soul." . . . . A soul
interred! . . . . I should like to know the whimsical author of
this ludicrous epitaph. With this sneer he got up to go away. His
companion, who had more sense, said within himself: Underneath
this stone lies some mystery; I will stay, and see the end of it.
Accordingly, he let his comrade depart, and without loss of time
began digging round about the stone with his knife till he got it
up. Under it he found a purse of leather, containing an hundred
ducats with a card on which was written these words in Latin:
"Whoever thou art who hast wit enough to discover the meaning of
the inscription, I appoint thee my heir, in the hope thou wilt
make a better use of my fortune than I have done!" The student,
out of his wits at the discovery, replaced the stone in its
former position, and set out again on the Salamanca road with the
soul of the licentiate in his pocket.

Now, my good friend and reader, no matter who you are, you must
be like one or the other of these two students. If you cast your
eye over my adventures without fixing it on the moral concealed
under them, you will derive very little benefit from the perusal:
but if you read with attention you will find that mixture of the
useful with the agreeable, so successfully prescribed by Horace.



INTRODUCTION by WM. MORTON FULLERTON.


WALTER SCOTT, who craved the beatitude -- the word is his own -- 
that would attend the perusal of another book as entrancing as 
Gil Blas, was on the side of the untutored public which knows 
nothing of technical classifications or of M. Brunetière's theory 
of the "evolution des genres." Lesage's great book, though 
scarcely answering to the exact technical definition of a 
picaresque novel -- the biography of a picaro or rogue -- 
belongs, nevertheless, by its external form, to the picaresque 
type of fiction; and Scott would certainly have admitted that its 
picaresqueness was very good of its kind; that it was in fact as 
picaresque as could be expected of a Frenchman who was 
conspicuously an "honnête homme" and who signed himself 
"bourgeois de Paris." But In all likelihood he would have 
instantly added that it was not the "picaresqueness" of Gil Blas 
which has given that production its fame; and that, if Lesage's 
masterpiece has lived so long, and if it lives to-day with such a 
fresh and abundant life, this constant appeal has been made in 
spite of its resemblance to the Spanish picaresque prototype.
The application of the scientific method to literary criticism 
during the last generation has steadily tended to define works of 
art as "documents" of their epoch, and at the same time to 
classify them according to their structural variations rather 
than to accept them wholly as sources of human pleasure. The 
novel of Lesage for the purposes of classification, may be viewed 
as a picaresque novel, and it is interesting and legitimate to 
note that it is no doubt the best of its kind; yet there is 
equally little doubt that thousands of readers who do not know 
what the word "picaresque" means have for several generations 
regarded Gil Blas as simply the best of all novels, and that 
their reasons have been based on qualities quite independent of 
the mould into which it happened to be run. This is, in fact, the 
truth which these brief remarks are meant to set forth. In order 
to become a classic, and in order to hold its own among the books 
of the world, Gil Blas has had to live down its picaresqueness. 
The book has survived, and become one of the great books, 
notwithstanding the characteristics which seemed destined to 
confine it to the museum of antique literary forms.

I

Walter Scott's recognition of the supreme delightfulness of Gil 
Blas has not been general among the critics; indeed, the sense of 
its intrinsic value as a definition of life must rather be placed 
to the credit of the uncritical public. Voltaire, referring to 
Lesage in his "Siècle de Louis XIV," limits his praise to the 
remark : "His novel Gil Blas has survived because of the 
naturalness of the style." The curtness and inadequacy of this 
remark are probably due rather to the fact that Voltaire did not 
see beyond the superficial traits of this novel, its general 
picaresque atmosphere, than, as has so often been asserted, to 
any malicious intent to decry a book in which he supposed himself 
to have been held up to ridicule. [The traditional view is, 
however, plausible enough, as Mr. James Fitzmaurice-Kelly has 
shown in his introduction to the edition of Gil Blas published in 
the "World's Classics." There can be no doubt as to Lesage having 
ridiculed Voltaire in two of his plays.] Joubert, whose delicacy 
was a hothouse fruit grown in the thin subsoil and the 
devitalised air in which he was compelled to live, corroborates 
Voltaire, while revealing his own prejudices --after all, is not 
the main interest of criticism the light it throws upon the 
critic? -- in a characteristic utterance : "Lesage's novels would 
appear to have been written in a café by a domino-player, after 
spending the evening at the play." Evidently this is a long way 
from the "beatitude" of Walter Scott, but it is nearer the point 
of view of Mr. Warner Allen, who, while he notes in his 
remarkable General Introduction to his edition of Celestine in 
the Picaresque Section of the "Library of Early Novelists," to 
which this volume belongs, that Gil Blas "has a conscience," is 
ingeniously effective in arguing that the spirit of Gil Blas is 
essentially picaresque -- by which he means that realism and 
materialism are so predominantly its note that it must be classed 
well below "Don Quixote," where the heterogeneous picaresque 
material is beautifully fused by the 1magination of an idealist. 
"It is just because Lesage ignores the idealistic side of man," 
Mr. Allen says, "that Gil Blas misses being a great creation." On 
the other hand, La Harpe, who had read many books, but was no 
doubt the very opposite of a scientific critic of literature, 
praises Gil Blas not merely, as did Scott, for its entertainment, 
its agrément, but also for its moral inspiration; utile dulci, he 
insists, ought to be the device of this excellent book, 
forgetting that Lesage has himself written the precept of Horace 
on its title-page. "C'est l'école du monde que Gil Blas," La 
Harpe continues; and he remarks with singular felicity that 
Lesage in Gil Blas "has not fallen into that gratuitous profusion 
of minute detail which is nowadays taken to be truth." This 
comment suggests the probability that the reproach addressed to 
Lesage as to his lack of idealism is one that La Harpe would be 
disinclined to accept; and that they who make it have other 
standards for judging a work of art than those of the public to 
whom it is addressed, or indeed than those of the artist himself, 
especially such an artist as Lesage, who in his "Declaration" to 
the reader says expressly: "My sole aim has been to represent 
life as it is" : "Je ne me suis proposé que de représenter la vie 
des hommes telle qu'elle est."

Certain of Lesage's predecessors had already declared it to be 
their aim to write books which should be a wholesome reaction 
against the romanticism of the tales of chivalry that had so long 
delighted the taste of Europe. The sub-title of Alemán's famous 
novel, Guzmán de Alfarache, was Atalaya de la Vida which 
Chapelain translated by "Image" or "Miroir de la Vie Humaine." 
And long before Lesage, the author of L'Histoire Comique de 
Francion used almost the identical terms of Alemán and Lesage in 
announcing his tale "Nous avons dessein de voir une image de la 
vie humaine, de sorte qu'il nous en faut montrer ici diverses 
pièces." Francion, less picaresque than the hero of Alemán, was 
undoubtedly what he has been called by one of Lesage's 
biographers, M. Lintilhac, a direct precursor of Gil Blas; and 
there can be no question as to the importance of the influence 
exercised upon Lesage by Charles Sorel's admirable performance. 
But, however easily even a little erudition can discover possible 
prototypes of Gil Blas in the late sixteenth and early 
seventeenth century literature of both France and Spain -- 
however picaresque, in a word, Gil Blas may be, and whatever else 
it may be -- its picaresqueness was obviously, for Lesage, not an 
end in itself, but merely a device for carrying out his main 
project, which was "the representation of life"; and the meaning 
he put into those words was incomparably richer than was their 
connotation on the lips of an Alemán or even a Sorel. Lesage 
found ready to his hand one of the most convenient literary forms 
tint the novel ever assumed for the achievement of the end he had 
in view. That end was to hold a mirror up to Nature, and to the 
whole of Nature.

This ambitious project has haunted most observers who have 
essayed the novel form. It was obviously the end and aim of the 
author of Anna Karenina. But such is the complexity of human 
relations, such the variety of the kinds of human plights, such 
the swift passage of events, such are the endless differences and 
the fleeting character of the situations presented to the 
artistic consciousness at any moment of time, that only the most 
self-confident craftsman would be tempted, in his sane mind, to 
undertake their complete representation. The mirror in which a 
writer would seek to converge and to foreshorten the vast 
spectacle of things must needs be an all-but unmanageable 
revolving mirror of gigantic dimensions, unless some way he found 
of dispensing with such machinery altogether. Tolstoi made no 
attempt to achieve an artistic synthesis of life as a whole. He 
was content to map life out on a sort of Mercator's projection. 
Balzac despaired altogether of success, and confined himself to 
"doing" the multitudinous phases of human activity piecemeal. 
Lesage, on the other hand, hit on the happy idea of using the 
picaro type, the picaresque tradition in the novel, to facilitate 
his project. And what device, in fact, could be neater and more 
rapid? Certainly not the invention of Zola. The author of the 
series of the Rougon-Macquart set himself the task of describing 
the whole of French society at the end of the last century. He 
believed himself to have improved on Balzac's method by 
conceiving of a family-tree, with branches sufficiently wide-
spreading to illustrate every kind of activity of which French 
men or French women were capable in his time. The unity of his 
result was to be secured by postulating a family, the sum of the 
several lives of whose members should be coterminous with the 
Conscious existence of all their essential French fellow-types at 
a certain historical period. The plan was ingenious but 
artificially ingenuous.

Lesage, writing at the opening of the eighteenth century, had, it 
is true, the luck to be free to employ -- or, in fact, to have 
thrust upon him by the literary taste of his time -- a simpler 
trick for the representation of life, The literary air was full 
of picaresque odours. But, while Lesage came after Sorel and 
Alemán, and a score of other same story-tellers eager to temper 
the bombast of the hour by the saving salt of realism, the living 
models that surrounded him were quite as suggestive as any he 
might have been led to imitate in the books of his predecessors. 
Lintilhac, Cherbuliez, Brunetière, have dwelt in detail on this 
fact. What need had Lesage of a Guzmán or a Francion, when before 
his very eyes were such conspicuous models for the study of the 
valet parvenu as the Cardinals Dubois and Alberoni? And why go 
farther afield than the memoirs of the famous Gourville, which 
appeared in 1673, if one really feels impelled at all costs to 
account for the origin of Gil Blas, and to answer the futile 
question, "Where did Lesage get his idea?" That kind of inquiry 
explains everything except the essential. Homer and Shakespeare, 
Walter Scott and Corneille, have been put to the same torture as 
Lesage; and in the folds of their royal robes whole colonies of 
industrious parasitic moths are still furiously and often 
enviously at work. There is a "Lesage question" as there is an 
"Homeric question." But of this the public recks little. It 
sanely holds the view of M. de Maurepas, who wittily defined an 
author as "un homme qui prend aux livres tout ce qui lui passe 
par la tête." The public rightly judges the work of art by the 
criterion of pleasure which it is capable of giving. By that 
standard Gil Blas was long ago classed among the delightful books 
of the world. How many of its beauties are plagiarisms, or 
whether any of them are, are inquiries which the wise are content 
to leave to the mandarins of literature. [While the oft-reported 
story of the pillage by Lesage of a lost Spanish manuscript is a 
myth, it is incontestable that in the last books of Gil Blas he 
embodied long passages from a French translation of two Italian 
pamphlets on The Disgrace of Count Olivares, and from a book 
published in 1683 at Cologne entitled, Le Ministre Parfait ou le 
Comte-Duc. It is easy to prove also that Lesage had read 
Lazarilla de Tormes and a great many Spanish tales and plays; 
but, as M. Lintilhac says, so had Corneille, yet the Cid remains 
the Cid.]

II

The representation of life, then, is the avowed object of Lesage. 
Gil Blas is a microcosm. One might apply to Lesage the words of 
Balzac in allusion to the Comedie Humaine : "J'aurai porté une 
société toute entière dans ma tête." Gil Blas is a picture, 
singularly vivid and comprehensive, of the society of France at 
the close of the reign of Louis XIV and at the beginning of the 
Regency. Lesage, like St. Simon, sought to reflect the life of 
his time; but he is greater than St. Simon because of the larger 
general interest and significance of his literary form. Lesage 
was a gentleman, serenely, gaily taking notes on the world that 
surrounded him; but, as it pleased him to publish all his notes 
in his own lifetime, he adopted the novel form and the device of 
a Spanish atmosphere. Happily the society that surrounded Lesage 
in the Paris of the end of the seventeenth and the beginning of 
the eighteenth centuries was sufficiently complex and 
representative for an exhaustive picture of that world to assume 
a typical value.

Gil Blas is an encyclopadia of human types. No other single book 
contains so rich a collection of specimens of the genus homo. The 
success with which Lesage has introduced into Gil Blas virtually 
every form of human character, all sorts and conditions of men, 
is one of the miracles of literary art. The purely traditional 
picaro types, the vagabond and the beggar, the unscrupulous 
highwayman and the cut-throat, have, after all, comparatively 
small importance in the great comedy of life which Lesage 
depicts. These picaro types move in and out of the vast throng 
peopling his pages much as their counterparts in the flesh, the 
Apaches of the Marais quarter, jostled on the Pont Neuf the 
honest workman, the country bumpkin, the banker Turcaret, the 
bourgeois merchant, the strutting soldier, the barefoot monk, the 
daintily stepping petits maîtres, the authors and the actors, the 
ministers and the high officials, the servants and the 
adventurers, the priests, and the précieuses peering from their 
vinaigrettes. From the brigand cave that sheltered the jail-bird 
to the drawing-room of the Marquise de Chaves, from the boudoir 
of the enticing Laure to the cabinet of the Duke of Olivares, we 
visit every haunt of human activity and every social condition, 
conversing on the way with comedians, doctors, poets, lawyers, 
statesmen, valets, judges of the Inquisition, shopkeepers, 
courtesans, archbishops, and countless other actors of the Human 
Comedy. The final impression is that we have been in contact with 
the whole of life and with life as a whole. In this connexion it 
is pertinent to quote the verdict of Nodier in the "Notice" 
prefixed to the famous and now rare edition of Gil Blas 
containing the woodcuts of Jean Gigoux (Paris 1835) : "Comme il 
avait embrassé tout ce qui appartient à l'homme dans sa 
composition, il osa se prescrire d'embrasser toute la langue dans 
son travail." In other words, the grammarian and the 
lexicographer have in Gil Blas what Nodier is justified in 
calling "un monument de la langue."

We have witnessed the amusing spectacle arm-in-arm with Gil Blas 
de Santillane, a puppet of circumstance, but the most good-
natured of companions. No youth of sprightlier wit, of keener 
observation, or of more unfailing good humour was ever born of 
mortal man or immortal writer. Gil Blas is too agreeable a fellow 
for us to dream of parting company with him merely because of his 
escapades. Moreover, no one was ever long in his company without 
discovering that the firstfruit of his innate gift of observation 
is a habit of reflection gradually conducting him to the point of 
view of the great American pragmatist. For Gil Blas, as for 
Franklin, whatever else honesty may be, it is at all events the 
best policy. His ambition "to get on," to succeed, is not the 
ambition of a Julien Sorel. He is not ready and willing to 
succeed at any price. He would not say cynically with Marie-
Caroline of Naples :"je vois trop que la force seule compte et 
que la bonne foi ne sert qu'a être dupe." (Letter to the Marquis 
de Gallo, July 2, 1800.) In the case of Gil Blas, the habit of 
reflection has engendered a conscience. As he grows older in 
experience, the practical promptings of that conscience tend to 
arrest many an impulse to indulge his petty vices and to 
reinforce the virtues which he is prudent enough to regard as 
useful. His efforts to better his lot, while they bring to the 
fore his harmless vanity, and often indeed a certain less 
agreeable snobbishness, are after all to his credit. He is the 
first to laugh at his own mistakes, as he is the first to learn 
the lesson of his blunders. Here is a characteristic utterance of 
his: 

"I let myself go with the current for three weeks. I gave myself 
up to every form of voluptuous pleasure. But I will say at the 
same time that in the midst of it all a sense of remorse often 
mingled bitterness with my delight. Debauch did not stifle this 
remorse; my remorse increased, on the contrary, in proportion as 
I became more and more of a debauchee; and, as a result of my 
fortunately honest nature, the disorder of the theatrical life 
began to strike me with horror. Ah, wretch that you are, I said 
to myself, is it thus that you are fulfilling the expectations of 
your family? Is it impossible, merely because you are a servant, 
to be an honest man? Do you really find it worth while to live 
with such a vicious crew? Envy, anger and avarice dominate some 
of them; modesty is unknown to others. Some have given themselves 
up to intemperance and idleness, while in others pride has become 
insolence. Enough of this! I will dwell no longer with the seven 
deadly sins."

From all that we know of Lesage himself, as well as from a 
comparison of Gil Blas with the author's other Works, it seems 
legitimate to conclude that the good humour of his most famous 
hero is merely the expression of his own philosophic gaiety, at 
all events of his own disabused placidity, his bourgeois 
moderation and practical sense, his bias toward taking things 
easily. Life, when viewed at the angle adopted by Lesage, is an 
endless series of comic situations of a highly diverting and 
edifying character. Many of its conventions, which are nurtured 
on hypocrisy and snobbery, form a constant object of his good-
humoured raillery, just as they form the subject-matter of the 
comic verve of his great master, Molière. Both have the most 
refreshing sense of values and an unimpeachable intellectual 
honesty.

The most comic incidents of the tale are the series of rebuffs 
experienced by Lesage's naive hero before he finally reaches the 
point where discretion becomes second nature. With what touching 
and respectful candour does Gil Blas fall a prey to the 
pretensions and foibles of the great! Note the art with which 
Lesage, juxtaposing his hero with, for instance, an Archbishop of 
Granada, shows the vain prelate so enamoured of his own 
productions as to suffer no honest criticism from even the most 
disinterested of his acolytes. First cajoled by flattery, then 
infuriated by the naive frankness of Gil Blas, whose opinion he 
had solicited, he shows the rash youth the door; and Gil Blas 
returns once again to his life of adventure. It is his rich fund 
of good sense that saves him here as throughout his career, and 
that keeps his judgment sane and his heart true amid all the 
eccentricities and affectations and passing passions, and even 
the temptations, which surround and beset him during his 
checkered years. This jolly easy-going boon companion is a long 
time learning to be canny, but he is never really a fool. He 
comes out ultimately the poorer for the loss of a good many 
illusions, but profoundly convinced that straightforwardness in 
human relations is as desirable a good as simplicity in art.
Watch him with his friend Fabrice, turned writer à la mode, after 
having been the astute lackey who early in life defined with such 
cold-blooded cynicism the ideals of a servant: 

"le métier de laquais est impossible, je l'avoue, pour un 
imbecile; mais il a des charmes pour un garçon d'esprit. Un génie 
supérieur qui se met en condition ne fait pas son service 
matériellement comme un nigaud. Il entre dans une maison
pour commander plutôt que pour servir. Il commence par étudier 
son maître, il se prête à ses défauts, gagne sa confiance et le 
mène ensuite par le nez."

Fabrice, seized by "la rage d'écrire," as Gil Blas calls it, and 
convinced that he has in him the stuff of a great writer, ignores 
the sage advice of his employer who has warned him that poetry is 
not all beer and skittles, and comes up to Madrid, the centre of 
"les beaux esprits," "in order to form his taste." He falls under 
the influence of one of the leaders in a log-rolling literary 
set, and so adroitly imitates the fashion of the hour that he is 
regarded as one of the cleverest writers of the younger 
generation. He and Gil Blas meet, after many years, over a bottle 
of wine; and Fabrice reads to his friend a sonnet which Gil Blas 
finds absurdly obscure. "A poet capable of producing such rubbish 
as that," he says, "can deceive only his time"; and he adds, 
"your sonnet is merely pompous nonsense." The tortured, involved, 
affected style disgusts Gil Blas as such a style always disgusted 
Lesage, whose one ambition was to be an "écrivain naturel qui 
parle comme le commun des hommes," and who detested "le langage 
précieux" which the great ladies and certain wits of his time 
took to be the mark of genius and a password for immortality. 
Fabrice becomes angry. "Tu n'es qu'une bête avec ton style 
naturel," he exclaims; and he maliciously reminds Gil Blas of 
what befell him with the Archbishop of Granada. The allusion 
makes the two old friends laugh, and they finish the evening over 
a third bottle.

Yes, Gil Blas, who is a kind of joyous jack-of-all trades, 
capable, as Fabrice on another occasion puts it, of fulfilling 
all kinds of employment, since he possesses "l'outil universel," 
is interesting and sympathetic quite as much because of his sound 
sense and ready wit as because of his amusing adventures. But 
this good sense and this wit, it should be remembered, are the 
fruits of his experience. Gil Blas's character is slowly formed 
by life under the reader's eye. Successively the dupe of the 
habits and the manners, the prejudices and the ideals of each 
social condition which he traverses in his advance towards the 
stable equilibrium of middle age, he is too intelligent ever to 
remain dazzled by his surroundings for more than a brief period. 
You constantly hear him, after each fresh round with Fate, saying 
in his natural French way: "ça n'est pas ça; there must be some 
thing better than that in store for me!" Even the seduction of 
life at Court ceases eventually to charm him; and one of his most 
poignant regrets is the fact that he had forgotten under that 
corrupting influence his father and mother and the old canon, his 
uncle. He does his best later on to make amends for this neglect. 
On his way to his country place at Lirias he is suddenly filled 
with remorse, and he turns aside towards Oviedo, where his 
parents live. His own dream now is to watch over their last 
years; and he looks forward, on arriving home, to inscribing in 
gold letters on the door of his father's house the Latin verses:

"Inveni portum. Spes et Fortuna, valete!
Sat me lusistis; ludite nunc alios!"

Alas! it is almost too late, for he arrives just in time to bury 
his father. He had previously entered the country inn, where he 
had been recognised by the inn keeper with lively joy. "By Saint 
Anthony of Padua," his host had exclaimed, "here is the son of 
the good Blas de Santillane"; and his wife had chimed in with, 
"Why, yes, so it is. Oh, I recognise him. He is hardly changed. 
It's that wide-awake little Gil Blas who had more intelligence 
than inches. I can still see him dropping in here for a bottle of 
wine for his uncle's supper." Gil Blas has changed, nevertheless. 
Fabrice is too keen not to perceive it some time afterwards when 
Gil Blas visits him at the hospital. Fabrice remarks upon his 
modest bearing and observes: "You haven't the vain and insolent 
air that prosperity is wont to give." Gil Blas explains the 
reason why: "Les disgraces ont purifié ma virtu; et j'ai appris a 
l'école de l'adversité à jouir des richesses sans m'en laisser 
posséder." He is now and then to be a backslider still, but we 
know that he has learned the essential lesson of life. Really, as 
the Italians say, "il tempo è galantuomo."

III

The rapidity of the narrative enhances the effect of optimism 
which is so inspiriting throughout the whole book. The 
transitions from the episodes of bad luck to those of good 
fortune take place, as Smollett has already pointed out, so 
suddenly that the reader positively has no time to pity Gil Blas. 
He is speedily inspired with a firm confidence in Lesage's 
ingenuity, which somehow manages to extricate his hero from every 
possible embarrassment. Lesage's point of view, as an observer of 
life, is thus quickly revealed to be a lively sense of life's 
chronic succession of ups and downs, and of the merely relative 
importance of its plights. When Gil Blas loses his place with 
Count Galiano, he remarks:

"I began to lose courage when I found myself back again in so 
miserable a case. I had grown accustomed to the conveniences of 
existence, and I could no longer, as before, regard indigence 
with cynicism. Yet I will confess I was wrong to indulge in 
sadness after having so many times discovered that no sooner had 
Fortune upset me than it put me on my feet again."

Lesage accepts the stoical ideal of patience in adversity, but he 
does not accept it in the stoical way. His philosophy is the 
Christian belief in a Providence upon whom sane mortals may 
serenely rely. Providence, he knows, can be counted upon to hold 
the balance true on that Day of Judgment, when all human things 
will be set right, and when there will be a startling reversal of 
human verdicts. Convinced, like Bishop Butler, that things will 
be as they will be, his experience of life has taught him that 
the best philosophy is to bide one's me, all one's antennae out 
For Lesage the logical result of having been frequently a fool is 
to cease being dupe.

It would be possible and amusing to draw a parallel in this 
connection between the philosophy of Lesage and that of an even 
more successful French playwright of the present day, M. Alfred 
Capus -- who has not yet, however, written a Gil Blas -- and to 
contrast the manner of the two with that of Beyle in his 
characterisation of Julien Sorel, Gil Blas is too often, if you 
like, a genial rascal, as are so many of M. Capus's heroes, but 
he is never an odiously cynical one like his servant Scipion, and 
like Julien. While Lesage could say with Philinte, discreetly 
blaming the vices of mankind:

"Je prends tout doucement les hommes comme ils sont,
J'accoutume mon âme à soufirir ce qu'ils font . . . 
Oui, je vois ces défauts dont votre âme murmure
Comme vices unis à l'humaine nature,
Et mon esprit enfin n'est pas plus offensé
De voir un homme fourbe, injuste, intéressé,
Que de voir des vautours affamés de carnage,
Des singes malfaisants et des loups pleins de rage,"

Beyle did not confine himself to "accustoming his soul to suffer" 
the enormities that men commit, but positively created in Julien 
Sorel an unscrupulous professor of energy whom he would appear to 
have regarded as an excellent model. Lesage, on the other hand, 
must be looked upon as a moralist; a moralist indulgent, no doubt 
-- such indulgence was the finest flower of his inexhaustible 
knowledge of life --yet a moralist in the same sense in which 
Shakespeare and Molière are moralists. Moreover, Lesage has no 
cynical Blas forcing him to confine the subject-matter of his 
novel to such naturalistic notations as were the stock-in-trade 
of the Goncourts and, to a large extent, of Zola.
He had notably no such bias, either "cynical" or "moral," as has 
wittingly altered the reports of so many British observers of 
life, who have regarded the pursuit of literature as a mission, 
to be accepted with a high and strenuous purpose, for the 
improvement of their fellows. Thus, even a Thackeray wrote first 
and foremost for edification. In a recently published letter to 
his friend Robert Hall, Thackeray refers as follows to Vanity 
Fair:

"I want to leave everybody dissatisfied and unhappy at the end of 
the story -- we ought all to be with our own and all other 
stories. Good God! don't I see (in that maybe cracked and warped 
looking-glass in which I am always looking) my own weaknesses, 
wickednesses, lusts, follies, shortcomings? in company, let us 
hope, with better qualities about which we will pretermit 
discourse. We must lift up our voices about these and howl to a 
congregation of fools: so much, at least, has been my endeavour." 
(The Times, July 17, 1911.)

The idea of "howling to a congregation of fools" would have 
struck Lesage as a counsel of impertinent illbreeding, or, at all 
events, as a grotesque attitude for a self-respecting novelist. 
Of course, Thackeray was in the tradition of a literature which 
counts among its chief masterpieces the Pilgrim's Progress; but 
if the Puritan point of view is good sociology and good 
Tolstoism, it is not necessarily for that reason good art; and it 
would even seem to make "good art" a more difficult achievement. 
In the great book just mentioned there is no laugh of Tom Jones 
to clear the air. Thackeray would have seemed, indeed, in Vanity 
Fair to have been more of an artist than his pamphleteering 
preoccupations appeared likely to allow him to become. He himself 
states his object in that book to have been to indicate in 
cheerful terms that we are for the most part an abominably 
foolish and selfish people. Incorrigible misanthropist, he sets 
out to draw up a savage indictment of the society of his time. He 
is cheerful, as cheerful as he knows how to be; but, as he has 
resolved to give no one in his book a chance, his cheerfulness 
fails to produce all its intended effect. Finally, one and all, 
even Amelia, are branded because foredoomed. But what is the 
result? Gibbeted for an example, they inspire more pity than 
horror; and not only does all our sympathy go out to them against 
the despotic heartlessness of the author, who so unfairly nailed 
them to the cross, but we fail even to draw the whole of the 
useful general moral which Thackeray holds to be essential. Thus 
Thackeray upsets even his own ends; anxious, by the confessed 
clarion-toned morality of his appeal, to produce the effect aimed 
at by a prophet in Israel, he nevertheless inspires in his reader 
a quick and sane recoil before the arbitrary injustice, or, at 
all events, the incredibility of the author's misanthropy. In 
literary art, in fact, the only way to convey the illusion of 
reality is to tell the average truth about the average man.
Lesage, like the Tolstoi of the good period, had the tact and 
good sense to perceive this. He does not make the unscientific 
and inartistic blunder of humiliating his heroes. Like a Balzac 
or a Tolstoi or a Henry James, he gives them their full value, 
takes them for all they are worth. The pretension that 
naturalism, because superficially true to a certain aspect of 
life, is realism in the complete sense of the word, is a view 
which Lesage in Gil Blas triumphantly repudiates; and he differs 
from many playwrights of contemporary France, who appear to be so 
enamoured of caddishness as to regard its manifestations as pre-
eminently worthy of presentation in the novel or on the stage. 
One of the ablest of Lesage's commentators has called him the 
Homer of naturalism; no neater phrase could be found to define 
his importance and his manner.

Nor is it the fault of Lesage if his immediate influence upon the 
literature of his time was perhaps not wholly what he would 
himself have wished it to be. It is a commonplace to note that 
Lesage helped to prepare in France that eighteenth century with 
which he was in so many respects out of sympathy. There was a 
whole side of Lesage that was out of touch with the modern world 
surrounding him. M. Faguet seems to me absolutely right as to 
this point. The spirit, the attitude of Lesage are seventeenth-
century -- for, after all, the seventeenth century was realist 
while so eminently moralist; he believes in the superiority of 
the clear old form of expression; he abominates an affected 
style; he prefers natural utterance that everybody can understand 
to individual experiments in ingenious phraseology. Moreover, 
while not at all the conscious moralist, he is a moralist all the 
same; he has a certain generalising habit, the liking for large 
vistas, harmonious inclusive ranges of thought; his thought-
scapes have the perfection and the proportions of a garden by Le 
Nôtre. But it is nevertheless certain that the immense success of 
Lesage as a realist, the fact that he made realism look so easy, 
constituted a terrible incentive to imitation; and that, as a 
matter of fact, his example was just one of those which no writer 
could afford to follow who had not his marvellous good sense and 
his mental and moral poise. Without such moral balance and such 
good sense the would-be realist is almost certain to become 
addicted to the grosser forms of naturalism, to exercise, that 
is, his faculty of clear vision on special salient and 
picturesque, even salacious and perverse cases, rather than upon 
the types of the average world with which average men are 
familiar. Thus there can be no doubt that Lesage's unconcern for 
positive edification, his indifference to matters of conscience, 
was a trait of the eighteenth century, and a trait for which he 
may to a certain extent be held responsible. It was inevitable 
that he should find imitators, and that, in this sense, he may be 
said to open the way to a Crébillon fils and a Laclos, even to a 
Louvet, for whom he would have refused to be responsible, and to 
prepare an eighteenth century with which there is every reason to 
suppose he would have become utterly out of sympathy, not merely 
as a man, but as an artist in letters.

IV

It remains to consider Gil Blas as a work of literary art. In 
style it is one of the most perfect examples of narrative prose 
in the world, comparable for limpidity, ease, and precision, with 
that of Cervantes in Don Quixote. With regard to its composition, 
it is noticeable that the novel begins at the same pitch of calm 
lucidity which is to characterise it to the end. The reader feels 
that the promise of the author in his "Declaration," "I have 
merely undertaken to represent life as it is," is likely to be 
kept. Lesage speaks with authority. The artists who inspire 
confidence with their very first stroke are not numerous. They 
belong to the aristocracy of the masters. What do such certainty 
and distinction imply? They mean that the product is the fruit of 
a mature intelligence; that the artist, be he sculptor, writer, 
or painter, has not undertaken to express until his mind is, as 
we say, thoroughly made up as to the nature of its content, nor 
until he is serenely master of the means at his disposal; that, 
in a word, he knows his business. In the case of Lesage it is 
peculiarly significant that, when he published the first part of 
Gil Blas in 1715, he was already forty-seven years of age; that 
the second part did not appear until 1724, nine years later; and 
that he was already an old gentleman with a family of boys, one 
of whom had entered the Church, when he ended his lifework, by 
the publication of the third part, in 1735. Gil Blas, in short, 
is the product of the maturity of one of the keenest observers 
that ever looked out upon the spectacle of things. The broad 
good-humoured gaiety of the earlier book, which vibrates with a 
picaresque lilt, is shaded gradually down, in the second volume, 
into a finer, serener, more intellectual irony. This change 
betrays the natural evolution in the author's interests and 
curiosities during the period reaching from his forty-seventh to 
his sixty-seventh year. The gaiety of the six books of the first 
part is to be contrasted with the soberer, more reflective spirit 
of the tale as it proceeds. We seem to be suiting our pace to the 
increasingly graver temper of a man whose knowledge of life has 
become richer, his insight keener, his heart more tolerant and 
generous. With the steady elimination of the picaresque element 
the novel becomes more and more an inclusive criticism of life. 
The author seems to be brooding over his pages with a tenderer 
care, as if he were more and more conscious of the significance, 
the magnificence even, of his task.

It is one of the results of this long gestation that Gil Blas has 
become a book of world-wide popularity. In the history of letters 
it has been an inexhaustible source of energy. It inspired the 
realistic novel. From Smollett and Marivaux to Dickens and Zola, 
and even to an Anatole France and to a Pio Baroja, Lesage has 
been the avowed or unavowed model of those writers who have been 
passionately enamoured of life, and irrepressibly compelled to 
express it. The influence of Lesage on the author, for instance, 
of Le Rouge et le Noir and of La Chartreuse de Parme -- perhaps 
particularly on the Stendhal of the Chartreuse de Parme -- seems 
incontestable. In August 1804, Beyle, writing to his sister 
Pauline, recommends her to read Gil Blas in order to learn to 
know the world, and cites the famous anecdote of the Archbishop 
of Granada's sermons. In April 1805, he promises to bring her the 
book. In another undated letter to his sister, Beyle writes: "the 
most accurate picture of human nature as it is, in the France of 
the eighteenth century, is still the book of Lesage, Gil Blas. 
Meditate well this excellent work." And finally, in his Journal, 
under the date of "10 Floréal, an xiii, 1805," Beyle notes his 
intention to cure himself of romanticism, and to learn to judge 
men as they are, by re-reading a certain number of books, among 
which he mentions Beaumarchais, the tales and La Pucelle of 
Voltaire, Chamfort, and Gil Blas. That is to say, at the most 
impressionable period of his intellectual life Beyle read and re-
read Gil Blas; a fact which a discerning critic might easily 
guess, as to the truth of which, indeed, such a critic would feel 
an absolute conviction, and which the documents cited appear to 
leave beyond a doubt It would perhaps be an exaggeration to 
pretend that but for Gil Blas, Beyle would not have been 
Stendhal; but I may be permitted to quote the following passage 
from a private letter of M. Paul Arbelet, the editor of 
Stendhal's Journal d'Italie.

"Votre hypothèse me parait très séduisante. Il y a sans aucun 
doute quelque parenté intellectuelle entre Lesage et Stendhal, 
tous deux curieux d'observation morale, tous deux juges sans 
illusions des faiblesses humaines, mais point misanthropes, car 
ils s'indignent peu des vices ou des ridicules, qui les amusent 
plutôt ou les intéressent. D'ailleurs l'un et l'autre manquent 
d'imagination et de poésie. Je comprends donc très bien que vous 
ayez eu l'idée d'une influence de Lesage sur Stendhal."

Furthermore, while Lesage is all this, the fountain-head of a 
great literary current, he is at the same time, as a moralist, in 
the sanest Latin and French tradition, that which is marked, in 
successive epochs, by the serene temper of a Horace, by the gay 
science, the pantagruelism of a Rabelais, by the irony of a 
Beaumarchais, who "se hâta de rire de tout, de peur d'être obligé 
d'en pleurer," and finally by the tranquil mansuetude of a Renan: 
observers, one and all, who, after having told the towers of all 
the citadels of science, became amusedly aware that the only 
really absolute truth in the world is that all things are 
relative.


HISTORY OF GIL BLAS OF SANTILLANE.



BOOK THE FIRST.



CH. I. -- The birth and education of Gil Blas.


MY father, Blas of Santillane, after having borne arms for a long
time in the Spanish service, retired to his native place. There
he married a chamber-maid who was not exactly in her teens, and I
made my debut on this stage ten months after marriage. They
afterwards went to live at Oviedo, where my mother got into
service, and my father obtained a situation equally adapted to
his capacities as a squire. As their wages were their fortune, I
might have got my education as I could, had it not been for an
uncle of mine in the town, a canon, by name Gil Perez. He was my
mother's eldest brother, and my god-father. Figure to yourself a
little fellow, three feet and a half high, as fat as you can
conceive, with a head sunk deep between his shoulders, and you
have my uncle to the life. For the rest of his qualities, he was
an ecclesiastic, and of course thought of nothing but good
living, I mean in the flesh as well as in the spirit, with the
means of which good living his stall, no lean one, provided him.

He took me home to his own house from my infancy, and ran the
risk of my bringing up. I struck him as so brisk a lad, that he
resolved to cultivate my talents. He bought me a primer, and
undertook my tuition as far as reading went: which was not amiss
for himself as well as for me; since by teaching me my letters he
brushed up his own learning, which had not been pursued in a very
scholastic manner; and, by dint of application, he got at last to
read his breviary out of hand, which he had never been able to do
before. He would have been very glad to have taught me Latin, to
save expense, but, alas! poor Gil Perez! he had never skimmed the
first principles of it in the whole course of his life. I should
not wonder if he was the most ignorant member of the chapter,
though on a subject involving as many possibilities as there were
canons, I presume not to pledge myself for anything like
certainty. To be sure, I have heard it suggested, that he did not
gain his preferment altogether by his learning: but that he owed
it exclusively to the gratitude of some good nuns whose discreet
factor he had been, and who had credit enough to procure him the
order of priesthood without the troublesome ceremony of an
examination.

He was obliged therefore to place me under the correction of a
master, so that I was sent to Doctor Godinez, who had the
reputation of being the most accomplished pedant of Oviedo. I
profited so well under his instructions, that by the end of five
or six years I could read a Greek author or two, and had no very
inadequate conception of the Latin poets. Besides my classical
studies, I applied to logic, which enabled me to become an expert
arguer. I now fell in love with discussions of all kinds to such
an excess, that I stopped his Majesty's subjects on the high
road, acquaintance or strangers, no matter! and proposed some
knotty point of controversy. Sometimes I fell in with a clan of
Irish, and an altercation never comes amiss to them! That was
your time, if you are fond of a battle. Such gestures! such
grimaces! such contortions! Our eyes sparkling, and our mouths
foaming! Those who did not take us for what we affected to be,
philosophers, must have set us down for madmen.

But let that be as it will, I gained the reputation of no small
learning in the town. My uncle was delighted, because he
prudently considered that I should so much the sooner cease to be
chargeable to him. Come here, Gil Blas, quoth he one day, you are
got to be a fine fellow. You are past seventeen, and. a clever
lad; you must bestir yourself, and get forward in the world. I
think of sending you to the university of Salamanca: with your
wit you will easily get a good post. I will give you a few ducats
for your journey, and my mule, which will fetch ten or twelve
pistoles at Salamanca, and with such a sum at setting out, you
will be enabled to hold up your head till you get a situation.

He could not have proposed to me anything more agreeable: for I
was dying to see a little of life. At the same time, I was not
such a fool as to betray my satisfaction; and when it came to the
hour of parting, by the sensibility I discovered at taking leave
of my dear uncle, to whom I was so much obliged, and by calling
in the stage effect of grief, I so softened the good soul, that
he put his hand deeper into his pocket than he would have done,
could he have pried into all that was passing in the interior of
my hypocritical little heart. Before my departure I took a last
leave of my papa and mamma, who loaded me with an ample
inheritance of good advice. They enjoined me to pray to God for
my uncle, to go honestly through the world, not to engage in any
ill, and above all, not to lay my hands on other people's
property. After they had lectured me for a good while, they made
me a present of their blessing which was all my patrimony and all
my expectation. As soon as I had received it, I mounted my mule,
and saw the outside of the town.



CH. II -- Gil Blas' alarm on his road to Pegnaflor; his
adventures on his arrival  in that town; and the character of the
men with whom he supped.


HERE I am, then, on the other side of Oviedo, in the road to
Pegnaflor, with the world before me, as yet my own master, as
well master of a bad mule and forty good ducats, without
reckoning on a little supplementary cash purloined from my much-
honoured uncle. The first thing I did was to let my mule go as
the beast liked, that is to say, very lazily. I dropped the rein,
and taking out my ducats, began to count them backwards and
forwards in my hat. I was out of my wits for joy, never having
seen such a sum of money before, and could not help looking at it
and sifting it through my fingers. I had counted it over about
the twentieth time, when all at once my mule, with head raised,
and ears pricked up, stood stock still in the middle of the high
road. I thought, to be sure, something was the matter; looked
about for a cause, and perceiving a hat upon the ground, with a
rosary of large beads, at the same time heard a lugubrious voice
pronounce these words: Pray, honoured master, have pity on a poor
maimed soldier! Please to throw a few small pieces into this hat;
you shall be rewarded for it in the other world. I looked
immediately on the side whence the voice proceeded, and saw, just
by a thicket, twenty or thirty paces from me, a sort of a
soldier, who had mounted the barrel of a confounded long carbine
on two cross sticks, and seemed to be taking aim at me. At a
sight which made me tremble for the patrimony of the Church
committed to my care, I stopped short, made sure of my ducats,
and taking out a little small change, as I rode by the hat,
placed to receive the charity of those quiet subjects who had not
the courage to refuse it, dropped in my contribution in detail,
to convince the soldier how nobly I dealt by him. He was
satisfied with my liberality, and gave me a blessing for every
kick I gave my mule in my impatience to get out of his way; but
the infernal beast, without partaking in the slightest degree of
my impatience, went at the old steady pace. A long custom of
jogging on fair and softly under my uncle's weight had
obliterated every idea of that motion called a gallop.

The prospect of my journey was not much improved by this
adventure as a specimen. I considered within myself that I had
yet some distance to Salamanca, and might, not improbably, meet
with something worse. My uncle seemed to have been very imprudent
not to have consigned me to the care of a muleteer. That, to be
sure, was what he ought to have done; but his notion was, that by
giving me his mule, my journey would be cheaper; and that entered
more into his calculation than the dangers in which I might be
involved on the road. To retrieve his error, therefore, I
resolved, if I had the good luck to arrive safe at Pegnaflor, to
offer my mule for sale, and take the opportunity of a muleteer
going to Astorga, whence I might get to Salamanca by a similar
conveyance. Though I had never been out of Oviedo I was
acquainted with the names of the towns through which I was to
pass; a species of information I took care to procure before my
setting out.

I got safe and sound to Pegnaflor, and stopped at the door of a
very decent looking inn. My foot was scarcely out of the stirrup
before the landlord was at my side, overwhelming me with public-
house civility. He untied my cloakbag with his own hands, swung
it across his shoulders, and ushered my Honour into a room, while
one of his men led my mule to the stable. This landlord, the most
busy prattler of the Asturias, ready to bother you impertinently
about his own concerns, and, at the same time, with a sufficient
portion of curiosity to worm himself into the knowledge of yours,
was not long in telling me that his name was Andrew Corcuelo;
that he had seen some service as a sergeant in the army, which he
had quitted fifteen months ago, and married a girl of Castropol,
who, though a little tawny or so, knew how to make both ends meet
as well as the best of them. He told me a thousand things besides
which he might just as well have kept private. Thinking himself
entitled, after this voluntary confidence, to an equal share of
mine, he asked me in a breath, and without further preface,
whence I came, whither I was going, and who I was. To all this I
felt myself bound to answer, article by article, because, though
rather abrupt in asking them, he accompanied each question with
so apologetic a bow, beseeching me with so submissive a grimace
not to be offended at his curiosity, that I was drawn in to
gratify it whether I would or no. Thus by degrees did we get into
a long conversation, in the course of which I took occasion to
hint that I had some reasons for wishing to get rid of my mule,
and travel under convoy of a muleteer. He seemed on the whole to
approve of my plan, though he could not prevail with himself to
tell me so briefly; for he introduced his remarks by descanting
on all the possible and probable mischances to which travellers
are liable on the road, not omitting an awkward story now and
then. I thought the fellow would never have done. But the
conclusion of the argument was, that if I wanted to sell my mule,
he knew an honest jockey who would take it off my hands. I begged
he would do me the favour to fetch him, which was no sooner said
than done.

On his return he introduced the purchaser, with a high encomium
on his integrity. We all three went into the yard, and the mule
was brought out to show paces before the jockey, who set himself
to examine the beast from head to foot. His report was bad
enough. To be sure, it would not have been easy to make a good
one; but if it had been the pope's mule, and this fellow was to
cheapen the bargain, it would have been just the same: nay, to
speak with all due reverence, if he had been asked to give an
opinion of the pope's great toe, from that disparaging habit of
his, he would have pronounced it no better than the toe of any
ordinary man. He laid it down, therefore, as a principle, that
the mule had all the defects a mule could have: appealing to the
landlord for a confirmation of his judgment, who, doubtless, had
reasons of his own for not controverting his friend's assertion.
Well! says the jockey, with an air of in difference, What price
have you the conscience to ask for this devil of an animal? After
such a panegyric, and master Corcuelo's certificate, whom I was
fool enough to take for a fair-dealing man and a good judge of
horse-flesh, they might have had the mule for nothing. I
therefore told the dealer that I threw myself on his mercy: he
must fix his own sum, and I should expect no more. On this he
began to affect the gentleman, and answered that I had found out
his weak side when I left it to his honour. He was right enough
in that! his honour was his weak side! for instead of bidding up
to my uncle's estimate of ten or twelve pistoles, the rascal had
the impudence to offer three ducats, which I accepted with as
light a heart as if I had got the best of the bargain.

Having disencumbered myself of my mule in so tradesmanlike a
manner, I went with my landlord to a carrier who was to set out
early the next morning for Astorga, and engaged to call me up in
time. When we had settled the hire of the mule, as well as the
expenses on the road, I turned back towards the inn with
Corcuelo, who, as we went along, got into the private history of
this muleteer. When I had been pestered with all the tittle-
tattle of the town about this fellow, the changes were just
beginning to ring on some new subject; but, by good luck, a
pretty-looking sort of a man very civilly interrupted my
loquacious friend. I left them together, and sauntered on without
the slightest suspicion of being at all concerned in their
discourse.

I ordered supper as soon as I got to the inn. It was a fish day:
but I thought eggs were better suited to my finances. While they
were getting ready I joined in conversation with the landlady,
whom I had not seen before. She seemed a pretty piece of goods
enough, and such a stirring body, that I should have concluded,
if her husband had not told me so, her tavern must have plenty of
custom. The moment the omelet was served up I sat down to table
by myself, and had scarcely got the relish of it, when my
landlord walked in, followed by the man who had stopped him in
the street. This pleasant gentleman wore a long rapier, and
might, perhaps, be about thirty years of age. He came up to me in
the most friendly manner possible. Mr Professor, says he, I have
just now heard that you are the renowned Gil Blas of Santillane,
that ornament of Oviedo and luminary of philosophy. And do my
eyes behold that very greatest of all great scholars and wits,
whose reputation has run hither so fast before him? Little do you
think, continues he, directing his discourse to the landlord and
landlady, little do you imagine, I say, what good luck has
befallen you. Why, you have got hold of a treasure. In this young
gentleman you behold the eighth wonder of the world. Then running
up and throwing his arms about my neck, Excuse me, added he; but
worlds would not bribe me to suppress the rapturous emotions your
honoured presence has excited.

I could not answer him so glibly as I wished, not so much for
want of words as of breath; for he hugged me so tight that I
began to be alarmed for my wind pipe. As soon, however, as I had
got my head out of durance, I replied, Signor cavalier, I had not
the least conception that my name was known at Pegnaflor. Known?
resumed he in the same pompous style; we keep a register of all
great persons within a circuit of twenty leagues round us. You
have the character of a prodigy here; and I have not a shadow of 
doubt, but one day or other Spain will be as proud of numbering
you among her rare productions, as Greece of having given birth
to her seven wise men. This fine speech was followed as before;
and I really began to think that with all my classical honours I
should at last be doomed to share the fate of Antaeus. If I had
been master of ever so little experience, I should not have been
the dupe of his rhodomontade. I must have discovered him by his
outrageous compliments, to be one of those parasites who swarm in
every town, and get into a stranger's company on his arrival, to
appease the wolf in their stomachs at his expense; but my youth
and vanity tempted me to draw a quite opposite conclusion. My
admirer was very clever in my eyes, and I asked him to supper on
the strength of it. Oh! most willingly, cried be: with all my
heart and soul. My fortunate star predominates, now that I have
the honour of being in company with the illustrious Gil Blas of
Santillane, and I shall certainly make the most of my good
fortune as long as it lasts. My appetite is rather delicate, but
I will just sit down with you by way of being sociable, and if I
can swallow a bit! only just not to look sulky; for we
philosophers are careless of the body.

These words were no sooner out of his mouth, than my panegyrist
took his seat opposite to me. A cover was laid for him in due
form and order. First he fell on the omelet with as much
perseverance as if he had not tasted food for three whole days.
By the complacency with which he eyed it I was morally certain
the poor pancake was at death's door. I therefore ordered its
heir apparent to succeed; and the business was despatched with
such speed, that the second made its appearance on the table,
just as we; -- no: -- I beg pardon; -- just as he had taken the
last lick of its predecessor. He pressed forward the main
business, however, with a diligence and activity proportioned to
the importance of the object he had in view: so that he contrived
to load me with panegyric on panegyric, without losing a single
stroke in the progress of mastication. Now all this gave me no
slender conceit of my pretty little self. When a man eats, he
must drink. The first toast of course was my health. The second,
in common civility, was my father and mother, whose happiness in
having such an angel of a son, he could not sufficiently envy or
admire. All this while he kept filling my glass, and challenging
me to keep pace with him. It was impossible to be backward in
doing justice to such excellent toasts and sentiments: the
compliments with which they were seasoned did not come amiss; so
that I got into such a convivial mood, at observing our second
omelet to disappear not insensibly, as just to ask the landlord
if he could not find us a little bit of fish. Master Corcuelo,
who to all appearance played booty with the parasite, told me he
had an excellent trout; but those who eat him must pay for him. I
am afraid he is meat for your masters. Meat for our masters!
exclaims my very humble servant in an angry tone of voice: that
is more than you know, my friend. Are you yet to learn that the
best of your larder is not too good for the renowned Gil Blas of
Santillane? Go where he will, he is fit to table with princes.

I was very glad that he took up the landlord's last expression;
because if he had not, I should. I felt myself a little hurt at
it, and said to Corcuelo with some degree of hauteur: Produce
this trout of yours, and I will take the consequences. The
landlord, who had got just what he wanted, set himself to work,
and served it up in high order. At the first glance of this third
course I saw such pleasure sparkling in the parasite's eyes, as
proved him to be of a very complying temper; just as ready to do
a kindness by the fish, as by those said eggs of which he had
given so good an account. But at last he was obliged to lay down
his arms for fear of accidents; as his magazine was crammed to
the very throat. Having eat and drank his fill, he bethought him
of putting a finishing hand to the farce. Master Gil Blas, said
he, as he rose from the table, I am too well pleased with my
princely entertainment to leave you without a word of advice, of
which you seem to stand in much need. From this time forward be
on your guard against extravagant praise. Do not trust men till
you know them. You may meet with many another man, who, like me,
may amuse himself at your expense, and perhaps carry the joke a
little further. But do not you be taken in a second time, to
believe yourself; on the word of such fellows, the eighth wonder
of the world. With this sting in the tail of his farewell speech
he very coolly took his leave.

I was as much alive to so ridiculous a circumstance, as I have
ever been in after-life to the most severe mortifications. I did
not know how to reconcile myself to the idea of having been so
egregiously taken in, or, in fact, to lowering of my pride. So,
so! quoth I, this rascal has been putting his tricks upon
travellers, has he? Then he only wanted to pump my landlord! or
more likely they were both in a story. Ah! my poor Gil Blas, thou
hadst better hide thy silly head! To have suffered such knaves as
these to turn thee into ridicule! A pretty story they will make
of this! It is sure to travel back to Oviedo; and will give our
friends a hopeful prospect of thy success in life. The family
will be quite delighted to think what a blessed harvest all their
pious advice has produced. There was no occasion to preach up
morals to thee; for verily thou hast more of the dupe than the
sharper in thy composition. Ready to tear my eyes out or bite my
fingers off from spite and vexation, I locked myself up in my
chamber and went to bed, but not to sleep; of which I had not got
a wink when the muleteer came to tell me, that he only waited for
me to set out on his journey. I got up as expeditiously as I
could; and while I was dressing Corcuelo put in his appearance,
with a little bill in his hand; -- a slight memorandum of the
trout! -- But paying through the nose was not the worst of it;
for I had the vexation to perceive, that while I was counting
over the cost, this hang-dog was chuckling at the recollection of
the night before. Having been fleeced most shamefully for a
supper, which stuck in my stomach though I had scarcely come in
for a morsel of it, I joined the muleteer with my baggage, giving
to as many devils as there are saints in the calendar, the
parasite, the landlord, and the inn.



CH. III.  --  The muleteer's temptation on the road; its
consequences, and the situation of Gil Blas between Scylla and
Charybdis.


I WAS not the only passenger. There were two young gentlemen of
Pegnaflor; a little chorister of Mondognedo, who was travelling
about the country, and a young tradesman of Astorga, returning
home from Verco with his new-married wife. We soon got
acquainted, and exchanged the usual confidence of travellers,
telling one another whence we came and whither we were going. The
bride was young enough; but so dark-complexioned, with so little
of what a man likes to look at in a woman, that I did not think
her worth the trouble. But she had youth and a good crummy person
on her side, and the muleteer, being rather less nice in his
taste, was resolved to try if he could not get into her good
graces. This pretty project occupied his ingenuity during the
whole day; but he deferred the execution till we should get to
Cacabelos, the last place where we were to stop on the road. We
alighted at an inn in the out skirts of the town, a quiet
convenient place, with a landlord who never troubled himself
about other people's concerns. We were ushered into a private
room, and got our supper snugly: but just as the cloth was taken
away in comes our carrier in a furious passion: -- Death and the
devil! I have been robbed. Here had I a hundred pistoles in my
purse! But I will have them back again. I am going for a
magistrate; and those gentry will not take a joke upon such
serious subjects. You will all be put to the rack, unless you
confess, and give back the money. The fellow played his part very
naturally, and burst out of the room, leaving us in a terrible
fright.

We had none of us the least suspicion of the trick, and being all
strangers, were afraid of one another. I looked askance at the
little chorister, and he, perhaps, had no better opinion of me.
Besides, we were all a pack of greenhorns, and were quite
unacquainted with the routine of business on these occasions. We
were fools enough to believe that the torture would be the very
first stage of our examination. With this dread upon our spirits,
we all made for the door. Some effected their escape into the
street, others into the garden: but the whole party preferred the
discretion of running away to the valour of standing their
ground. The young tradesman of Astorga had as great an objection
to bone-twisting as the rest of us: so he did as Eneas, and many
another good husband has done before him; -- ran away and left
his wife behind. At that critical moment the muleteer, as I was
told afterwards, who had not half so much sense of decency as his
own mules, delighted at the success of his stratagem, began
moving his motives to the citizen's wife: but this Lucrece of the
Asturias, borrowing the chastity of a saint from the ugliness of
the devil who tempted her, defended her sweet person tooth and
nail; and showed she was in earnest about it by the noise she
made. The patrol, who happened to be passing by the inn at the
time, and knew that the neighbourhood required a little looking
after, took the liberty of just asking the cause of the
disturbance. The landlord, who was trying if he could not sing in
the kitchen louder than she could scream in the parlour, and
swore he heard no music but his own, was at last obliged to
introduce the myrmidons of the police to the distressed lady,
just in time to rescue her from the necessity of a surrender at
discretion. The head officer, a coarse fellow, without an atom of
feeling for the tender passion, no sooner saw the game that was
playing, than he gave the amorous muleteer five or six blows with
the butt end of his halberd, representing to him the indecency of
his conduct in terms quite as offensive to modesty as the naughty
propensity which had called forth his virtuous indignation.
Neither did he stop here; but laid hold of the culprit, and
carried plaintiff and defendant before the magistrate. The
former, with her charms all heightened by the discomposure of her
dress, went eagerly to try their effect in obtaining justice for
the outrage they had sustained. His Worship heard at least one
party; and after solemn deliberation pronounced the offence to be
of a most heinous nature. He ordered him to be stripped, and to
receive a competent number of lashes in his presence. The
conclusion of the sentence was, that if the Endymion of our
Asturian Diana was not forthcoming the next day, a couple of
guards should escort the disconsolate goddess to the town of
Astorga, at the expense of this mule-driving Acteon.

For my part, being probably more terrified than the rest of the
party, I got into the fields, scampering over hedge and ditch,
through enclosures and across commons, till I found myself hard
by a forest. I was just going for concealment to ensconce myself
in the very heart of the thicket, when two men on horseback rode
across me, crying, Who goes there? As my alarm prevented me from
giving them an immediate answer, they came to close quarters, and
holding each of them a pistol to my throat, required me to give
an account of myself; who I was, whence I came, what business I
had in that forest, and above all, not to tell a lie about it.
Their rough interrogatives were, according to my notion, little
better than the rack with which our friend the muleteer had
offered to treat us. I represented myself however as a young man
on my way from Oviedo to Salamanca; told the story of our late
fright, and faithfully attributed my running away in such a hurry
to the dread of a worse exercise under the torture. They burst
into an immoderate fit of laughter at my simplicity; and one of
them said: Take heart, my little friend; come along with us, and
do not be afraid; we will put you in a place where the devil
shall not find you. At these words, he took me up behind him, and
we darted into the forest.

I did not know what to think of this odd meeting; yet on the
whole I could not well be worse off than before. If these gentry,
thought I to myself, had been thieves, they would have robbed,
and perhaps murdered me. Depend on it, they are a couple of good
honest country gentlemen in this neighbourhood, who, seeing me
frightened, have taken compassion on me, and mean to carry me
home with them and make me comfortable. But these visions did not
last long. After turning and winding backward and forward in deep
silence, we found ourselves at the foot of a hill, where we
dismounted. This is our abode, said one of these sequestered
gentlemen. I looked about in all directions, but the deuce a bit
of either house or cottage: not a vestige of human habitation!
The two men in the mean time raised a great wooden trap, covered
with earth and briars, to conceal the entrance of a long shelving
passage under-ground, to which from habits the poor beasts took
very kindly of their own accord. Their masters kept tight hold of
me, and let the trap down after them. Thus was the worthy nephew
of my uncle Perez caught, just for all the world as you would
catch a rat.



CH. IV. -- Description of the subterraneous dwelling and its
contents.


I NOW knew into what company I had fallen; and I leave it to any
one to judge whether the discovery must not have rid me of my
former fear. A dread more mighty and more just now seized my
faculties. Money and life, all given up for lost! With the air of
a victim on his passage to the altar did I walk, more dead than
alive, between my two conductors, who finding that I trembled,
frightened me so much the more by telling me not to be afraid.
When we had gone two hundred paces, winding down a declivity all
the way, we got into a stable lighted by two large iron lamps
suspended from the vault above. There was a good store of straw,
and several casks of hay and corn with room enough for twenty
horses: but at that time there were only the two which came with
us. An old Negro, who seemed for his years in pretty good case,
was tying them to the rack where they were to feed.

We went out of the stable. By the melancholy light of some other
lamps, which only served to dress up horror in its native
colours, we arrived at a kitchen where an old harridan was
broiling some steaks on the coals, and getting supper ready. The
kitchen furniture was better than might be expected, and the
pantry provided in a very plentiful manner. The lady of the
larder's picture is worth drawing. Considerably on the wrong side
of sixty!  --  In her youth her hair had been of a fiery red;
though she would have called it auburn. Time had indeed given it
the fairer tint of grey; but a lock of more youthful hue,
interspersed at intervals, produced all the variegated effect of
the admired autumnal shades. To say nothing of an olive
complexion, she had an enormous chin turning up, an immense nose
turning down, with a mouth in the middle, modestly retiring
inwards, to make room for its encroaching neighbours. Red eyes
are no beauty in any animal but a ferret; -- hers were purple.

Here, dame Leonard, said one of the horsemen as he presented me
to this angelic imp of darkness, we have brought you a young lad.
Then looking round, and observing me to be miserably pale, Pluck
up your spirits, my friend; you shall come to no harm. We want a
scullion, and have met with you. You are a lucky dog! We had a
boy who died about a fortnight ago: you shall succeed to the
preferment. He was rather too delicate for his place. You seem a
good stout fellow, and may live a week or two longer. We find you
in bed and board, coal and candle; but as for day-light, you will
never see that again. Your leisure hours will pass off very
agreeably with Leonard, who is really a very good creature, and
tolerably tender-hearted; you will have all your little comforts
about you. I flatter myself you have not got among beggars. At
this moment the thief seized a flambeau; and as I feared, "with
zeal to destroy;" for he ordered me to follow him.

He took me into a cellar, where I saw a great number of bottles
and earthen pots full of excellent wine. He then made me cross 
several rooms. In some were pieces of cloth piled up; in others,
stuffs and silks. As we passed through I could not help casting a
sheep's eye at the gold and silver plate peeping out of the
different cupboards. After that, I followed him into a great hall
illuminated by three copper lustres, and serving as a gallery
between the other rooms. Here he put fresh questions to me;
asking my name;  -- why I left Oviedo; -- and when I had
satisfied his curiosity: Well, Gil Blas, said he, since your only
motive for quitting your native place was to get into something
snug and eligible, to be sure you must have been born to good
luck, or you would not have fallen into our hands. I tell you
once for all, you will live here on the fat of the land, and may
souse over head and ears in ready money. Besides, you are in a
place of perfect safety. The officers of the holy brotherhood
might pass through the forest a hundred times without discovering
our subterraneous abode. The entrance is only known to myself and
my comrades. You may perhaps ask how it came to be contrived,
without being perceived by the inhabitants in the neighbourhood.
But you are to understand, my friend, that it was made long ago,
and is no work of ours. After the Moors had made themselves
masters of Granada, of Arragon, and nearly the whole of Spain,
the Christians, rather than submit to the tyranny of infidels,
betook themselves to flight, and lay concealed in this country,
in Biscay, and in the Asturias, whither the brave Don Pelagio had
withdrawn himself. They lived in a state of exile, on the
mountains, or in the woods, dispersed in little knots. Some took
up their residences in natural caves, others in artificial
dwellings under-ground, like this we are in. In process of time,
when by the blessing of Providence they had driven their enemies
out of Spain, they returned to the towns. From that time forth
their retreats have served as a rendezvous for the gentlemen of
our profession. It is true that several of them have been
discovered and destroyed by the holy brotherhood: but there are
some yet remaining; and, by great good luck, I have tenanted this
without paying any rent for it almost these fifteen years:
Captain Rolando, at your service! I am the leader of the band;
and the man you saw with me is one of my troopers.



CH. V.  -- The arrival of the banditti in the subterraneous
retreat, with an account of their pleasant conversation.


JUST as Captain Rolando had finished his speech six new faces
made their appearance in the hall; the lieutenant and five
privates returning home with their booty. They were hauling in
two great baskets full of sugar, cinnamon, pepper, figs, almonds,
and raisins. The lieutenant gave an account of their proceedings
to the captain, and told him they had taken these articles, as
well as the sumpter-mule, from a grocer of Benavento. An official
report having thus been made to the prime-minister, the grocer's
contribution was carried to account; and the next step was to
regale after their labours. A large table was set out in the
hall. They sent me back to the kitchen, where dame Leonarda told
me what I had to do. I made the best of a bad bargain, finding
the luck ran against me; and, swallowing my grievances, set
myself to wait on my noble masters.

I cleaned my plate, set out my sideboard, and brought up my wine.
As soon as I announced dinner to be on table, consisting of two
good black peppery ragouts for the first course, this high and
mighty company took their seats. They fell too most voraciously.
My place was to wait; and I handed about the glasses with so
butler-like an air, as to be not a little complimented on my
dexterity. The chief entertained them with a short sketch of my
story, and praised my parts. But I had recovered from my mania by
this time, and could listen to my own panegyric with the humility
of an anchorite or the contempt of a philosopher. They all seemed
to take a liking to me, and to think I had dropped from the
clouds on purpose to be their cup-bearer. My predecessor was a
fool to me. Since his death, the illustrious Leonarda had the
honour of presenting nectar to these gods of the lower regions.
But she was now degraded, and I had the felicity of being
installed in her office. Thus, old Hebe being a little the worse
for wear, young Ganymede tripped up her heels.
A substantial joint of meat after the ragouts at length blunted
the edge of their appetites. Eating and drinking went together:
so that they soon got into a merry pin, and made a roaring noise.
Well done, my lads! All talkers and no listeners. One begins a
long story, another cuts a joke; here a fellow bawls, there a
fellow sings; and they all seem to be at cross purposes. At last
Rolando, tired of a concert in which he could hardly hear the
sound of his own voice, let them know that he was maestro di
capella, and brought them into better tune. Gentlemen, said he, I
have a question to put. Instead of stunning one another with this
infernal din, had we not better enjoy a little rational
conversation? A thought is just come into my head. Since the
happy day that united us we have never had the curiosity to
inquire into each other's pedigrees, or by what chain of
circumstances we were each of us led to embrace our present way
of life. There would be no harm in knowing who and who are
together. Let us exchange confidence: we may find some amusement
in it. The lieutenant and the rest, like true heroes of romance,
accepted the challenge with the utmost courtesy, and the captain
told the first story to the following effect: --  Gentlemen, you
are to know that I am the only son of a rich citizen in Madrid.
The day of my birth was celebrated in the family by rejoicings
without end. My father, no chicken, thought it a considerable
feat to have got an heir, and my mother was kind enough to suckle
me herself. My maternal grandfather was still living: a good old
man, who did not trouble himself about other people's concerns,
but said his prayers, and fought his campaigns over and over
again; for he had been in the army. Of course I was idolized by
these three persons; never out of their arms. My early years were
passed in the most childish amusements, for fear of hurting my
health by application. It will not do, said my father, to hammer
much learning into children till time has ripened their
understanding. While he waited for this ripening, the season went
by. I could neither read nor write: but I made up for that in
other ways. My father taught me a thousand different games. I
became perfectly acquainted with cards, was no stranger to dice,
and my grandfather set me the example of drawing the long bow,
while he entertained me with his military exploits. He sung the
same songs repeatedly one after another every day; so that when,
after saying ten or twelve lines after him for three months
together, I got to boggle through them without missing, the whole
family were in raptures at my memory. Neither was my wit thought
to be at all less extraordinary; for I was suffered to talk at
random, and took care to put in my oar in the most impertinent
manner possible. O the pretty little dear! exclaimed my father,
as if he had been fascinated. My mother made it up with kisses,
and my grandfather's old eyes overflowed. I played all sorts of
dirty and indecent tricks before them with impunity; everything
was excusable in so fine a boy: an angel could not do wrong.
Going on in this manner, I was already in my twelfth year without
ever having a master. It was high time; but then he was to teach
me by fair means: he might threaten, but must not flog me. This
arrangement did me but little good; for sometimes I laughed when
my tutor scolded: at others, I ran with tears in my eyes to my
mother or my grandfather, and complained that he had used me ill.
The poor devil got nothing by denying it. My word was always
taken before his, and he came off with the character of a cruel
rascal. One day I scratched myself with my own nails, and set up
a howl as if I had been flogged. My mother ran, and turned the
master out of doors, though he vowed and protested he had never
lifted a finger against me.

Thus did I get rid of all my tutors, till at last I met with one
to my mind. He was a bachelor of Alcala. This was the master for
a young man of fashion. Women, wine, and gaming, were his
principal amusements. It was impossible to be in better hands. He
hit the right nail on the head: for he let me do what I pleased,
and thus got into the good graces of the family, who abandoned me
to his conduct. They had no reason to repent. He perfected me
betimes in the knowledge of the world. By dint of taking me about
to all his haunts, he gave such a finish to my education, that
barring literature and science, I be came an universal scholar.
As soon as he saw that I could go alone in the high road to ruin
he went to qualify others for the same journey.
During my childhood I had lived at home just as I liked, and did
not sufficiently consider, that now I was beginning to be
responsible for my own actions. My father and mother were a
standing jest. Yet they were themselves thrown into convulsions
at my sallies; and the more ridiculous they were made by them,
the more waggish they thought me. In the mean time I got into all
manner of scrapes with some young fellows of my own kidney; and,
as our relations kept us rather too short of cash for the
exigencies of so loose a life, we each of us made free with
whatever we could lay our hands on in our own families. Finding
this would not raise the supplies, we began to pick pockets in
the streets at night. As ill luck would have it, our exploits
came to the knowledge of the police. A warrant was out against
us; but some good-natured friend, thinking it a pity we should be
nipped in the bud, gave us a caution. We took to our heels, and
rose in our vocation to the rank of highwaymen. From that time
forth, gentlemen, with a blessing on my endeavours, I have gone
on till I am almost the father of the profession, in spite of the
dangers to which it is exposed.

Here the captain ended, and it came to the turn of the
lieutenant. Gentle men, extremes are said to meet; -- and so it
will appear from a comparison of our commander's education and
mine. My father was a butcher at Toledo. He passed, with reason,
for the greatest brute in the town, and my mother's sweet
disposition was not mended by the example. In my childhood, they
whipped me in emulation of one another; I came in for a thousand
lashes of a day! The slightest fault was followed up by the
severest punishment. In vain did I beg for mercy with tears in my
eyes, and protest that I was sorry for what I had done. They
never excused me, and nine times out of ten flogged me for
nothing. When I was under my father's lash, my mother, not
thinking his arm stout enough, lent her assistance, instead of
begging me off. The favours I received at their hands gave me
such a disgust, that I quitted their house before I had completed
my fourteenth year, took the Arragon road, and begged my way to
Saragossa. There I associated with vagrants, who led a merry life
enough. They taught me to counterfeit blindness and lameness, to
dress up an artificial wound in each of my legs, and to adopt
many other methods of imposing on the credulity of the charitable
and humane. In the morning, like actors at rehearsal, we cast our
characters, and settled the business of the comedy. We had each
our exits and our entrances; till in the evening the curtain
dropped, and we regaled at the expense of the dupes we had
deluded in the day. Wearied, however, with the company of these
wretches, and wishing to live in more worshipful society, I
entered into partnership with a gang of sharpers. These fellows
taught me some good tricks: but Saragossa soon became too hot to
hold us, after we had fallen out with a limb of the law, who had
hitherto taken us under his protection. We each of us provided
for ourselves, and left the devil to take the hindmost. For my
part, I enlisted in a brave and veteran regiment, which had seen
abundance of service on the king's highway: and I found myself so
comfortable in their quarters, that I had no desire to change my
birth. So that you see, gentlemen, I was very much obliged to my
relations for their bad behaviour; for if they had treated me a
little more kindly, I might have been a blackguard butcher at
this moment, instead of having the honour to be your lieutenant.
Gentlemen, -- interrupted a hopeful young freebooter who sat
between the captain and the lieutenant, -- the stories we have
just heard are neither so complicated nor so curious as mine. I
peeped into existence by means of a country woman in the
neighbourhood of Seville. Three weeks after she had set me down
in this system, a nurse child was offered her. You are to
understand she was yet in her prime, comely in her person, and
had a good breast of milk. The young suckling had noble blood in
him, and was an only son. My mother accepted the proposal with
all her heart, and went to fetch the child. It was entrusted to
her care. She had no sooner brought it home, than, fancying a
resemblance, she conceived the idea of substituting me for the
brat of high birth, in the hope of drawing a handsome commission
at some future time for this motherly office in behalf of her
infant. My father, whose morals were on a level with those of
clodhoppers in general, lent himself very willingly to the cheat:
so that with only a change of clouts the son of Don Rodrigo de
Herrera was packed off in my name to another nurse, and my mother
suckled her own and her master's child at once in my little
person.

They may say what they will of instinct and the force of blood!
The little gentleman's parents were very easily taken in. They
had not the slightest suspicion of the trick; and were eternally
dandling me till I was seven years old. As it was their intention
to make me a finished gentleman, they gave me masters of all
kinds; but I had very little taste for their lessons, and above
all, I detested the sciences. I had at any time rather play with
the servants or the stable boys, and was a complete kitchen
genius. But tossing up for heads or tails was not my ruling
passion. Before seventeen I had an itch for getting drunk. I
played the devil among the chamber-maids; but my prime favourite
was a kitchen girl, who had infinite merit in my eyes. She was a
great bloated horse-god-mother, whose good case and easy morals
suited me exactly. I boarded her with so little circumspection
that Don Rodrigo took notice of it. He took me to task pretty
sharply; twitted me with my low taste; and, for fear the presence
of my charmer should counteract his sage counsels, showed the
goddess of my devotions the outside of the door.

This proceeding was rather offensive; and I determined to be even
with him. I stole his wife's jewels; and ravishing my Helen from
a laundress of her acquaintance, went off with her in open day,
that the transaction might lose nothing in point of notoriety.
But this was not all. I carried her among her relations, where I
married her according to the rites of the church, as much from
the personal motive of mortifying Herrera, as from the patriotic
enthusiasm of encouraging our young nobility to mend the breed.
Three months after marriage, I heard that Don Rodrigo had gone
the way of all flesh. The intelligence was not lost upon me. I
was at Seville in a twinkling, to administer in due form and
order to his effects; but the tables were turned. My mother had
paid the debt of nature, and in her last agonies had been so much
off her guard as to confess the whole affair to the curate of the
village and other competent witnesses. Don Rodrigo's son had
already taken my place, or rather his own, and his popularity was
increased by the deficiency of mine; so that as the trumps were
all out in that hand, and I had no particular wish for the
present my wife was likely to make me, I joined issue with some
desperate blades, with whom I began my trading ventures.

The young cut-purse having finished his story, another told us
that he was the son of a merchant at Burgos; that, in his youth,
prompted more by piety than wit, he had taken the religious habit
and professed in a very strict order, and that a few years
afterwards he had apostatized. In short, the eight robbers told
their tale one after another, and when I had heard them all, I
did not wonder that the destinies had brought them together. The
conversation now took a different turn. They brought several
schemes upon the carpet for the next campaign; and after having
laid down their plan of operations, rose from table and went to
bed. They lighted their night candles, and withdrew to their
apartments. I attended Captain Rolando to his. While I was
fiddling about him as he undressed: Well! Gil Blas, said he, you
see how we live! We are always merry; hatred and envy have no
footing here; we have not the least difference, but hang together
just like monks. You are sure, my good lad, to lead a pleasant
life here; for I do not think you are fool enough to make any
bones about consorting with gentlemen of the road. In what does
ours differ from many a more reputable trade? Depend on it, my
friend, all men love two hands in their neighbour's purse, though
only one in their own. Men's principles are all alike; the only
difference lies in the mode of carrying them into effect.
Conquerors, for instance, make free with the territories of their
neighbours. People of fashion borrow and do not pay. Bankers,
treasurers, brokers, clerks, and traders of all kinds, wholesale
and retail, give ample liberty to their wants to overdraw on
their consciences. I shall not mention the hangers-on of the law;
we all know how it goes with them. At the same time it must be
allowed that they have more humanity than we have; for as it is
often our vocation to take away the life of the innocent for
plunder, it is sometimes theirs for fee and reward to save the
guilty.



CH. VI. -- The attempt of Gil Blas to escape, and its success.


AFTER the captain of the banditti had thus apologized for
adopting such a line of life, he went to bed. For my part, I
returned to the hall, where I cleared the table, and set
everything to rights. Then I went to the kitchen, where Domingo,
the old negro, and dame Leonarda had been expecting me at supper.
Though entirely without appetite, I had the good manners to sit
down with them. Not a morsel could I eat; and, as I scarcely felt
more miserable than I looked, this pair so justly formed to meet
by nature, undertook to give me a little comfort. Why do you take
on so, my good lad? said the old dowager: you ought rather to
bless your stars for your good luck. You are young, and seem a
little soft; you would have a fine kettle of fish of it in the
busy world. You might have fallen into bad hands, and then your
morals would have been corrupted; whereas here your innocence is
insured to its full value. Dame Leonarda is in the right, put in
the old negro gravely, the world is but a troublesome place. Be
thankful, my friend, for being so early relieved from the
dangers, the difficulties, and the afflictions of this miserable
life.

I bore this prosing very quietly, because I should have got no
good by putting myself in a passion about it. At length Domingo,
after playing a good knife and fork, and getting gloriously
muddled, took himself off to the stable. Leonarda, by the
glimmering of a lamp, showed me the way to a vault which served
as a last home to those of the corps who died a natural death.
Here I stumbled upon something more like a grave than a bed. This
is your room, said she. Your predecessor lay here as long as he
was among us, and here he lies to this day. He suffered himself
to be hurried out of life in his prime: do not you be so foolish
as to follow his example. With this kind advice, she left me with
the lamp for my companion and returned to the kitchen. I threw
myself on the little bed, not so much for rest as meditation. O
heaven! exclaimed I, was there ever a fate so dreadful as mine?
it is determined then I am to take my leave of daylight! Beside
this, as if it were not enough to be buried alive at eighteen, my
misery is to be aggravated by being in the service of a banditti;
by passing the day with highwaymen, and the night in a
charnelhouse. These reflections, which seemed to me very dismal,
and were indeed no better than they seemed, set me crying most
bitterly. I could not conceive what cursed maggot my uncle had
got in his head to send me to Salamanca; repented running away
from Cacabelos, and would have compounded for the torture. But,
considering how vain it was to shut the door when the steed was
stolen, I determined, instead of lamenting the past, to hit upon
some expedient for making my escape. What! thought I, is it
impossible to get off? The cut-throats are asleep; cooky and the
black will be snoring ere long. Why cannot I, by the help of this
lamp, find the passage by which I descended into these infernal
regions? I am afraid, indeed, my strength is not equal to lifting
the trap at the entrance. However, let us see. Faint heart never
won fair lady. Despair will lend me new force, and who knows but
I may succeed?

Thus was the train laid for a grand attempt. I got up as soon as
Leonarda and Domingo were likely to be asleep. With the lamp in
my hand, I stole out of the vault, putting up my prayers to all
the spirits in paradise, and ten miles round. It was with no
small difficulty that I threaded all the windings of this new
labyrinth. At length I found myself at the stable door, and
perceived the passage which was the object of my search. Pushing
on I made my way towards the trap with a light pair of heels and
a beating heart: but, alas! in the middle of my career I ran
against a cursed iron grate locked fast, with bars so close as
not to admit a hand between them. I looked rather foolish at the
occurrence of this new difficulty, which I had not been aware of
at my entrance, because the grate was then open. However, I tried
what I could do by fumbling at the bars. Then for a peep at the
lock; or whether it could not be forced! When all at once my poor
shoulders were saluted with five or six good strokes of a bull's
pizzle. I set up such a shrill alarum, that the den of Cacus rang
with it; when looking round, who should it be but the old negro
in his shirt, holding a dark lanthorn in one hand, and the
instrument of my punishment in the other. Oh, ho! quoth he, my
merry little fellow, you will run away, will you? No, no! you
must not think to set your wits against mine. I heard you all the
while. You thought you should find the grate open, did not you?
You may take it for granted, my friend, that henceforth it will
always be shut. When we keep any one here against his will, he
must be a cleverer fellow than you to make his escape.

In the mean time, at the howl I had set up two or three of the
robbers waked suddenly; and not knowing but the holy brotherhood
might be falling upon them, they got up and called their
comrades. Without the loss of a moment all were on the alert.
Swords and carabines were put in requisition, and the whole posse
advanced forward almost in a state of nature to the place where I
was parleying with Domingo. But as soon as they learned the cause
of the uproar, their alarm resolved itself into a peal of
laughter. How now, Gil Blas, said the apostate son of the church,
you have not been a good six hours with us, and are you tired of
our company already? You must have a great objection to
retirement. Why, what would you do if you were a Carthusian
friar? Get along with you, and go to bed. This time you shall get
off with Domingo's discipline; but if you are ever caught in a
second attempt of the same kind, by Saint Bartholomew! we will
flay you alive. With this hint he retired, and the rest of the
party went back to their rooms. The old negro, taking credit to 
himself for his vigilance, returned to his stable; and I found my
way back to my charnel-house, where I passed the remainder of the
night in weeping and wailing.



CH. VII. -- Gil Blas, not being able to do what he likes, does
what he can.


FOR the first few days I thought I should have given up the ghost
for very spite and vexation. The lingering life I led was nearly
akin to death itself; but in the end my good genius whispered me
to play the hypocrite, I aimed at looking a little more cheerful;
began to laugh and sing, though it was some times on the wrong
side of my mouth; in a word, I put so good a face on the matter,
that Leonarda and Domingo were completely taken in. They thought
the bird was reconciled to his cage. The robbers entertained the
same notion. I looked as brisk as the beverage I poured out, and
put in my oar whenever I thought I could say a good thing. My
freedom, far from offending, was taken in good part. Gil Blas,
quoth the captain one evening, while I was playing the buffoon,
you have done well, my friend, to banish melancholy. I am
delighted with your wit and humour. Some people wear a mask at
first acquaintance; I had no notion what a jovial fellow you
were.

My praises now seemed to run from mouth to mouth. They were all
so partial to me, that, not to miss my opportunity; -- Gentlemen,
quoth I, allow me to tell you a piece of my mind. Since I have
been your guest, a new light breaks in upon me. I have bid adieu
to vulgar prejudices, and caught a ray at the fountain of your
illumination. I feel that I was born to be your knight companion.
I languish to make one among you, and will stand my chance of a
halter with the best. All the company cried Hear! -- I was
considered as a promising member of the senate. It was then
determined unanimously to give me a trial in some inferior
department; afterwards to bespeak me a good desperate encounter
in which I might show my prowess; and if I answered expectation
to give me a high and responsible employment in the commonwealth.

It was necessary therefore to go on exhibiting a copy of my
countenance, and doing my best in my office of cup-bearer. I was
impatient beyond measure; for I only aspired after the honours of
the sitting, to obtain the liberty of going abroad with the rest;
and I was in hopes that by running the risk of getting my neck
into one noose I might get it out of another. This was my only
chance. The time nevertheless seemed long to wait, and I kept my
eye on Domingo, with the hope of outwitting him: but the thing
was not feasible; he was always on the watch. Orpheus as leader
of the band, with a complete orchestra of performers as good as
himself, could not have soothed the savage breast of this
Cerberus. The truth is, by the by, that for fear of exciting his
suspicion, I did not set my wits against him so much as I might
have done. He was on the look-out, and I was obliged to play the
prude, or my virtue might have come into disgrace. I therefore
stopped proceedings till the time of my probation should expire,
to which I looked forward with impatience, just as if I was
waiting for a place under government.

Heaven be praised, in about six months I gained my end. The
commandant Rolando addressing his regiment, said: Comrades, we
must stand upon honour with Gil Blas. I have no bad opinion of
our young candidate; we shall make something of him. If you will
take my advice, let him go and reap his first harvest with us to-
morrow on the king's highway. We will lead him on in the path of
honour. The robbers applauded the sentiments of the captain with
a thunder of acclamation; and to show me how much I was
considered as one of the gang, from that moment they dispensed
with my attendance at the side board. Dame Leonarda was
reinstated in the office from which she had been discharged to
make room for me. They made me change my dress, which consisted
in a plain short cassock a good deal the worse for wear, and
tricked me out in the spoils of a gentleman lately robbed. After
this inauguration, I made my arrangements for my first campaign.



CH. VIII. -- Gil Blas goes out with the gang, and performs an
exploit on the highway.


IT was past midnight in the month of September, when I issued
from the subterraneous abode as one of the fraternity. I was
armed, like them, with a carabine, two pistols, a sword, and a
bayonet, and was mounted on a very good horse, the property of
the gentleman in whose costume I appeared. I had lived so long
like a mole under-ground, that the daybreak could not fail of
dazzling me: but my eyes got reconciled to it by degrees.

We passed close by Pontferrada, and were determined to lie in
ambush behind a small wood skirting the road to Leon. There we
were waiting for whatever fortune might please to throw in our
way, when we espied a Dominican friar, mounted, contrary to the
rubric of those pious fathers, on a shabby mule. God be praised,
exclaimed the captain with a sneer, this is a noble beginning for
Gil Blas. Let him go and trounce that monk: we will bear witness
to his qualifications. The connoisseurs were all of opinion that
this commission suited my talents to a hair, and exhorted me to
do my best Gentlemen, quoth I, you shall have no reason to
complain. I will strip this holy father to his birth-day suit,
and give you complete right and title to his mule. No, no, said
Rolando, the beast would not be worth its fodder: only bring us
our reverend pastor's purse; that is all we require. Hereupon I
issued from the wood and pushed up to the man of God, doing
penance all the time in my own breast for the sin I was
committing. I could have liked to have turned my back upon my
fellows at that moment; but most of them had the advantage of
better horses than mine: had they seen me making off they would
have been at my heels, and would soon have caught me, or perhaps
would have fired a volley, for which I was not sufficiently case-
hardened. I could not therefore venture on so perilous an
alternative; so that claiming acquaintance with the reverend
father, I asked to look at his purse, and just put out the end of
a pistol. He stopped short to gaze upon me; and, without seeming
much frightened, said, My child, you are very young; this is an
early apprenticeship to a bad trade. Father, replied I, bad as it
is, I wish I had begun it sooner. What! my son, rejoined the good
friar, who did not understand the real meaning of what I said,
how say you? What blindness! give me leave to place before your
eyes the unhappy condition. Come, come, father! interrupted I,
with impatience, a truce to your morality, if you please. My
business on the high road is not to hear sermons. Money makes my
mare to go. Money said he, with a look of surprise; you have a
poor opinion of Spanish charity, if you think that people of my
stamp have any occasion for such trash upon their travels. Let me
undeceive you. We are made welcome wherever we go, and pay for
our board and lodgings by our prayers. In short, we carry no cash
with us on the road; but draw drafts upon Providence. That is all
very well, replied I; yet for fear your drafts should be
dishonoured, you take care to keep about you a little supply for
present need. But come, father, let us make an end: my comrades
in the wood are in a hurry; so your money or your life. At these
words, which I pronounced with a determined air, the friar began
to think the business grew serious. Since needs must, said he,
there is wherewithal to satisfy your craving. A word and a blow
is the only rhetoric with you gentlemen. As he said this, be drew
a large leathern purse from under his gown, and threw it on the
ground. I then told him he might make the best of his way: and he
did not wait for a second bidding, but stuck his heels into the
mule, which, giving the lie to my opinion, for I thought it on a
par with my uncle's, set off at a good round pace. While he was
riding for his life, I dismounted. The purse was none of the
lightest. I mounted again, and got back to the wood, where those
nice. observers were waiting with impatience to congratulate me
on my success. I could hardly get my foot out of the stirrup, so
eager were they to shake hands with me. Courage, Gil Blas, said
Rolando; you have done wonders. I have had my eyes on you during
your whole performance, and have watched your countenance. I have
no hesitation in predicting that you will become in time a very
accomplished highwayman. The lieutenant and the rest chimed in
with the prophecy, and assured me that I could not fail of
fulfilling it hereafter. I thanked them for the elevated idea
they had formed of my talents, and promised to do all in my power
not to discredit their penetration.

After they had lavished praises, the effect rather of their
candour than of my merit, they took it into their heads to
examine the booty I had brought under my convoy. Let us see, said
they, let us see how a friar's purse is lined. It should be fat
and flourishing, continued one of them, for these good fathers do
not mortify the flesh when they travel. The captain untied the
purse, opened it, and took out two or three handfuls of little
copper coins, an Agnus-Dei here and there, and some scapularies.
At sight of so novel a prize, all the privates burst into an
immoderate fit of laughter. God be praised! cried the lieutenant,
we are very much obliged to Gil Blas: his first attack has
produced a supply, very seasonable to our fraternity. One joke
brought on another. These rascals, especially the fellow who had
retired from the church to our subterraneous hermitage, began to
make themselves merry on the subject. They said a thousand good
things, such as showed at once the sharpness of their wits and
the profligacy of their morals. They were all on the broad grin
except myself. It was impossible to be butt and marksman too.
They each of them shot their bolt at me, and the captain said:
Faith, Gil Blas, I would advise you as a friend not to set your
wit a second time against the church: the biter may be bit; for
you must live some time longer among us, before you are a match
for them.



CH. IX.  -- A more serious incident.


WE lounged about the wood for the greater part of the day,
without lighting on any traveller to pay toll for the friar. At
length we were beginning to wear our homeward way, as if
confining the feats of the day to this laughable adventure, which
furnished a plentiful fund of conversation, when we got
intelligence of a carriage on the road drawn by four mules. They
were coming at a hard gallop, with three outriders, who seemed to
be well armed. Rolando ordered the troop to halt, and hold a
council, the result of whose deliberations was to attack the
enemy. We were regularly drawn up in battle-array, and marched to
meet the caravan. In spite of the applause I had gained in the
wood, I felt an oozing sort of tremour come over me, with a chill
in my veins and a chattering in my teeth that seemed to bode me
no good. As it never rains but it pours, I was in the front of
the battle, hemmed in between the captain and the lieutenant, who
had given me that post of honour, that I might lose no time in
learning to stand fire. Rolando, observing the low ebb of my
animal spirits, looked askew at me, and muttered in a tone more
resolute than courtly: Hark ye! Gil Blas, look sharp about you! I
give you fair notice, that if you play the recreant, I shall
lodge a couple of bullets in your brain. I believed him as firmly
as my catechism, and thought it high time not to neglect the
hint; so that I was obliged to lay an embargo on the expression
of my fears, and to think only of recommending my soul to God in
silence.

While all this was going on, the carriage and horsemen drew near.
They suspected what sort of gentry we were; and guessing our
trade by our badge, stopped within gun-shot. They had carabines
and pistols as well as ourselves. While they were preparing to
give us a brisk reception, there jumped out of the coach a well-
looking gentleman richly dressed. He mounted a led horse, and put
himself at the head of his party. Though they were but four
against nine, for the coachman kept his seat on the box, they
advanced towards us with a confidence calculated to redouble my
terror. Yet I did not forget, though trembling in every joint, to
hold myself in readiness for a shot: but, to give a candid
relation of the affair, I blinked and looked the other way in
letting off my piece; so that from the harmlessness of my fire, I
was sure not to have murder to answer for in another world.

I shall not give the particulars of the engagement; though
present, I was no eye-witness; and my fear, while it laid hold of
my imagination, drew a veil over the anticipated horror of the
sight. All I know about the matter is, that after a grand
discharge of musquetry, I heard my companions hallooing Victory!
Victory! as if their lungs were made of leather. At this shout
the terror which had made a forcible entry on my senses was
ejected, and I beheld the four horse men stretched lifeless on
the field of battle. On our side, we had only one man killed.
This was the renegade parson, who had now filled the measure of
his apostasy, and paid for jesting with scapularies and such
sacred things. The lieutenant received a slight wound in the arm;
but the bullet did little more than graze the skin.

Master Rolando was the first at the coach-door. Within was a lady
of from four to five-and-twenty, beautiful as an angel in his
eyes, in spite of her sad condition. She had fainted during the
conflict, and her swoon still continued. While he was fixed like
a statue on her charms, the rest of were in profound meditation
on the plunder. We began by securing the horses of the defunct;
for these animals, frightened at the report of our pieces, had
got to a little distance, after the loss of their riders. For the
mules, they had not wagged a hair, though the coachman had jumped
from his box during the engagement to make his escape. We
dismounted for the purpose of unharnessing and loading them with
some trunks tied before and behind the carriage. This settled,
the captain ordered the lady, who had not yet recovered her
faculties, to be set on horseback before the best mounted of the
robbers; then, leaving the carriage and the uncased carcases by
the road-side, we carried off with us the lady, the mules, and
the horses.



CH. X. -- The lady's treatment from the robbers. The event of the
great design, conceived by Gil Blas.


THE night had another hour to run when we arrived at our
subterraneous mansion. The first thing we did was to lead our
cavalry to the stable, where we were obliged to groom them
ourselves, as the old negro had been confined to his bed for
three days, with a violent fit of the gout, and an universal
rheumatism. He had no member supple but his tongue; and that he
employed in testifying his indignation by the most horrible
impieties. Leaving this wretch to curse and swear by himself, we
went to the kitchen to look after the lady. So successful were
our attentions, that we succeeded in recovering her from her fit.
But when she had once more the use of her senses, and saw herself
encompassed by strangers, she knew the extent of her misfortune,
and shuddered at the thought. All that grief and despair together
could present, of images the most distressing, appeared depicted
in her eyes, which she lifted up to heaven, as if in reproach for
the indignities she was threatened with. Then, giving way at once
to these dreadful apprehensions, she fell again into a swoon, her
eyelids closed once more, and the robbers thought that death was
going to snatch from them their prey. The captain, therefore,
judging it more to the purpose to leave her to herself than to
torment her with any more of their assistance, ordered her to be
laid on Leonarda's bed, and at all events to let nature take its
course.

We went into the hall, where one of the robbers, who had been
bred a surgeon, looked at the lieutenant's arm and put a plaister
to it. After this scientific operation, it was thought expedient
to examine the baggage. Some of the trunks were filled with laces
and linen, others with various articles of wearing apparel: but
the last contained some bags of coin; a circumstance highly
approved by the receivers-general of the estate. After this
investigation, the cook set out the side-board, laid the cloth,
and served up supper. Our conversation ran first on the great
victory we had achieved. On this subject said Rolando, directing
himself to me, Confess the truth, Gil Blas: you cannot deny that
you were devilishly frightened. I candidly admitted the fact; but
promised to fight like a crusader after my second or third
campaign. Hereupon all the company took my part, alleging the
sharpness of the action in my excuse, and that it was very well
for a novice, not yet accustomed to the smell of powder.

We next talked of the mules and horses just added to our
subterraneous stud. It was determined to set off the next morning
before day-break, and sell them at Mansilla, before there was any
chance of our expedition having got wind. This resolution taken,
we finished our supper, and returned to the kitchen to pay our
respects to the lady. We found her in the same condition.
Nevertheless, though the dregs of life seemed almost exhausted,
some of these poachers could not help casting a wicked leer at
her, and giving visible signs of a motion within them, which
would have broken out into overt act, had not Rolando put a spoke
in their wheel by representing that they ought at least to wait
till the lady had got rid of her terrors and squeamishness, and
could come in for her share of the amusement. Their respect for
the captain operated as a check to the incontinence of their
passions. Nothing else could have saved the lady; nor would death
itself probably have secured her from violation.

Again therefore did we leave this unhappy female to her
melancholy fate. Rolando contented himself with charging Leonarda
to take care of her, and we all separated for the night. For my
part, when I went to bed, instead of courting sleep, my thoughts
were wholly taken up with the lady's misfortunes. I had no doubt
of her being a woman of quality, and thought her lot on that
account so much the more piteous. I could not paint to myself,
without shuddering, the horrors which awaited her; and felt
myself as sensibly affected by them, as if united to her by the
ties of blood or friendship. At length, after having sufficiently
bewailed her destiny, I mused on the means of preserving her
honour from its present danger, and myself from a longer abode in
this dungeon. I considered that the old negro could not stir, and
recollected that since his illness the cook had the key of the
grate. That thought warmed my fancy, and gave birth to a project
not to be hazarded lightly: the stages of its execution were the
following.

I pretended to have the colic. A lad in the colic cannot help
whining and groaning; but I went further, and cried out lustily,
as loud as my lungs would let me. This roused my gentle friends,
and brought them about me to know what the deuce was the matter.
I informed them that I had a swinging fit of the gripes, and to
humour the idea, gnashed my teeth, made all manner of wry faces
till I looked like a bedlamite, and twisted my limbs as if I had
been going to be delivered of a heathen oracle. Then I became
calm all at once, as if my pains had abated. The next minute I
flounced up and down upon my bed, and threw my arms about at
random. In a word, I played my part so well that these more
experienced performers, knowing as they were, suffered themselves
to be thrown off their guard, and to believe that my malady was
real. All at once did they busy themselves for my relief. One
brought me a bottle of brandy, and forced me to gulp down half of
it; another, in spite of my remonstrances, applied oil of sweet
almonds in a very offensive manner: a third went and made a
napkin burning hot, to be clapped upon my stomach. In vain did I
cry mercy; they attributed my noise to the violence of my
disorder, and went on inflicting positive evil by way of remedy
for that which was artificial. At last, able to bear it no
longer, I was obliged to swear that I was better, and entreat
them to give me quarter. They left off killing me with kindness,
and I took care not to complain any more, for fear of
experiencing their tender attentions a second time.

This scene lasted nearly three hours. After which the robbers,
calculating it to be near day-break, prepared for their journey
to Mansilla. I was for getting up, as if I had set my heart on
being of the party; but that they would not allow. No, no, Gil
Blas, said Signor Rolando, stay here, my lad; your colic may
return. You shall go with us another time; to-day you are not in
travelling condition. I did not think it prudent to urge my
attendance too much, for fear of being taken at my word; but only
affected great disappointment with so natural an air, that they
all went off without the slightest misgiving of my design. After
their departure, for which I had prayed most fervently, I said to
myself: Now is your time, Gil Blas, to be firm and resolved. Arm
yourself with courage to go through with an enterprise so
propitiously begun. Domingo is tied by the leg, and Leonarda may
show her teeth, but she cannot bite. Pounce down upon opportunity
while it offers; you may wait long enough for another. Thus did I
spirit myself up in soliloquy. Having got out of bed, I laid hold
of my sword and pistols; and away I went to the kitchen. But
before I made my appearance I stopped to hear what Leonarda was
talking about to the fair incognita, who was come to her senses,
and, on a view of her misfortune in its extremity, took on most
desperately. That is right, my girl, said the old hag, cry your
eyes out, sob away plentifully, you know the good effect of
woman's tears. The sudden shock was too much for you; but the
danger is over now the engines can play. Your grief will abate by
little and little, and you wilt get reconciled to living with our
gentlemen, who are very good sort of people. You will be better
off than a princess. You do not know how fond they will be of
you. Not a day will pass without your being obliged to some of
them. Many a woman would give one of her eyes to be in your
place.

I did not allow Leonarda time to go on any longer with this
babbling. In I went, and putting a pistol to her breast, insisted
with a menacing air on her delivering up the key of the grate.
She did not know what to make of my behaviour; and, though almost
in the last stage of life, had such a propensity to linger on the
road as not to venture on a refusal. With the key in my hand I
directed the following speech to the distressed object of my
compassion: Madam, Heaven sends you a deliverer in me; follow,
and I will see you safe whithersoever you wish to be conducted.
The lady was not deaf to my proposal, which made such an
impression on her grateful heart that she jumped up with all the
strength she had left, threw herself at my feet, and conjured me
to save her honour. I raised her from the ground, and assured her
she might rely on me. I then took some ropes which were
opportunely in the kitchen, and with her assistance tied Leonarda
to the legs of a large table, protesting that I would kill her if
she only breathed a murmur. After that, lighting a candle, I went
with the incognita to the treasury, where I filled my pockets
with pistoles, single and double, as full as they could hold. To
encourage the lady not to be scrupulous, I begged she would think
herself at home, and make free with her own. With our finances
thus recruited, we went towards the stable, where I marched in
with my pistols cocked. I was of opinion that the old blackamoor,
for all his gout and rheumatism, would not let me saddle and
bridle my horse peaceably, and my resolution was to put a
finishing hand to all his ailments if he took it into his head to
play the churl: but, by good luck, he was at that moment in such
pain that I stole the steed without his perceiving that the door
was open. The lady in the mean time was waiting for me. We were
not long in threading the passage leading to the outlet; but
reached the grate, opened it, and at last got to the trap. Much
ado there was to lift it, which we could not have done, but for
the new strength we borrowed from the hopes of our escape.

Day was beginning to dawn when we emerged from that abyss. Our
first object was to get as far from it as possible. I jumped into
the saddle: the lady got up behind me, and taking the first path
that offered, we soon gal loped out of the forest. Coming to some
cross-roads we took our chance. I trembled for fear of its
leading to Mansilla, and our encountering Rolando and his
comrades. Luckily my apprehensions were unfounded. We got to
Astorga by two o'clock in the afternoon. The people looked at us
as if they had never seen such a sight before as a woman riding
behind a man. We alighted at the first inn. I immediately ordered
a partridge and a young rabbit to the spit. While my orders were
in a train of execution, the lady was shown to a room, where we
began to scrape acquaintance with one another; which we had not
done on the road, on account of the speed we made. She expressed
a high sense of my services, and told me that after so
gentlemanly a conduct, she could not allow herself to think me
one of the gang from whom I had rescued her. I told her my story
to confirm her good opinion. By these means I entitled myself to
her confidence, and to the knowledge of her misfortunes, which
she recounted to the following effect.



CH. XI -- The history of Donna Mencia de Mosquera.


I WAS born at Valladolid, and am called Donna Mencia de Mosquera.
My father, Don Martin, after spending most of his family estate
in the service, was killed in Portugal at the head of his
regiment. He left me so little property, that I was a bad match,
though an only daughter. I was not, however, without my admirers,
notwithstanding the mediocrity of my fortune. Several of the most
considerable cavaliers in Spain sought me in marriage. My
favourite was Don Alvar de Mello. It is true he had a prettier
person than his rivals; but more solid qualities determined me in
his favour. He had wit, discretion, valour, probity; and in
addition to all these, an air of fashion. Was an entertainment to
be given? His taste was sure to be displayed. If he appeared in
the lists, he always fixed the eyes of the beholders on his
strength and dexterity. I singled him out from among all the
rest, and married him.

A few days after our nuptials, he met Don Andrew de Baësa, who
had been his rival, in a private place. They attacked one another
sword in hand, and Don Andrew fell. As he was nephew to the
corregidor of Valladolid, a turbulent man, violently incensed
against the house of Mello, Don Alvar thought he could not soon
enough make his escape. He returned home speedily, and told me
what had happened while his horse was getting ready. My dear
Mencia, said he at length, we must part. You know the corregidor:
let us not flatter ourselves; he will hunt me even to death. You
are unacquainted with his influence; this empire will be too hot
to hold me. He was so penetrated by his own grief and mine as not
to be able to articulate further. I made him take some cash and
jewels: then he folded me in his arms, and we did nothing but
mingle our sighs and tears for a quarter of an hour. In a short
time the horse was at the door. He tore himself from me, and left
me in a condition not easily to be expressed. It had been well if
the excess of my affliction had destroyed me! How much pain and
trouble might I have escaped by death! Some hours after Don Alvar
was gone, the corregidor became acquainted with his flight. He
set up a hue and cry after him, sparing no pains to get him into
his power. My husband, however, eluded his pursuit, and got into
safe quarters; so that the judge, finding himself reduced to
confine his vengeance to the poor satisfaction of confiscating,
where he meant to execute, laboured to good purpose in his
vocation. Don Alvar's little property all went to the hammer.

I remained in a very comfortless situation, with scarcely the
means of subsistence. A retired life was best suited to my
circumstances, with a single female servant. I passed my hours in 
lamenting, not an indigence, which I bore patiently, but the
absence of a beloved husband, of whom I received no accounts. He
had indeed pledged himself, in the melancholy moments of our
parting, to be punctual in acquainting me with his destiny, to
whatever part of the world his evil star might conduct him. And
yet seven years roiled on without my hearing of him. My suspense
respecting his fate afflicted me most deeply. At last I heard of
his falling in battle, under the Portuguese banner, in the
kingdom of Fez. A man newly returned from Africa brought me the
account, with the assurance that he had been well acquainted with
Don Alvar de Mello; had served with him in the army, and had seen
him drop in the action. To this narrative of facts he added
several collateral circumstances, which left me no room to doubt
of my husband's premature death.

About this time Don Ambrosio Mesia Carillo, Marquis de la
Guardia, arrived at Valladolid. He was one of those elderly
noblemen who, with that good breeding acquired by long experience
in courts, throw their years into the background, and retain the
faculty of making themselves agreeable to our sex. One day he
happened by accident to hear the story of Don Alvar; and, from
the part I bore in it and the description of my person, there
arose a desire of being better acquainted. To satisfy his
curiosity, he made interest with one of my relations to invite me
to her house. The gentleman was one of the party. This first
interview made not the less impression on his heart for the
traces of sorrow which were too obvious on my countenance. He was
touched by its melancholy and languishing expression, which gave
him a favourable forecast of my constancy. Respect, rather than
any warmer sentiment, might perhaps be the inspirer of his
wishes. For he told me more than once what a miracle of good
faith he considered me, and my husband's fate as enviable in this
respect, however lamentable in others. In a word, he was struck 
with me at first sight, and did not wait for a review of my
pretensions, but at once took the resolution of making me his
wife.

The intervention of my kinswoman was adopted as the means of
inducing me to accept his proposal. She paid me a visit; and in
the course of conversation, pleaded, that as my husband had
submitted to the decree of Providence in the kingdom of Fez,
according to very credible accounts, it was no longer rational to
coop up my charms. I had shed tears enough over a man to whom I
had been united but for a few moments as it were, and I ought to
avail myself of the present offer, and had nothing to do but to
step into happiness at once. In furtherance of these arguments,
she set forth the old marquis's pedigree, his wealth, and high
character: but in vain did her eloquence expatiate on his
endowments, for I was not to be moved. Not that my mind misgave
me respecting Don Alvar's death; nor that the apprehension of his
sudden and unwelcome appearance hereafter, checked my
inclinations. My little liking, or rather my extreme repugnance,
to a second marriage, after the sad issue of the first, was the
sole obstacle opposed to my relation's urgency. Neither was she
disheartened: on the contrary, her zeal for Don Ambrosio resorted
to endless stratagems. All my family were pressed into the old
lord's service. So beneficial a match was not to be trifled with!
They were eternally besetting, dunning, and tormenting me. In
fact, my despondency, which increased from day to day,
contributed not a little to my yielding.

As there was no getting rid of him, I gave way to their eager
suit, and was wedded to the Marquis de la Guardia. The day after
the nuptials, we went to a very fine castle of his near Burgos,
between Grajal and Rodillas. He conceived a violent love for me:
the desire of pleasing was visible in all his actions: the
anticipation of my slenderest wishes was his earliest and his
latest study. No husband ever regarded his wife more tenderly, no
lover could pour forth more devotion to his mistress. Nor would
it have been possible for me to steel my heart against a return
of passion, though our ages were so disproportioned, had not
every soft sentiment been buried in Don Alvar's grave. But the
avenues of a constant heart are barred against a second inmate.
The memory of my first husband threw a damp on all the kind
efforts of the second. Mere gratitude was a cold retribution for
such tenderness; but it was all I had to give.

Such was my temper of mind, when, taking the air one day at a
window in my apartment, I perceived a peasant-looking man in the
garden, viewing me with fixed attention. He appeared to be a
common labourer. The circumstance soon passed out of my thoughts;
but the next day, having again taken my station at the window, I
saw him on the self-same spot, and again found myself the object
of his eager gaze. This seemed strange! I looked at him in my
turn; and, after an attentive scrutiny, thought I could trace the
features of the unhappy Don Alvar. This seeming visit from the
tombs roused all the dormant agony of my soul, and extorted from
me a piercing scream. Happily, I was then alone with Inès, who of
all my women engaged the largest share of my confidence. I told
her what surmise had so agitated my spirits. She only laughed at
the idea, and took it for granted that a slight resemblance had
imposed on my fancy. Take courage, madam, said she, and do not be
afraid of seeing your first husband. What likelihood is there of
his being here in the disguise of a peasant? Is it even within
the reach of credibility that he is yet alive? However, I will go
down into the garden, and talk with this rustic. I will answer
for finding out who be is, and will return in all possible haste
with my intelligence. Inès ran on her errand like a lapwing; but
soon returned to my apartment with a face of mingled astonishment
and emotion. Madam, exclaimed she, your conjecture is but too
well grounded; it is indeed Don Alvar whom you have seen; he made
himself known at once, and pleads for a private interview.

As I had the means of admitting Don Alvar instantaneously, by the
absence of the Marquis at Burgos, I commissioned my waiting-maid
to introduce him into my closet by a private staircase. Well may
you imagine the hurry and agitation of my spirits. How could I
support the presence of a man, who was entitled to overwhelm me
with reproaches? I fainted at his very foot-fall as he entered.
They were about me in a moment --  he as well as Inès; and when
they had recovered me from my swoon, Don Alvar said  -- Madam,
for heaven's sake, compose yourself. My presence shall never be
the cause of pain to you; nor would I for the world expose you to
the slightest anxiety. I am no savage husband, come to account
with you for a sacred pledge; nor do I impute to criminal motives
the second contract you have formed. I am well aware that it was
owing to the importunity of your friends; your persecutions from
that quarter are not unknown to me. Besides, the report of my
death was current in Valladolid; and you had so much the more
reason to give it credit, as no letter from me gave you any
assurance to the contrary. In short, I am no stranger to your
habits of life since our cruel separation; and know that
necessity, not lightness of heart, has thrown you into the arms   
Ah! sir, interrupted I with sobs, why will you make excuses for
your unworthy wife? She is guilty, since you survive. Why am I
not still in the forlorn state in which I languished before my
marriage with Don Ambrosio? Fatal nuptials! --  alas! but for
these, I should at least have had the consolation in my
wretchedness of seeing the object of my first vows again without
a blush.

My dear Mencia, replied Don Alvar, with a look which marked how
deeply he was penetrated by my contrition, I make no complaint of
you; and far from upbraiding you with your present prosperity, as
heaven is my witness, I return it thanks for the favours it has
showered on you. Since the sad day of my departure from
Valladolid, my own fate has ever been adverse. My life has been
but a tissue of misfortune; and, as a surcharge of evil destiny,
I had no means of letting you hear from me. Too secure in your
affection, I could neither think nor dream but of the condition
to which my fatal love might have reduced you. Donna Mencia in
tears was the lovely, but killing spectre that haunted me; of all
my miseries, your dear idea was the most acute. Some times, I
own, I felt remorse for the transporting crime of having pleased
you. I wished you had lent an ear to the suit of some happier
rival, since the preference with which you had honoured me was to
fall so cruelly on your own head. To cut short my melancholy tale
--  after seven years of suffering, more enamoured than ever, I
determined to see you once again. The impulse was not to be
resisted; and the expiration of a long slavery having furnished
me with the power of giving way to it, I have been at Valladolid
under this disguise at the hazard of a discovery. There, I
learned the whole story. I then came to this castle, and found
the means of admission into the gardener's service, who has
engaged me as a labourer. Such was my stratagem to obtain this
private interview. But do not suppose me capable of blasting, by
my continuance here, the happiness of your future days. I love
you better than my own life; I have no consideration but for your
repose; and it is my purpose, after thus unburdening my heart, to
finish in exile the sacrifice of an existence which has lost its
value since no longer to be devoted to your service.

No, Don Alvar, no, exclaimed I at these words; you shall never
quit me a second time. I will be the companion of your
wanderings; and death only shall divide us from this hour. Take
my advice, replied he, live with Don Ambrosio; unite not yourself
with my miseries, but leave me to stand under their undivided
weight. These and other such entreaties he used; but the more
willing he seemed to sacrifice himself to my welfare, the less
did I feel disposed to take advantage of his generosity. When he
saw me resolute in my determination to follow him, he all at once
changed his tone; and assuming an aspect of more satisfaction,
Madam, said he, since you still love Don Alvar well enough to
prefer adversity with him before your present ease and affluence,
let us then take up our abode at Betancos, in the interior of
Galicia. There I have a safe retreat. Though my misfortunes may
have stripped me of all my effects, they have not alienated all
my friends; some are yet faithful, and have furnished me with the
means of carrying you off. With their help I have hired a
carriage at Zamora; have bought mules and horses, and am
accompanied by perhaps the three boldest of the Galicians. They
are armed with carabines and pistols, waiting my orders at the
village of Rodillas. Let us avail ourselves of Don Ambrosio's
absence. I will send the carriage to the castle gate, and we will
set out without loss of time. I consented. Don Alvar flew towards
Rodillas, and shortly returned with his escort. My women, from
the midst of whom I was carried off, not knowing what to think of
this violent proceeding, made their escape in great terror. Inès
only was in the secret; but she would not link her fate with
mine, on account of a love affair with Don Ambrosio's favourite
man.

I got into the carriage, therefore, with Don Alvar, taking
nothing with me but my clothes and some jewels of my own before
my second marriage; for I could not think of appropriating any
presents of the Marquis. We travelled in the direction of
Galicia, without knowing if we should be lucky enough to reach
it. We had reason to fear Don Ambrosio's pursuit on his return,
and that we should be overtaken by superior numbers. We went
forward for two days without any alarm, and in the hope of being
equally fortunate the third, had got into a very quiet
conversation. Don Alvar was relating the melancholy adventure
which had occasioned the rumour of his death, and how he
recovered his freedom, after five years of slavery, when
yesterday we met upon the Leon road the banditti you were with.
He it was whom they killed with all his attendants, and it is for
him the tears flow, which you see me shedding at this moment.



CH. XII. --  A disagreeable interruption.


DONNA MENCIA melted into tears as she finished this recital. I
allowed her to give a free passage to her sighs; I even wept
myself for company, so natural is it to be interested for the
afflicted, and especially for a lovely female in distress. I was
just going to ask her what she meant to do in the present
conjuncture, and possibly she was going to consult me on the same
subject if our conversation had not been interrupted; but we
heard a great noise in the inn, which drew our attention whether
we would or no. It was no less than the arrival of the
corregidor, attended by two alguazils and their marshalmen. They
came into the room where we were. A young gentleman in their
train came first up to me, and began taking to pieces the
different articles of my dress. He had no occasion to examine
them long. By Saint James, exclaimed he, this is my identical
doublet! It is the very thing, and as safely to be challenged as
my horse. You may commit this spark on my recognizance; he is one
of the gang who have an undiscovered retreat in this country.

At this discourse, which gave me to understand my accuser to be
the gentleman robbed, whose spoils to my confusion were
exclusively my own, I was without a word to say for myself,
looking one way and the other, and not knowing where to fix my
eyes. The corregidor, whose office was suspicion, set me down for
the culprit; and, presuming on the lady for an accomplice,
ordered us into separate custody. This magistrate was none of
your stem gallows-preaching fellows, he had a jocular
epigrammatic sort of countenance. God knows if his heart lay in
the right place for all that! As soon as I was committed, in came
he with his pack. They knew their trade, and began by searching
me. What a forfeit to these lords of the manor! At every handful
of pistoles, what little eyes did I see them make! The corregidor
was absolutely out of his wits! It was the best stroke within the
memory of justice! My pretty lad, said his Worship with a
softened tone, we only do our duty, but do not you tremble for
your bones before the time: you will not be broken on the wheel
if you do not deserve it. These blood-suckers were emptying my
pockets all the time with their cursed palaver, and took from me
what their betters of the shades below had the decency to leave -
- my uncle's forty ducats. They stuck at nothing! Their staunch
fingers, with slow but certain scent, routed me out from top to
toe; they whisked me round and round, and stripped me even to the
shame of modesty, for fear some sneaking portrait of the king
should slink between my shirt and skin. When they could sift me
no further, the corregidor thought it time to begin his
examination. I told a plain tale. My deposition was taken down;
and the sequel was, that he carried in his train his bloodhounds,
and my little property, leaving me to toss without a rag upon a
beggarly wisp of straw.

Oh the miseries of human life! groaned I, when I found myself in
this merciless and solitary condition. Our adventures here are
whimsical, and out of all time and tune. From my first outset
from Oviedo, I had got into a pleasant round of difficulties;
hardly had I worked myself out of one danger, before I soused
into another. Coming into town here, how could I expect the
honour of the corregidor's acquaintance? While thus communing
with my own thoughts, I got once more into the cursed doublet and
the rest of the paraphernalia which had got me into such a
scrape; then plucking up a little courage, never mind, Gil Blas,
thought I, do not be chicken-hearted. What is a prison above-
ground, after so brimstone a snuffle as thou hast had of the
regions below? But, alas! I hallo before I am out of the wood! I
am in more experienced hands than those of Leonarda and Domingo.
My key will not open this grate! I might well say so, for a
prisoner without money is like a bird with its wings clipt; one
must be in full feather to flutter out of distance from these
gaol-birds.

But we left a partridge and a young rabbit on the spit! How they
got off I know not; but my supper was a bit of sallow-
complexioned bread, with a pitcher of water to render it amenable
to mastication! and thus was I destined to bite the bridle in my
dungeon. A fortnight was pretty well without seeing a soul but my
keeper, who had orders that I should want for nothing in the
bread and water way! Whenever he made his appearance I was
inclined to be sociable, and to parley a little to get rid of the
blue devils; but this majestic minister was above reply, he was
mum! he scarcely trusted his eyes but to see that I did not slip
by him. On the sixteenth day, the corregidor strutted in to this
tune --  You are a lucky fellow! I have news for you. The lady is
packed off for Burgos. She came under my examination before her
departure, and her answers went to your exculpation. You will be
at large this very day if your carrier from Pegnaflor to
Cacabelos agrees in the same tale. He is now in Astorga. I have
sent for him, and expect him here; if he confirms the story of
the torture, you are your own master.

At these words I was ready to jump out of my skin for joy. The
business was settled! I thanked the magistrate for the abridgment
of justice with which he had deigned to favour me, and was
getting to the fag end of my compliment, when the muleteer
arrived, with an attendant before and behind. I knew the fellow's
face; but he, having as a matter of course sold my cloak-bag with
the contents, from a deep-rooted affection to the money which the
sale had brought, swore lustily that he had no acquaintance with
me, and had never seen me in the whole course of his life. Oh!
you villain, exclaimed I, go down on your knees and own that you
have sold my clothes. Prythee, have some regard to truth! Look in
my face; am not I one of those shallow young fellows whom you had
the wit to threaten with the rack in the corporate town of
Cacabelos? The muleteer turned upon his toe, and protested he had
not the honour of my acquaintance. As he persisted in his
disavowal, I was recommitted for further examination. Patience
once more! It was only reducing feasts and fasts to the level of
bread and water, and regaling the only sense I had the means of
using with the sight of my tongue-tied warden. But when I
reflected how little innocence would avail to extricate me from
the clutches of the law, the thought was death; I panted for my
subterraneous paradise. Take it for all in all, said I, there
were fewer grievances than in this dungeon. I was hail fellow
well met with the banditti! I bandied about my jokes with the
best of them, and lived on the sweet hope of an escape; whereas
my innocence here will only be a passport to the galleys.



CH. XIII. -- The lucky means by which Gil Blas escaped from
prison, and his travels afterwards.


WHILE I passed the hours in tickling my fancy with my own gay
thoughts, my adventures, word for word, as I had set my hand to
them, were current about the town. The people wanted to make a
show of me! One after another, there they came, peeping in at a
little window of my prison, not too capacious of daylight; and
when they had looked about them, off they went! This raree show
was a novelty. Since my commitment, there had not been a living
creature at that window, which looked into a court where silence
and horror kept guard. This gave me to understand that I was
become the town-talk, and I knew not whether to divine good or
evil from the omen.

One of my first visitors was the little chorister of Mondognedo,
who had a fellow-feeling with me for the rack, and an equally
light pair of heels. I knew him at once, and he had no qualms
about acknowledging me as an acquaintance. We exchanged a kind
greeting, then compared notes since our separation. I was obliged
to relate my adventures in due form and order. The chorister, on
his part, told me what had happened in the inn at Cacabelos,
between the muleteer and the bride, after we had taken to our
heels in a panic. Then with a friendly assurance at parting, he
promised to leave no stone unturned for my release. His
companions of mere curiosity testified their pity for my
misfortune; assuring me that they would lend a helping hand to
the little chorister, and do their utmost to procure my freedom.

They were no worse than their word. The corregidor was applied to
in my favour, who, no longer doubtful of my innocence, above all
when he had heard the chorister's story, came three weeks
afterwards into my cell. Gil Blas, said he, I never stand shilly-
shally: begone, you are free; you may take yourself off whenever
you please. But, tell me, if you were carried to the forest,
could you not discover the subterraneous retreat? No, sir,
replied I: as I only entered in the night, and made my escape
before day-break, it would be impossible to fix upon the spot.
Thereupon the magistrate withdrew, assuring me that the gaoler
should be ordered to give me free egress. In fact, the very next
moment the turnkey came into my dungeon, followed by one of his
outriding establishment with a bundle of clothes under his arm.
They both of them stripped me with the utmost solemnity, and
without uttering a single syllable, of my doublet and breeches,
which had the honour to be made of a bettermost cloth almost new;
then, having rigged me in an old frock, they shoved me out of
their hospitable mansion by the shoulders.

The taking I was in to see myself so ill equipped, acted as a
cooler to the usual transport of prisoners at recovering their
liberty. I was tempted to escape from the town without delay,
that I might withdraw from the gaze of the people, whose prying
eyes I could not encounter but with pain. My gratitude, however,
got the better of my diffidence. I went to thank the little
chorister, to whom I was so much obliged. He could not help
chuckling when he saw me. That is your trim, is it? said he. As
far as I see, you cannot complain that your case has not been
sifted to the bottom. I have nothing to say against the laws of
my country, replied I; they are as just as need be. I only wish
their officers would take after them! They might have spared me
my suit of clothes: I have paid for them over and over again. I
am quite of your mind, rejoined he; but they would tell you that
these are little formalities of old standing, which cannot be
dispensed with. What! you are foolish enough to suppose, for
instance, that your horse has been restored to its right owner?
Not a word of it, if you please: the beast is at this present in
the stables of the register, where it has been impounded as a
witness to be brought into court: if the poor gentleman comes off
with the crupper, he will be so much in pocket. But let us change
the subject. What is your plan? What do you mean to do with
yourself? I have an inclination, said I, to take the road for
Burgos. I may light on my rescued lady; she will give me a little
ready cash: I shall then buy a new short cassock, and betake
myself to Salamanca, where I shall see what I can make of my
Latin. All my trouble is, how to get to Burgos: one must live on
the road. I understand you, replied he. Take my purse: it is
rather thinly lined, to be sure; but you know a chorister's
dividends are not like a bishop's. At the same time he drew it
from his pouch, and inserted it between my hands with so good a
grace, that I could not do otherwise than accept it, for want of
a better. I thanked him as though he had made me a present of a
gold mine, and tendered him a thousand promises of recompense, to
be duly honoured and punctually paid at doom's-day. With this I
left him, and skulked out of the town, not paying my respects to
my other benefactors; but giving them a thousand blessings from
my heart.

The little chorister had reason for speaking modestly of his
purse, it was not orthodox. By good luck, I had been used for
these two months to a very slender diet, and had still a little
small change left when I reached Ponte de Mula, not far from
Burgos. I halted there to inquire after Donna Mencia. The hostess
of the inn I put up at was a little withered, spiteful, emaciated
bit of mortality. I saw at a glance, by the mouths she made at me
aside, that my frock did not hit her fancy; and I thought it a
proof of her taste. So I sat myself down at a table; ate bread
and cheese, and drank a few glasses of execrable wine, such as
innkeepers technically call cassecoquin. During this meal, which
was of a piece with the outward appearance of the guest, I did my
utmost to come to closer quarters with my landlady. Did she know
the Marquis de la Guardia? Was his castle far out of town? Above
all, what was become of my lady marchioness? You ask many
questions in a breath, replied she, bridling with disdain. But I
got out of her, though by hard pumping, that Don Ambrosio's
castle was but a short league from Ponte de Mula.

After I had done eating and drinking, as it was night, I thought
it natural to go to bed, and asked for my room. A room for you!
shrieked my landlady, darting at me a glance of contempt and
pride; I have no rooms for fellows who make their supper on a bit
of cheese. All my beds are bespoke. There are people of fashion
expected, and our accommodations are all kept for them.
But I will not be unchristian: you may lie in my barn: I suppose
your soft skin will not be incommoded by the feel of straw. She
spoke truth without knowing it. I took it all in silence, and
slunk to my roosting-place, where I fell asleep like a man, the
excess of whose labours are his ready passport to the blessings
of repose.



CH XIV.  --  Donna Mencia's reception of him at Burgos.

I WAS no sluggard, but got up the next morning betimes. I paid my
bill to the landlady, who was already stirring, and seemed a
little less lofty and in better humour than the evening before; a
circumstance I attributed to the endeavours of three kind
guardsmen belonging to the holy brotherhood. These gentlemen had
slept in the inn: they were evidently on a very intimate footing
with the hostess: and doubtless it was for guests of such note
that all the beds were bespoke.

I inquired in the town my way to the castle where I wanted to
present my. self. By accident I made up to a man not unlike my
landlord at Pegnaflor. He was not satisfied with answering my
question to the point; but informed me that Don Ambrosio had been
dead three weeks, and the marchioness his lady had taken the
resolution of retiring to a convent at Burgos, which he named. I
proceeded immediately towards that town, instead of taking the
road to the castle, as I had first meant to do, and flew at once
to the place of Donna Mencia's retreat. I besought the attendant
at the turning-box to tell that lady that a young man just
discharged from prison at Astorga wanted to speak with her. The
nun went on the message immediately. On her return, she showed me
into a parlour, where I did not wait long before Don Ambrosio's
widow appeared at the grate in deep mourning.

You are welcome, said the lady. Four days ago I wrote to a person
at Astorga, to pay you a visit as from me, and to tell you to
come and see me the moment you were released from prison. I had
no doubt of your being discharged shortly: what I told the
corregidor in your exculpation was enough for that. An answer was
brought that you had been set at liberty, but that no one knew
what was become of you. I was afraid of not seeing you any more,
and losing the pleasure of expressing my gratitude. Never mind,
added she, observing my confusion at making my appearance in so
wretched a garb; your dress is of very little consequence. After
the important services you have rendered me, I should be the most
ungrateful of my sex, if I were to do nothing for you in return.
I undertake, therefore, to better your condition: it is my duty,
and the means are in my power. My fortune is large enough to pay
my debt of obligation to you, without putting myself to
inconvenience.

You know, continued she, my story up to the time when we both
were committed to prison. I will now tell you what has happened
to me since. When the corregidor at Astorga had sent me to
Burgos, after having heard from my own lips a faithful recital of
my adventures, I presented myself at the castle of Ambrosio. My
return thither excited extreme surprise: but they told me that it
was too late; the marquis, as if he had been thunderstruck at my
flight, fell sick; and the physicians despaired of his recovery.
Here was a new incident in the melancholy tragedy of my fate. Yet
I ordered my arrival to be announced. The next moment I ran into
his chamber, and threw myself on my knees by his bedside, with a
face running down with tears and a heart oppressed with the most
lively sorrow. Who sent for you hither? said he as soon as he saw
me; are you come to contemplate your own contrivance? Was it not
enough to have deprived me of life? But was it necessary to
satisfy your heart's desire, to be an eye-witness of my death? My
lord, replied I, Inès must have told you that I fled with my
first husband; and, had it not been for the sad accident which
has taken him from me for ever, you never would have seen me
more. At the same time, I acquainted him that Don Alvar had been
killed by banditti, whose captive I had consequently been in a
subterraneous dungeon. After relating the particulars of my story
to the end, Don Ambrosio held out to me his hand. It is enough,
said he affectionately, I will make no more complaints. Alas!
Have I in fact any right to reproach you? You were thrown once
more in the way of a beloved husband; and gave me up to follow
his fortunes: can I blame such an instance of your affection? No,
madam, it would have been vain to resist the will of fate. For
that reason I gave orders not to pursue you. In my rival himself
I could not but respect the sacred rights with which he was
invested, and even the impulse of your flight seemed to have been
communicated by some superior power. To close all with an act of
justice, and in the spirit of reconciliation, your return hither
has re-established you completely in my affection. Yes, my dear
Mencia, your presence fills me with joy: but, alas! I shall not
long be sensible to it. I feel my last hour to be at hand. No
sooner are you restored to me, than I must bid you an eternal
farewell. At these touching expressions, my tears flowed in
torrents. I felt and expressed as much affliction as the human
heart is capable of containing. I question whether Don Alvar's
death, doting on him as I did, had cost me more bitter
lamentations. Don Ambrosio had given way to no mistaken presage
of his death, which happened on the following day; and I remained
mistress of a considerable jointure, settled on me at our
marriage. But I shall take care to make no unworthy use of it.
The world shall not see me, young as I still am, wantoning in the
arms of a third husband. Besides that such levity seems
irreconcilable with the feelings of any but the profligate of our
sex, I will frankly own the relish of life to be extinct in me;
so that I mean to end my days in this convent, and to become a
benefactress to it.

Such was Donna Mencia's discourse about her future plans. She
then drew a purse from beneath her robe, and put it into my
hands, with this address: Here are a hundred ducats simply to
furnish out your wardrobe. That done, come and see me again. I
mean not to confine my gratitude within such narrow bounds. I
returned her a thousand thanks, and promised solemnly not to quit
Burgos, without taking leave of her. Having given this pledge,
which I had every inclination to redeem, I went to look out for
some house of entertainment. Entering the first I met with, I
asked for a room. To parry the ill opinion my frock might convey
of my finances, I told the landlord that, however appearances
might be against me, I could pay for my night's lodging as well
as a better dressed gentleman. At this speech, the landlord,
whose name was Majuelo, a great banterer in a coarse way, running
over me with his eyes from top to toe, answered with a cool,
sarcastic grin, that there was no need of any such assurance; it
was evident I should pay my way liberally, for he discovered
something of nobility through my disguise, and had no doubt but I
was a gentle man in very easy circumstances. I saw plainly that
the rascal was laughing at me; and, to stop his humour before it
became too convulsive, gave him a little insight into the state
of my purse. I went so far as to count over my ducats on a table
before him, and perceived my coin to have inclined him to a more
respectful judgment. I begged the favour of him to send for a
tailor. A broker would be better, said he; he will bring all
sorts of apparel, and you will be dressed up out of hand. I
approved of this advice, and determined to follow it; but, as the
day was on the point of closing, I put off my purchase till the
morrow, and thought only of getting a good supper, to make amends
for the miserable fare I had taken up with since my escape from
the forest.



CH. XV. -- Gil Blas dresses himself to more advantage, and
receives a second present from the lady. His equipage on setting
out from Burgos.


THEY served me up a plentiful fricassee of sheep's trotters,
almost the whole of which I demolished. My drinking kept pace
with my eating: and when I could stuff no longer, I went to bed.
I lay comfortably enough, and was in hopes that a sound sleep
would have the kindness without delay to commit a friendly
invasion on my senses. But I could not close an eye for
ruminating on the dress I should choose. What shall I do, thought
I? Shall I follow my first plan? Shall I buy a short cassock, and
go to Salamanca to set up for a tutor? Why should I adopt the
costume of a licentiate? For the purpose of going into orders? Do
I feel an inward call? No? If I have any call, it is quite the
contrary way. I had rather wear a sword than an apron: and push
my fortune in this world, before I think of the next.

I made up my mind to take on myself the appearance of a
gentleman. Waiting for the day with the greatest impatience, its
first dawn no sooner greeted my eyes, than I got up. I made such
an uproar in the inn, as to wake the most inveterate sleeper, and
called the servants out of bed, who returned my salute with a
volley of curses. But they found themselves under a necessity of
stirring, and I let them have no rest till they had sent for a
broker. The gentleman soon made his appearance, followed by two
lads, each lugging in a great bundle of green cloth. He accosted
me very civilly, to the following effect: Honoured sir, you are a
happy man to have been recommended to me rather than any one
else. I do not mean to give my brethren an ill word: God forbid I
should offer the slightest injury to their reputation! They have
none to spare. But, between ourselves, there is not one of them
that has any bowels; they are more extortionate than the
Israelites. There is not a broker but myself that has any moral
sense. I keep within the bounds of a reasonable profit. I am
satisfied with a pound in the penny;  --  no, no!  --  that is
wrong:  --  with a penny in the pound. Thanks to heaven, I get
forward fair and softly in the world.

The broker, after this preface, which I, like a fool, took for
chapter and verse, told his journeymen to undo their bundles.
They showed me suits of every colour in the rainbow, and exposed
to sale a great choice of plain cloths. These I threw aside with
contempt, as thinking them too undrest; but they made me try on
one which fitted me as well as if I had been measured for it, and
just hit my fancy, though it was a little the worse for wear. It
was a doublet with slashed sleeves, with breeches and a cloak,
the whole of blue velvet with a gold embroidery. I felt a little
hankering after this particular article, and attempted to beat
down the price. The broker, who saw my inclination, told me I had
a very correct taste. By all that is sacred! exclaimed he, it is
plain you are no younker. Take this with you! That dress was made
for one of the first nobility in the kingdom, and has not been on
his back three times. Look at the velvet; feel it: nothing can be
richer or of a better colour; and for the embroidery, come now!
tell truth: did you ever see better workmanship? What is the
price of it? said I. Only sixty ducats, replied he. I have
refused the money, or else I am a liar. The alternative could not
fail in one proposition or the other. I bid five and forty: two
or three and twenty would have been nearer the mark. My worthy
master, said the broker coolly, I never ask too much. I have but
one price. But here, added he, holding up the suits I had thrown
aside; take these: I can afford to sell them a better bargain.
All this only inflamed my eagerness to buy what I was cheapening;
and as I had no idea that he would have made any abatement, I
paid him down sixty ducats. When he saw how easily a fool and his
money were parted, I verily believe that in spite of the moral
sense, he heartily repented not having taken a hint from the
extortionate Israelite. But reconciling himself as well as he
could to the small profit, to which he professed to confine
himself, of a pound upon a penny, he retreated with his
journeymen. I was not suffered to forget that they must have
something for their trouble.

I had now a cloak, a doublet, and a very decent pair of breeches.
The rest of my wardrobe was to be thought of: and this took up
the whole morning. I bought some linen, a hat, silk stockings,
shoes, and a sword; and concluded by putting on my purchases.
What pleasure was it to see myself so well accoutred! My eyes
were never cloyed, as it were, with the richness of my attire.
Never did peacock look at his own plumage with less philosophy.
On that very day, I paid a second visit to Donna Mencia, who
received me with her usual affability. She thanked me over again
for the service I had rendered her. On that subject, rapid was
the interchange of compliments. Then, wishing every kind of
success, she bade me farewell, and withdrew, without giving me
anything but a ring worth thirty pistoles, which she begged me to
keep as a remembrance.

I looked very foolish with my ring! I had reckoned on a much more
considerable present. Thus, little satisfied with the lady's
bounty, I measured back my steps in a very musing attitude: but
as I entered the inn door, a man over took me, and throwing off
his wrapping cloak, discovered a large bag under his arm. At the
vision of the bag, apparently full of current coin, I stood
gaping as did most of the company present. The voice of angel or
archangel could not have been sweeter, than when this messenger
of earthly dross, laying the bag upon the table, said: Signor Gil
Blas, the lady marchioness desires her compliments. I bowed the
bearer out, with an accumulation of fine speeches; and, as soon
as his back was turned, pounced upon the bag, like a hawk upon
its quarry, and bore it between my talons to my chamber. I untied
it without loss of time, and the contents were;  --  a thousand
ducats! The landlord who had overheard the bearer, came in just
as I had done counting them, to know what was in the bag. The
sight of my riches displayed upon a table, struck him in a very
forcible manner. What the devil! here is a sum of money! So, so!
you are the man! pursued he with a waggish sort of leer, you know
how to -- tickle the -- fancies of the ladies! Four and twenty
hours only have you been in Burgos, and marchionesses, I warrant
you, have surrendered at the first summons!

This discourse was not so much amiss. I was half inclined to
leave Majuelo in his error; for it flattered my vanity. I do not
wonder young fellows are fond of passing for men of gallantry.
But as yet the purity of my morals was proof against the
suggestions of my pride. I undeceived my landlord, by telling him
Donna Mencia's story, to which he listened very attentively.
Afterwards I let him into the state of my affairs; and, as he
seemed to take an interest in them, besought him to assist me
with his advice. He ruminated for some time; then said with a
serious air: Master Gil Blas, I have taken a liking to you; and
since you are candid enough to open your heart to me, I will tell
you sincerely what I think would suit you best. You were
evidently born for a court life: I recommend you to go thither,
and to get about the person of some considerable nobleman. But
make a point either of getting at his secrets, or administering
to his pleasures; unless you do that, it will be all lost time in
his family. I know the great: they reckon nothing upon the zeal
and attachment of a real friend; but only care for pimping
sycophants. You have, besides, another string to your bow. You
are young, with an attractive person: parts out of the question,
for they are not at all times necessary, it is hard if you cannot
turn the head of some rich widow, or handsome wife with a
broomstick for her husband. Love may ruin men of fortune; but it
makes amends by feathering the nests of those who have none. My
vote, therefore, is for Madrid: but you must not make your
appearance there without an establishment. There, as elsewhere,
people judge by the outside; and you will only be respected
according to the figure you make. I will find you a servant, a
tried domestic, a prudent lad; in a word, a fellow of my own
creation. Buy a couple of mules; one for yourself, the other for
him: and set off as fast as you can.

This counsel was too palatable to be refused. On the day
following I purchased two fine mules, and bargained with my new
servant. He was a young man of thirty, of a very simple and godly
appearance. He told me he was a native of Galicia, by name
Ambrose de Lamela. Other servants are selfish, and think they
never can have wages enough. This fellow assured me he was a man
of few wants, and should be contented with whatever I had the
goodness to give him. I bought a pair of boots, with a
portmanteau to lock up my linen and my money. Having settled with
my landlord, I set out from Burgos the next morning before sun-
rise, on my way to Madrid.



CH. XVI.  -- Showing that prosperity will slip through a man's
fingers.


WE slept at Duengnas the first night, and reached Valladolid on
the following day, about four o'clock in the afternoon. We
alighted at the inn of the most respectable appearance in the
town. I left the care of the mules to my fellow, and went up to a
room whither I ordered my portmanteau to be carried by a waiter.
As I felt a little weary, I threw myself on a couch in my boots,
and fell asleep involuntarily. It was almost night when I awoke.
I called for Ambrose. He was not to be found in the house; but
made his appearance in a short time. I asked him where he had
been: he answered in his godly way, that he was just come from
church, whither he went for the purpose of thanksgiving, by
reason that we had been graciously preserved from all perils and
dangers between Burgos and Valladolid. I commended his piety; and
ordered a chicken to be roasted for supper.

At the moment when I was giving this order, my landlord came into
my room with a light in his hand. That cursed candle served to
introduce a lady, handsome, but not young, and very richly
attired. She leant upon an usher, none of the youngest, and a
little blackamoor was her train-bearer. I was under no small
surprise when this fair incognita, with a profound obeisance,
begged to know if my name might happen to be Signor Gil Blas of
Santillane? I had no sooner blundered out yes, than she released
her sweet hand from the custody of the usher, and embraced me
with a transport of joy, of which I knew less and less what to
make. Heaven be praised, cried she, for all its mercies! You are
he, noble sir, the very man of whom I was in quest. By this
introduction I was reminded of my friend the parasite at
Pegnaflor, and was on the point of suspecting the lady to be no
better than an honest woman should be: but her finale gave me a
much higher opinion of her. I am, continued she, first cousin to
Donna Mencia de Mosquera, whom you have so greatly befriended. It
was but this morning I received a letter from her. She writes me
word that having learnt your intention of going to Madrid, she
wished me to receive you hospitably on your journey, if you went
this way. For these two hours have I been parading the town. From
inn to inn have I gone to inform myself what strangers were in
the house; and I gathered from the landlord's description that
you were most likely to have been my cousin's deliverer. Since
then I have found you out, you shall know by experience my
gratitude to the friends of my family, and especially to my dear
cousin's hero. You will take up your abode, if you please, at my
house. Your accommodations will be better. I wished to excuse
myself; and told the lady that I could not be so troublesome: but
her importunities were more than a match for my modesty. A
carriage was waiting at the door of the inn to convey us. She saw
my portmanteau taken care of with her own eyes, because, as she
justly observed, there were a great many light-fingered gentry
about Valladolid -- to be sure there were a great many light-
fingered gentry about Valladolid, as she justly observed! In
short, I got into the carriage with her and the old usher, and
suffered myself to be carried off bodily from the inn, to the
great annoyance of the landlord, who saw himself thus weaned from
all the little perquisites he had reckoned on from my abode under
his roof.

Our carriage, having rolled on some distance, stopped. We
alighted at the door of a handsome house, and went up-stairs into
a well-furnished apartment, illuminated by twenty or thirty wax
candles. Several servants were in waiting, of whom the lady
inquired whether Don Raphael was come. They answered, No. She
then addressed herself to me: Signor Gil Blas, I am waiting for
my brother's return from a country seat of ours, about two
leagues distant. What an agreeable surprise will it be to him to
find a man under his roof to whom our family is so much indebted!
At the very moment she had finished this pretty speech we heard a
noise, and were informed at the same time that it was occasioned
by the arrival of Don Raphael. This spark soon made his
appearance. He was a young man of portly figure and genteel
manners. I am in ecstacy to see you back again, brother, said the
lady; you will assist me in doing the honours to Signor Gil Blas
of Santillane. We can never do enough to show our sense of his
kindness to our kinswoman, Donna Mencia. Here, read this letter I
have just received. Don Raphael opened the envelope, and read
aloud as follows:

My dear Camilla, Signor Gil Blas of Santillane, the saviour of my
honour and my life, has just set out for court. He will of course
pass through Valladolid. I conjure you by our family connection,
and still more by our indissoluble friendship, to give him an
hospitable reception, and to detain him for some time as your
guest. I flatter myself that you will so far oblige me, and that
my deliverer will receive every kind of polite attention from
yourself, and my cousin, Don Raphael. Your affectionate cousin,

DONNA MENCIA.

Burgos.

What! cried Don Raphael, casting his eyes again over the letter,
is it to this gentleman my kinswoman owes her honour and her
life? Then heaven be praised for this happy meeting. With this
sort of language, he advanced to wards me; and squeezing me
tightly in his arms: What joy to me is it, added he, to have the
honour of seeing Signor Gil Blas of Santillane! My cousin the
marchioness had no need to press the hospitality. Had she only
told us simply that you were passing through Valladolid, that
would have been enough. My sister Camilla and I shall be at no
loss how to conduct ourselves towards a young gentleman who has
conferred an obligation, not to be repaid, on her of all our
family most tenderly beloved by us. I made the best answer I
could to these speeches, which were followed by many others of
the same kind, and interlarded with a thousand bows and scrapes.
But Lord bless me, he has his boots on! The servants were ordered
in, to take them ofF.

We next went into another room, where the cloth was lain. Down we
sat at table, the brother, sister, and myself. They paid me a
hundred compliments during supper. Not a word escaped me, but
they magnified it into an admirable hit! It was impossible not to
observe the assiduity with which they both helped me out of every
dish. Don Raphael often pledged me to Donna Mencia's health. I
could not refuse the challenge; and it looked a little as if
Camilla, who was a very good companion, ogled at me with no
questionable meaning. I even thought I could perceive that she
watched her opportunity, as if she was afraid of being detected
by her brother. An oracle could not have convinced me more firmly
that the lady was caught; and I looked forward to a little
delicate amusement from the discovery, during the short time I
was to stay at Valladolid. That hope was my tempter to comply
with the request they made me, of condescending to pass a few
days with them. They thanked me kindly for indulging them with my
company; and Camilla's restrained, but visible transport,
confirmed me in the opinion that I was not altogether
disagreeable in her eyes.

Don Raphael, finding I had made up my mind to be his guest for a
few days, proposed to take me to his country house. The
description of it was magnificent, and the round of amusements he
meditated for me was not to be described. At one time, said he,
we will take the diversion of the chase, at another that of
fishing; and whenever you have a mind for a saunter, we have
charming woods and gardens. In addition, we shall have agreeable
society. I flatter myself you will not find the time hang heavy
on your hands. I accepted the invitation, and it was agreed that
we should go to this fine country house the following day. We
rose from the table with this pleasant scheme in our mouths. Don
Raphael seemed in ecstacy. Signor Gil Blas, said he, embracing
me, I leave you with my sister. I am going presently to give the
necessary orders, and send invitations round to the families I
wish to be of the party. With these words he sallied forth from
the room where we were sitting. I went on chatting with the lady,
whose topics of discourse did not bely the glances of her
expressive eyes. She took me by the hand, and playing with my
ring, You have a mighty pretty brilliant there, said she, but it
is small. Are you a judge of jewellery? I answered, no! I am
sorry for that, resumed she, because I was in hopes you could
have told me what this is worth. As she uttered these words, she
showed me a large ruby on her finger; and, while I was looking at
it, said -- An uncle of mine, who was governor of the Spanish
settlements in the Philippine isles, gave me this ruby. The
jewellers at Valladolid value it at three hundred pistoles. It
cannot be worth less, said I, for it is evidently a very fine
stone. Why, then, since you have taken a fancy to it, replied
she, an exchange is no robbery. In a twinkling she whisked off my
ring, and placed her own on my little finger. After this
exchange, a genteel way enough of making a present, Camilla
pressed my hand and gazed at me with expressive tenderness; then,
all at once breaking off the conversation, wished me good night,
and re tired to hide her blushes, as if she had been ready to
sink at the indiscreet avowal of her sentiments.

No one hitherto had trod less in the paths of gallantry than 
myself! Yet I could not shut my eyes to the vista vision opened
to me by this precipitate retreat. Under these circumstances, a
country excursion might have its charms. Full of this flattering
idea, and intoxicated with the prosperous condition of my
affairs, I locked myself into my bed-room, after having told my
servant to call me betimes in the morning. Instead of going to
sleep, I gave myself up to the agreeable reflections which my
portmanteau, snug upon the table, and my ruby excited in my
breast. Heaven be praised, thought I, though misfortunes have
been my lot, I am unfortunate no longer. A thousand ducats here,
a ring of three hundred pistoles' value there! I am in cash for a
considerable time. In deed Majuelo was no flatterer, I see
clearly. The ladies of Madrid will take fire like touchwood,
since the green sticks of Valladolid are so inflammable. Then the
kind regards of the generous Camilla arrayed themselves in all
their charms, and I tasted by anticipation the amusements Don
Raphael was preparing for me at his villa. In the mean while,
amid so many images of pleasure, sleep was on the watch to strew
his poppies on my couch. As soon as I felt myself drowsy, I
undressed and went to bed.

The next morning, when I awoke, I found it rather late. It was
odd enough that my servant did not make his appearance, after
such particular orders. Ambrose, thought I to myself, my devout
Ambrose is either at church, or abominably lazy this morning. But
I soon let go this opinion of him to take up a worse; for getting
out of bed, and seeing no portmanteau, I suspected him to have
stolen it during the night. To clear up my suspicions, I opened
my chamber door, and called the religious rascal over and over
again. An old man answered, saying --  What is your pleasure,
sir? All your folks left my house before day-break. Your house!
How now! exclaimed I; am I not under Don Raphael's roof? I do not
know the gentleman, said he. You are in a ready-furnished
lodging, and I am the landlord. Yesterday evening, an hour before
your arrival, the lady who supped with you came hither, and
engaged this suite of apartments for a nobleman of high rank,
travelling incognito, as she called it. She paid me beforehand. I
was now in the secret. It was plain enough what sort of people
Camilla and Don Raphael were; and I conjectured that my servant,
having wormed himself into a complete knowledge of my concerns,
had betrayed me to these impostors. Instead of blaming myself for
this sad accident, and considering that it could never have
happened but for my indiscretion in so unnecessarily betraying my
confidence to Majuelo, I gave bad language to the poor harmless
dame fortune, and cursed my ill star in a hundred different
formularies. The master of the ready-furnished lodging, to whom I
related the adventure, which perhaps was as much his as mine,
showed some little outward sensibility to my affliction. He
lamented over me, and protested he was deeply mortified that such
a play should have been acted in his house; but I verily believe,
not withstanding his fine words, that he had an equal share in
the cheat with mine host at Burgos, to whom I have never denied
the merit of so ingenious an invention.



CH. XVII. -- The measures Gil Blas took after the adventure of
the ready-furnished lodging.


AFTER the first transports of my grief were over, I began to
consider, that instead of giving way to remorse, I ought rather
to bear up against my ill fate. I summoned back my resolution,
and, by way of comfort, said to myself as I was dressing -- I am
still in luck that the knaves have not carried off my clothes and
what little money I had in my pocket. I gave them some credit for
being so considerate. They had even been generous enough to leave
me my boots, which I parted with to the landlord for a third of
their cost. At last I sallied out of the ready-furnished lodging,
unencumbered, heaven be praised, with baggage or attendance. The
first thing I did was to go and see if my mules were still at the
inn where we alighted the evening before. It was not to be
supposed that Ambrose would have neglected a due attention to
them; and it would have been well for me if I had always taken
such exact measure of his character. I learned that he had not
waited for the morning, but had been careful to fetch them by
over-night. Under the circumstances, satisfied I should never see
them again, any more than my portmanteau, I walked sulkily along
the streets, musing on the future plans I should adopt. I was
tempted to go back to Burgos, and once more have recourse to
Donna Mencia; but, regarding this as an abuse of that lady's
goodness, and being aware, moreover, what a fool I should look
like, I thought it best to forego that idea. I made a vow too for
the future to be on my guard against women. I could have sent the
chaste Susanna to the house of correction. From time to time my
ring caught my eye, it was a present from Camilla! and I was
ready to burst with anguish. Alas! thought I, I am no judge of
jewellery, but I shall be, by experience of these hucksters who
exchange without a robbery. I need not go to a jeweller to be
told I am an ass! I can see my own face in my ruby.

Yet I did not neglect to know the truth respecting the value of
my ring, and showed it to a lapidary, who rated it at three
ducats. At such an estimate, though as much as I expected, I made
a formal surrender to the devil, of the Philippine isles, the
governor and his niece; or rather, I only restored his own
subjects to their lawful sovereign. As I was going out of the
lapidary's shop a young fellow brushed by me, and on looking
round, made a full stop. I could not recollect his name at first,
though his features were perfectly familiar to me. How now, Gil
Blas, said he, are you ashamed of an old acquaintance? or have
two years so altered the son of Nunez the barber, that you do not
know him? Do not you recollect Fabricio, your townsman and
schoolfellow? How often have we kept, before Doctor Godinez, upon
universals and metaphysics!

These words did not flow so fast as my recollection, and we
embraced with mutual good will. Well, my friend, resumed he, I am 
overjoyed to meet with you. Words fall short -- But how is this?
Why, you look like --  as heaven is my judge, you are dressed
like a grandee! A gentleman's sword, silk stockings, a velvet
doublet and cloak, embroidered with silver! Plague take it! this
is getting on in the world with a vengeance. I will lay a wager
you are in with some old monied harridan. You reckon without your
host, said I, my affairs are not so prosperous as you imagine.
That will not do for me, replied he, I know better things; but
you have a mind to be close. And that fine ruby on your finger,
master Gil Blas, whence comes that, if I may be so bold? It
comes, quoth I, from an infernal jade. Fabricio, my dear
Fabricio, far from being point, quint, and quatorze with the
ladies of Valladolid, you are to know, my friend, that I am their
complete bubble.

I uttered these last words so ruefully, that Fabricio saw plainly
that some trick had been played upon me. He was anxious to learn
why I was out of humour with the lovely sex. I had no difficulty
in satisfying his curiosity; but as the story was a long one, and
besides we had no mind to part in a hurry, we went into a coffee-
house to be a little more at ease. There I recounted to him,
during breakfast, all that had happened to me since my departure
from Oviedo. My adventures he thought whimsical enough; and
testifying his sympathy in my present uneasy circumstances, added
-- We must make the best, my good lad, of all our misfortunes in
this life. Is a man of parts in distress? he waits patiently for
better luck. Such an one, as Cicero truly observes, never suffers
himself to be humbled so low, as to forget that he is a man. For
my own part, that is just my character; in or out of favour there
is no sinking me; I always float on the surface of ill-luck. For
example, I was in love with a girl of some family at Oviedo, and
was beloved by her in return. I asked her of her father in
marriage, he refused. Many a young fellow would have died of
grief; but no! mark my spirit, I carried off the little baggage.
She was lively, heedless, and coquettish: pleasure consequently
was always uppermost to the prejudice of duty. I took her with me
for six months backwards and forwards about Galicia; thence,
adopting my taste for travelling, she had a mind to go to
Portugal, but in other company --  more food for despair. Yet I
did not give in under the weight of this new affliction; but,
improving on Menelaus, thought myself much obliged to the Paris
who had whispered in the ear of my Helen, for ridding me of a bad
bargain; I therefore determined to keep the peace. After that,
not finding it convenient to return to the Asturias and balance
accounts with justice, I went forward into the kingdom of Leon,
spending between one town and another all the loose cash
remaining from the rape of my Indian princess; for we had both of
us birdlimed our fingers at our departure from Oviedo. I got to
Palencia with a solitary ducat, out of which I was obliged to buy
a pair of shoes. The remainder would not go far. My situation
became rather perplexing. I began already to be reduced to short
allowance; something must be done. I resolved to go out to
service. My first place was with a woollen-draper in a large way,
whose son was a lad of wit and fashion; here was a complete
antidote to fasting, but then there was a little awkwardness. The
father ordered me to dog the son, the son begged my assistance in
imposing on the father; it was necessary to take one side or
other. Entreaties sound more musical than commands, and my taste
for music got me turned out of doors. The next service I entered
into was with an old painter, who undertook, as a matter of
favour, to teach me the principles of his art; but he was so busy
in feeding me with knowledge, that he forgot to give me any meat.
This neglect of substance for shadow disgusted me with my abode
at Palencia. I came to Valladolid, where, by the greatest good
luck in the world, I was hired by a governor of the hospital; I
am with him still, and delighted with my quarters. My master,
Signor Manuel Ordonnez, is a man of profound piety. He always
walks with his eyes cast downwards, and a large rosary in his
hand. They say that from his early youth, having been a close
inspector of the poor, he has interested himself in their affairs
with unwearied zeal. Charity draws down a blessing on the
charitable, everything has prospered with him. What a favourite
of heaven! The more he does for the poor, the richer he grows.

As Fabricio was going on in this manner, I interrupted him. It is
well you are satisfied with your lot; but, between ourselves,
surely you might play your part better in the world. Do not you
believe it, Gil Blas, replied he; be assured that for a man of my
temper a more agreeable situation could not possibly have been
devised. The trade of a lacquey is toilsome, to be sure, for a
poor creature; but for a lad of spirit it is all enchantment. A
superior genius, when he gets a service, does not go about it
like a lumpish simpleton. He enters into a family as viceroy over
the master, not as an inferior minister. He begins by measuring
the length of his employer's foot; by lending himself to his
weaknesses, he gains his confidence, and ends with leading him by
the nose. Such has been my plan of operation at the governor's. I
knew the pilgrim at once by his staff; his wish was for an
earthly canonization. I pretended to believe him to be the saint
he wished to be taken for, hypocrisy costs nothing. Nay, I went
further, for I took pattern by him; and playing the same part
before him which he played before others, I out-cozened the
cozener, and by degrees got to be major-domo. I am in hopes some
day or other, under his wing, to have the fingering of the poor-
box. It may bring a blessing upon me as well as another; for I
have caught the flame from him, and already feel deeply for the
interests of charity.

These are fine hopes, my dear Fabricio, replied I; and I
congratulate you upon them. For my part, I am determined on my
first plan. I shall straightway convert my embroidered suit into
a cassock, repair to Salamanca, and there, enlisting under the
banner of the university, fulfil the sacred duties of a tutor. A
fine scheme! exclaimed Fabricio, a pleasant conceit! What
madness, at your age, to turn pedant! Are you aware, you stupid
fellow, what you take upon yourself by that choice? As soon as
you are settled, all the house will be upon the watch, your most
trivial actions will be minutely sifted. You will lead a life of
incessant constraint; you must set yourself off with a
counterfeit outside, and affect to entertain a double set of the
cardinal virtues in your bosom. You will not have a moment to
bestow on pleasure. The everlasting censor of your pupil, your
days will pass in teaching grammar and administering saintly
reprehension, when he shall say or do anything against decorum.
After so much labour and confinement, what will be your reward?
If the little gentleman is a pickle, they will lay all the blame
on your bad management; and you will be kicked out of the family,
it may be without your stipend. Do not tell me then of a tutor's
employment; it is worse than a cure of souls. But talk as much as
you will about a lacquey's occupation, that is a sinecure, and
pledges you to nothing. Suppose one's master not to be
immaculate? A servant of superior genius will flatter his vices,
and not unfrequently turn them to account. A footman lives at his
ease in a good family. After having ate and drank his fill, he
goes to bed peaceably, without troubling himself who pays the
bills.

I should never have done, my dear fellow, pursued he, were I to
enumerate all the advantages of service. Trust me, Gil Blas,
discard for ever your foolish wish of being a tutor, and follow
my example. So be it: but, Fabricio, replied I, governors like
yours are not to be met with every day; and if resolved to go to
service, I should like at least to get a good situation. Oh! you
are in the right, said he, and that shall be my concern. I will
get you a comfortable place, if it were only to snatch a fine
fellow from the jaws of the university.

The near approach of poverty with which I was threatened, and
Fabricio's apparent good case, having more weight with me than
his arguments, I determined to wear a livery. On which we sallied
forth from the tavern, and my townsman said: I am going to
introduce you to a man, to whom most of the servants resort when
they are on the ramble; he has eaves-droppers about him to pick
up all that passes in families. He knows at once where the
servants are going away, and keeps a correct register, not only
of vacant places, but of vacant masters, with their good and bad
properties. The fellow has been a friar in some convent or other.
In short, he it was who got me my place.

While we were conversing about so singular an office of
intelligence, the son of Nunez the barber took me into a street
which had no thoroughfare. We went into a mean house, where we
found a man about fifty writing at a table. We wished him good
day, with quite as much humility as became us: but, whether it
was from natural pride, or that, from a habit of seeing none but
lacqueys and coachmen, he had got a trick of receiving his
company with an easy freedom, without rising from his seat, he
just gave a slight nod. He seemed surprised that a young man in
embroidered velvet should want a place; he had rather expected me
to have wanted a servant. However, he was not kept long in doubt,
since Fabricio said at once: Signor Arias de Londona, give me
leave to introduce one of my best friends. He is a youth of good
connections, whom adverse circumstances have reduced to the
necessity of going to service. Have the goodness to provide for
him handsomely, and you may trust to his gratitude. Gentlemen,
replied Arias coolly, this is the way with you all; before you
are settled, you make the finest promises in the world: but
afterwards, Lord help us! your memories are very short. The
deuce! replied Fabricio, why you do not complain of me? Have not
I done the thing genteelly? You ought to have done it much
better, rejoined Arias: your place is better than a clerk in a
public office, and you paid me as if I had quartered you upon a
poor author. Here I interfered, and told Master Arias, that to
convince him I was not a shabby fellow, I would make my
acknowledgments beforehand; at the same time taking out two
ducats, with an assurance of not stopping there if he got me into
a good berth.

He seemed to like my mode of dealing. There are, said he, some
very good places vacant. I will give you a list of them, and you
shall take your choice. With these words, he put on his
spectacles, opened a register on the table, turned over a few of
the leaves, and began reading to this effect: Captain Torbellino
wants a footman; a hasty, hair-brained, humoursome chap; scolds
incessantly, swears, kicks his servants, and very often cripples
them. Go on to the next, cried I, at this picture; such a captain
will never do for me. My sprightliness made Arias smile, and he
went on with his catalogue thus: Donna Manuela de Sandoval, a
superannuated dowager, peevish and fantastical, is in want at
this very time; she keeps but one, and him never for four-and-
twenty hours. There has been a livery in the house for these ten
years, which fits every new-corner, whether tall or short. They
only just try it on; so that it is as good as new though it has
had two thousand owners. Doctor Alvar Fanez wants a journeyman;
an eminent member of the faculty! He boards his family very
handsomely, has everything comfortable about him, and gives very
high wages; but he is a little too fond of experiments. When he
gets a parcel of bad drugs, which happens very often, there is a
pretty quick succession of new servants.

Oh! I do not in the least doubt it, interrupted Fabricio with a
horse-laugh. Upon my word, you give me a fine character of your
customers. Patience, said Arias de Londona; we have not yet got
to the end: there is variety enough. Thereupon he continued to
read on: Donna Alfonsa de Solis, an old devotee, who lives two-
thirds of her time at church, and always keeps her servant at her
apron string, has been in want for these three weeks. The
Licentiate Sédillo, an old prebendary of the chapter here, turned
away his servant yesterday evening     Halt there, Signor Arias
de Londona, cried Fabricio at that passage; we will stick to the
church. The Licentiate Sédillo is one of my master's friends, and
I am very well acquainted with him. I know he has for his
housekeeper an old hypocrite, called Dame Jacintha, who is
complete mistress of the family. It is one of the best houses in
Valladolid. A very idle life, and plenty of excellent meat and
drink. Besides, his reverence is an old, gouty, infirm man, 
likely soon to make his will: there is a legacy to be looked
after. That is a delightful prospect for one of our cloth! Gil
Blas, added he, turning round to me, let us lose no time, my
friend, but go immediately to the licentiate's house. I will
introduce you myself, and give you a character. At these words,
for fear of missing such an opportunity, we took a hasty leave of
Signor Arias, who assured me, for my money, that if I failed
here, he would do something as good for me elsewhere.



BOOK THE SECOND.



CH. I. -- Fabricio introduces Gil Blas to the Licentiate Sédillo,
and procures him a reception. The domestic economy of that
clergyman. Picture of his housekeeper.


WE were so dreadfully afraid of offending against the regular
hours of the old licentiate, that we made but a hop, skip, and
jump, from the street with one outlet, to the prebendal
residence. The gates were barred: but we ventured to announce our
arrival. A girl of ten years old, the housekeeper's professed
niece, and slander could not gainsay the relationship, opened the
door to us. As we asked to speak with his reverence, Dame
Jacintha made her appearance. She was a lady of ripe person and
parts, but by no means past her prime; and I was particularly
attracted by the clearness of her complexion. She wore a long
woollen gown of the most ordinary quality, with a large leathern
girdle, whence hung suspended a bunch of keys on one side, and on
the other a tremendous string of beads. As soon as we got a
glimpse of her, we made our obeisances with all possible
reverence. She returned our salutation with similar good
breeding, but with an air of modesty, and eyes communing with the
ground.

I have been told, said my fellow servant, that the reverend the
Licentiate Sédillo wants an honest lad, and I have one at his
service with whom he will be well satisfied. The superintendent
of the household turned up her eyes at these words with a
significant side glance at me; and, finding it difficult to
reconcile my laced jacket with Fabricio's exordium, asked if it
was this fine gentleman who was come after the place. Yes, said
the son of Nunez, it is this interesting and engaging youth. Just
as you see him, the ups and downs of this transitory life have
compelled him to wear an epaulette: but fate will have made him
ample amends, added he with an affected languish, if he is so
happy as to be an inmate here, and to profit by the society of
the virtuous Jacintha. The patriarch of the Indies might have
sighed for the virtuous Jacintha at the head of his
establishment. At these words, this withered branch of piety
withdrew her penetrating regards from me, to contemplate this
courteous spokesman. Struck with certain lines which were not new
to her, in his face, I have some floating idea of having seen you
before, said she; but my memory wants a lift. Holy Jacintha,
replied Fabricio, it is enough for me to have been blessed with
your pious notice. Twice have I been under this venerable roof
with my master, Signor Manuel Ordonnez, governor of the hospital.
Ah! just so, answered the lady chamberlain, I recollect! You are
an old acquaintance. Well-a-day now! Your very belonging to
Signor Ordonnez is enough to prove you a youth of merit and
strict propriety. A servant is known by his place, and this lad
could not have had a better sponsor. Come along with me; I will
introduce you to Signor Sédillo. I am sure he will be glad to
engage a lad at your recommendation.

We followed Dame Jacintha. The canon lived in the lower part of
the house, in a comfortable suite of wainscotted apartments. She
begged us to wait a moment in the anti-chamber, while she went
into the licentiate's room. After some private parley with him,
merely that he might know what he was about, she came to tell us
we might walk in. We kenned the old cripple, immersed in an elbow
chair, with a pillow under his head, cushions under his arms, and
his legs supported on a large stool, stuffed with down. We were
no niggards of our bows as we advanced; and Fabricio, still
taking the lead, not only repeated over again what he had said to
the housekeeper, but set about extolling my merit, and expatiated
in an especial manner on the honours I had gained in the schools
under Doctor Godinez on all metaphysical questions: as if it was
necessary for a prebendary's footman to be as learned as his
master. However that might be, it served as a tub to the whale.
Besides, Dame Jacintha did not look forbidding, and my surety
received the following answer: Friend, I receive into my service
the lad you recommend. I like him well enough; and as for his
morals, they cannot be much amiss, since he presents himself
under the wing of a domestic belonging to Signor Ordonnez.

As soon as Fabricio saw me safe landed, he made a low bow to the
prebendary, a still lower to the lady, and withdrew in high good
humour, whispering in my ear that we should meet again, and that
I had only to make good my footing. As soon as he had left the
room, the licentiate inquired my name, why I had left my native
place; and drew me on by his questions to relate my adventures
before Dame Jacintha. They were both highly amused, above all by
my last rencounter. Camilla and Don Raphael gave such play to
their risible muscles, that I thought old chalkstone would have
burst: for, as he laughed with all his might, so violent a cough
laid hold of him, as went very near to have carried him off. His
will was not made. What an alarm for the housekeeper! Trembling,
distracted, off she flew to the good man's succour, and just like
a nurse with a puking child, paddled about his forehead and
tapped him on the back. Luckily it was a false alarm; the old
gentleman left off coughing, and the housekeeper tormenting him.
When it was over, I was for going on with my narrative; but Dame
Jacintha, in awe of a second fit, set herself against it. She
therefore took me with her out of the room to a ward robe, where,
among several suits, was that of my predecessor. This I was to
take, and leave my own in its room, which I was not sorry to see
laid up safe, in the hope it might be of further use. After this,
we went together to get dinner ready.

I knew what I was about in the art of dressing meat. Dame
Leonarda, with whom I had served my time, might have passed for a
very decent plain cook; but a mere turnspit to dame Jacintha. The
latter might almost have borne away the bell from the archbishop
of Toledo's man. She was mistress of everything; gravy soups, of
the most delicious texture and relish; and, for made dishes, she
could season them up or soften them down to the most delicate or
voluptuous palate. At dinner-time we returned to his reverence's
apartment. While I was arranging the grand concern close by his
arm-chair, the lady of all work crammed a napkin under the old
boy's chin, and pinned it behind his back. Without losing a
moment, in marched I with a stew, fit to be set before the first
gourmand in Madrid, and two courses, to have tickled the gills of
a viceroy, only that Dame Jacintha had touched the spice-box with
discretion, for fear of exasperating the gout. At the first
glimpse of this goodly mess, my old master, whom I conceived to
have lost the use of his limbs, made me to understand that his
arms were exempted from the interdict He availed himself of their
assistance, to get clear of his pillow and cushions, and
proceeded gaily to the attack. His hand shook, to be sure; but
somehow or other it contrived to do its duty. He sent it
backwards and forwards fast enough; though it brought but half
its cargo to the landing-place at a lading: the table cloth and
napkin took toll. I carried off the soup when he had done, and
brought in a partridge flanked by two roast quails, which Dame
Jacintha cut up for him. She took care to make him take a good
draught of wine, a little lowered at proper intervals, out of a
large, deep, silver cup, which she held to his mouth, as if he
had been an infant. He winged the partridge, and came down slap-
dash upon all the rest of the dishes. When he had done cramming,
that saint of the saucepan unpinned his napkin, reinstated his
pillow and cushions; then, leaving him composed in his arm-chair
to the enjoyment of his usual nap after dinner, we took away, and
demolished the remainder with appetites worthy of our master.

The dinner of to-day was the ordinary bill of fare. Our canon
played the best knife and fork in the chapter. But the supper was
a mere bauble; seldom more than a chicken and a little
confectionery. I larded my inside in this house, and led a good
easy life. There was but one awkward circumstance; and that was
sitting up with my master, to save the expense of a nurse.
Besides a strangury, which kept him on the fidget ten times in an
hour, he was very much given to perspire; and in that event, I
shifted him. Gil Blas, said he, on the second night, you are an
active, clever fellow; I foresee that we shall jog on very well
together. I only just give you a hint to keep in with Dame
Jacintha; the girl has been about me for these fifteen years, and
manages all my little matters; she comforts my outward man, and I 
cannot do too much for her. For that reason, you are to know,
that she is more to me than all my family. There is my nephew, my
own sister's son; why, I have turned him out of doors, only to
please her. He had no regard for the poor lass: and so far from
giving her credit for all her little assiduities, the saucy
rascal swore she did not care a farthing for me! But now-a-days,
young people think virtue and gratitude all a farce. Heaven be
praised, I am rid of the varlet. What claim has blood, in
comparison with unquestionable attachment? I am influenced by a
give-and-take principle in my connections. You are right, sir,
replied I; gratitude ought to be the first thing, and natural
affection the last. Ay! resumed he; and my will shall be a
comment on that text. My housekeeper shall be residuary legatee;
and you shall have a corner in a codicil, if you go on as well as
you have begun. The footman I turned off yesterday has lost a
good legacy, by not knowing where to hit the right nail on the
head. If the blockhead had not obliged me, by his ill behaviour,
to send him packing, I would have made a man of him: but the
beggar on horseback gave himself airs to Dame Jacintha! Then
master lazy-bones did not like sitting up! I might pass the night
as I could, provided he had no trouble with me. Oh! the unfeeling
scoundrel! exclaimed I, in the true spirit of Fabricio, he was
not a man to be about so good a master. The lad for your money
should be a humble, but confidential friend; he should not make a
toil of what ought to be a pleasure, but think nothing of going
through fire and water for your ease.

These professions were not lost upon the licentiate. Neither were
my assurances of due submission to Dame Jacintha's authority less
acceptable. Puffing myself off for a servant, who was not afraid
of work, I got through my business as cheerfully as I could. I
never complained of my nursery. Though to be sure it was irksome
enough; and if the legacy had not settled my stomach, I should
have sickened at the nature of my employment. It is true I got
some hours' rest during the day. The housekeeper, to do her
justice, was kind enough to me; owing to the insinuating manner
in which I wormed myself into her good graces. Suppose me at
table, with her and her niece Inésilla! I changed their plates,
filled their glasses, never thought of my own dinner before they
had everything they wanted. This was the way to thrive in their
esteem. One day when Dame Jacintha was gone to market, finding
myself alone with Inésilla, I began to make myself agreeable.
Were her father and mother alive? Oh! no, answered she; they have
been dead this long, long time; for my good aunt says they have,
and I have never seen them. I religiously believed the little
innocent, though her answer was not of the clearest; and she got
into such an humour of talking, as to tell me more than I wanted
to know. She informed me, or rather I inferred it from her
artless simplicity, that her good aunt had a good friend, who
lived likewise with an old canon. The temporalities of the church
were under his administration; and these lucky domestics reckoned
upon entwining the spoils of their masters round the pillars of
the hymeneal temple, into whose sanctuary they had penetrated by
anticipation. Dame Jacintha, as I have said before, though a
little stricken in years, had still some bloom. To be sure, she
spared no pains to cherish it: besides daily evacuations, she
took plentiful doses of all-powerful jelly. She got her sleep in
the night too, while I sat up with my master. But what perhaps
contributed most to the freshness of this everlasting flower, was
an issue in each leg, of which I should never have known, but for
that blab Inésilla.


CH. II. -- The canon's illness; his treatment; the consequence;
the legacy to Gil Blas.
I STAID three months with the Licentiate Sédillo, without
complaining of bad nights. At the end of that time he fell sick.
The distemper was a fever; and it inflamed the gout For the first
time in his life, which had been long, he called in a physician.
Doctor Sangrado was sent for; the Hippocrates of Valladolid. Dame
Jacintha was for sending for the lawyer first, and touched that
string; but the patient thought it was time enough, and had a
little will of his own upon some points. Away I went therefore
for Doctor Sangrado; and brought him with me. A tall, withered,
wan executioner of the sisters three, who had done all their
justice for at least these forty years! This learned forerunner
of the undertaker had an aspect suited to his office: his words
were weighed to a scruple; and his jargon sounded grand in the
ears of the uninitiated. His arguments were mathematical
demonstrations: and his opinions had the merit of originality.

After studying my master's symptoms, he began with medical
solemnity: The question here is, to remedy an obstructed
perspiration. Ordinary practitioners, in this case, would follow
the old routine of salines, diuretics, volatile salts, sulphur
and mercury; but purges and sudorifics are a deadly practice!
Chemical preparations are edged tools in the hands of the
ignorant. My methods are more simple, and more efficacious. What
is your usual diet? I live pretty much upon soups, replied the
canon, and eat my meat with a good deal of gravy. Soups and
gravy! exclaimed the petrified doctor. Upon my word, it is no
wonder you are ill. High living is a poisoned bait; a trap set by
sensuality, to cut short the days of wretched man. We must have
done with pampering our appetites: the more insipid, the more
wholesome. The human blood is not a gravy! Why then you must give
it such a nourishment as will assimilate with the particles of
which it is composed. You drink wine, I warrant you? Yes, said
the licentiate, but diluted. Oh! finely diluted, I dare say,
rejoined the physician. This is licentiousness with a vengeance!
A frightful course of feeding! Why, you ought to have died years
ago. How old are you? I am in my sixty-ninth year, replied the
canon. So I thought, quoth the practitioner, a premature old age
is always the consequence of in temperance. If you had only drank
clear water all your life, and had been contented with plain
food, boiled apples for instance, you would not have been a
martyr to the gout, and your limbs would have performed their
functions with lubricity. But I do not despair of setting you on
your legs again, provided you give yourself up to my management.
The licentiate promised to be upon his good behaviour.

Sangrado then sent me for a surgeon of his own choosing, and took
from him six good porringers of blood, by way of a beginning, to
remedy this obstinate obstruction. He then said to the surgeon;
Master Martin Onez, you will take as much more three hours hence,
and to-morrow you will repeat the operation. It is a mere vulgar
error, that the blood is of any use in the system; the faster you
draw it off the better. A patient has nothing to do but to keep
himself quiet; with him, to live is merely not to die; he has no
more occasion for blood than a man in a trance; in both cases,
life consists exclusively in pulsation and respiration. When the
doctor had ordered these frequent and copious bleedings, he added
a drench of warm water at very short intervals, maintaining that
water in sufficient quantities was the grand secret in the
materia medica. He then took his leave, telling Dame Jacintha and
me, with an air of confidence, that he would answer for the
patient's life, if his system was fairly pursued. The
housekeeper, though protesting secretly against this new
practice, bowed to his superior authority. In fact, we set on the
kettles in a hurry; and, as the physician had desired us above
all things to give him enough, we began with pouring down two or
three pints at as many gulps. An hour after we beset him again;
then, returning to the attack time after time, we fairly poured a
deluge into his poor stomach The surgeon, on the other hand,
taking out the blood as we put in the water, we reduced the old
canon to death's door in less than two days.

This venerable ecclesiastic, able to hold it out no longer, as I
pledged him in a large glass of his new cordial, said to me in a
faint voice -- Hold, Gil Blas, do not give me any more, my
friend. It is plain death will come when he will come, in spite
of water; and, though I have hardly a drop of blood in my veins,
I am no better for getting rid of the enemy. The ablest physician
in the world can do nothing for us, when our time is expired.
Fetch a notary; I will make my will. At these last words,
pleasing enough to my fancy, I affected to appear unhappy; and
concealing my impatience to be gone: Sir, said I, you are not
reduced so low, thank God, but you may yet recover. No, no,
interrupted he, my good fellow, it is all over. I feel the gout
shifting, and the hand of death is upon me. Make haste, and go
where I told you. I saw, sure enough, that he changed every
moment: and the case was so urgent, that I ran as fast as I
could, leaving him in Dame Jacintha's care, who was more afraid
than myself of his dying without a will. I laid hold of the first
notary I could find; Sir, said I, the Licentiate Sédillo, my
master, is drawing near his end; he wants to settle his affairs;
there is not a moment to be lost. The notary was a dapper little
fellow, who loved his joke; and inquired who was our physician.
At the name of Doctor Sangrado, hurrying on his cloak and hat:
For mercy's sake! cried he, let us set off with all possible
speed; for this doctor dispatches business so fast, that our
fraternity cannot keep pace with him. That fellow spoils half my
jobs.

With this sarcasm, he set forward in good earnest, and, as we
pushed on, to get the start of the grim tyrant, I said to him:
Sir, you are aware that a dying testator's memory is sometimes a
little short; should my master chance to for get me, be so good
as to put in a word in my favour. That I will, my lad, replied
the little proctor; you may rely on it. I will urge something
handsome, if I have an opportunity. The licentiate, on our
arrival, had still all his faculties about him. Dame Jacintha was
by his bedside, laying in her tears by wholesale. She had played
her game, and bespoken a handsome remembrance. We left the notary
alone with my master, and went together into the anti-chamber,
where we met the surgeon, sent by the physician for another and a
last experiment. We laid hold of him. Stop, Master Martin, said
the housekeeper, you cannot go into Signor Sédillo's room just
now. He is giving his last orders; but you may bleed away when
the will is made.

We were terribly afraid, this pious gentlewoman and I, lest the
licentiate should go off with his will half finished; but by good
luck, the important deed was executed. We saw the proctor come
out, who, finding me on the watch, slapped me on the shoulder,
and said with a simper: Gil Blas is not forgotten. At these
words, I felt the must lively joy; and was so well pleased with
my master for his kind notice, that I promised myself the
pleasure of praying for his soul after death, which event
happened anon; for the surgeon having bled him once more, the
poor old man, quite exhausted, gave up the ghost under the
lancet. Just as he was breathing his last, the physician made his
appearance, and looked a little foolish, notwithstanding the
universality of his death-bed experience. Yet far from imputing
the accident to the new practice, he walked off, affirming with
intrepidity, that it was owing to their having been too lenient
with the lancet, and too chary of their warm water. The medical
executioner, I mean the surgeon, seeing that his functions also
were at an end, followed Doctor Sangrado.

As soon as we saw the breath out of our patron's body, Dame
Jacintha, Inésilla, and myself, joined in a decent chorus of
funeral lamentation, loud enough to produce a proper effect in
the neighbourhood. The emblem of a life to come, though she had
more reason than any of us to rejoice, took the soprano part, and
screamed out her afflictions in a most pathetic manner. The room
in an instant was crowded with people, attracted less by
compassion than curiosity. The relations of the deceased no
sooner got wind of his departure than they pounced down upon the
premises, and sealed up everything. From  the housekeeper's
distreess they thought there was no will; but they soon found
their mistake, and that there was one without a flaw. When it was
opened, and they learned the disposition of the testator's
principal property, in favour of Dame Jacintha and the little
girl, they pronounced his funeral oration in terms not a little
disparaging to his memory. They gave a broad apostrophe at the
same time to the godly legatee, and a few blessings to me in my
turn. It must be owned I had earned them. The licentiate, heaven
reward him for it, to secure my remembrances through life,
expressed himself thus in a paragraph of his will  -- Item, as
Gil Blas has already some little smattering of literature, to
encourage his studious habits, I give and bequeath to him my
library, all my books and my manuscripts, without any drawback or
exception.

I could not conceive where this said library might be; I had
never seen any. I only knew of some papers, with five or six
bound books, on two little deal shelves in my master's closet;
and that was my legacy. The books too could be of no great use to
me; the title of one was, The complete Man Cook; another, A
Treatise on Indigestion, with the Methods of Cure; the rest were
the four parts of the breviary, half eaten up by the worms. In
the article of manuscripts, the most curious consisted of
documents relating to a lawsuit in which the prebendary was once
engaged for his stall. After having examined my legacy with more
minuteness than it deserved, I made over my right and title to
these invidious relations. I even renounced my livery, and took
back my own suit, claiming my wages as my only reward. I then
went to look out for another place. As for Dame Jacintha, besides
her residue under the will, she had some snug little articles,
which, by the help of her good friend, she had appropriated to
her own use during the last illness of the licentiate.



CH. III. -- Gil Blas enters into Doctor Sangrado's service, and
becomes a famous practitioner.


I DETERMINED to throw myself in the way of Signor Arias de
Londona, and to look out for a new berth in his register; but as
I was on my way to No Thoroughfare, who should come across me but
Doctor Sangrado, whom I had not seen since the day of my master's
death. I took the liberty of touching my hat. He kenned me in a
twinkling, though I had changed my dress; and with as much warmth
as his temperament would allow him; Hey day! said he, the very
lad I wanted to see; you have never been out of my thought. I
have occasion for a clever fellow about me, and pitched upon you
as the very thing, if you can read and write. Sir, replied I, if
that is all you require, I am your man. In that case, rejoined
he, we need look no further. Come home with me; it will be all
comfort: I shall behave to you like a brother. You will have no
wages, but everything will be found you. You shall eat and drink
according to the true faith, and be taught to cure all diseases.
In a word, you shall rather be my young Sangrado than my footman.

I closed in with the doctor's proposal, in the hope of becoming
an Esculapius under so inspired a master. He carried me home on
the spur of the occasion, to instal me in my honourable
employment; which honourable employment consisted in writing down
the name and residence of the patients who sent for him in his
absence. There had indeed been a register for this purpose, kept
by an old domestic; but she had not the gift of spelling
accurately, and wrote a most perplexing hand. This account I was
to keep. It might truly be called a bill of mortality; for my
members all went from bad to worse during the short time they
continued in this system. I was a sort of book-keeper for the
other world, to take places in the stage, and to see that the
first come were the first served. My pen was always in my hand,
for Doctor Sangrado had more practice than any physician of his
time in Valladolid. He had got into reputation with the public by
a certain professional slang, humoured by a medical face, and
some extraordinary cases, more honoured by implicit faith than
scrupulous investigation.

He was in no want of patients, nor consequently of property. He
did not keep the best house in the world; we lived with some
little attention to economy. The usual bill of fare consisted of
peas, beans, boiled apples or cheese. He considered this food as
best suited to the human stomach, that is to say, as most
amenable to the grinders, whence it was to encounter the process
of digestion. Nevertheless, easy as was their passage, he was not
for stopping the way with too much of them: and, to be sure, he
was in the right. But though he cautioned the maid and me against
repletion in respect of solids, it was made up by free permission
to drink as much water as we liked. Far from prescribing us any
limits there, he would tell us sometimes -- Drink, my children;
health consists in the pliability and moisture of the parts.
Drink water by pails full, it is a universal dissolvent; water
liquefies all the salts. Is the course of the blood a little
sluggish? this grand principle sets it forward: too rapid? its
career is checked. Our doctor was so orthodox on this head, that
he drank nothing himself but water, though advanced in years. He
defined old age to be a natural consumption which dries us up and
wastes us away: on this principle, he deplored the ignorance of
those who call wine old men's milk. He maintained that wine wears
them out and corrodes them, and pleaded with all the force of
eloquence against that liquor, fatal in common both to the young
and old, that friend with a serpent in its bosom, that pleasure
with a dagger under its girdle.

In spite of these fine arguments, at the end of a week a
looseness ensued, with some twinges, which I was blasphemous
enough to saddle on the universal dissolvent, and the new-
fashioned diet. I stated my symptoms to my master, in the hope he
would relax the rigour of his regimen, and qualify my meals with
a little wine, but his hostility to that liquor was inflexible.
If you have not philosophy enough, said he, for pure water, there
are innocent infusions to strengthen the stomach against the
nausea of aqueous quaffings. Sage, for example, has a very pretty
flavour: and if you wish to heighten it into a debauch, it is
only mixing rosemary, wild poppy, and other simples, but no
compounds.

In vain did he crack off his water, and teach me the secret of
composing delicious messes. I was so abstemious, that, remarking
my moderation, he said -- In good sooth, Gil Blas, I marvel not
that you are no better than you are; you do not drink enough, my
friend. Water taken in a small quantity serves only to separate
the particles of bile and set them in action; but our practice is
to drown them in a copious drench, Fear not, my good lad, lest a
superabundance of liquid should either weaken or chill your
stomach; far from thy better judgment be that silly fear of
unadulterated drink. I will ensure you against all consequences;
and if my authority will not serve your turn, read Celsus. That
oracle of the ancients makes an admirable panegyric on water; in
short, he says in plain terms that those who plead an inconstant
stomach in favour of wine, publish a libel on their own bowels,
and make their organization a pretence for their sensuality.

As it would have been ungenteel in me to have run riot on my
entrance into the career of practice, I affected thorough
conviction; indeed, I thought there was something in it. I
therefore went on drinking water on the authority of Celsus, or,
to speak in scientific terms, I began to drown the bile in
copious drenches of that unadulterated liquor; and though I felt
myself more out of order from day to day, prejudice won the cause
against experience. It is evident, therefore, that I was in the
right road to the practice of physic. Yet I could not always be
insensible to the qualms which increased in my frame, to that
degree, as to determine me on quitting Doctor Sangrado. But he
invested me with a new office which changed my tone. Hark you, my
child, said he to me one day, I am not one of those hard and
ungrateful masters, who leave their household to grow grey in
service without a suitable reward. I am well pleased with you, I
have a regard for you, and without waiting till you have served
your time, I will make your fortune. Without more ado, I will
initiate you in the healing art, of which I have for so many
years been at the head. Other physicians make the science to
consist of various unintelligible branches; but I will shorten
the road for you, and dispense with the drudgery of studying
natural philosophy, pharmacy, botany, and anatomy. Remember, my
friend, that bleeding and drinking warm water are the two grand
principles; the true secret of curing all the distempers incident
to humanity. Yes, this marvellous secret which I reveal to you,
and which nature, beyond the reach of my colleagues, has failed
in rescuing from my pen, is comprehended in these two articles --
namely, bleeding and drenching. Here you have the sum total of my
philosophy; you are thoroughly bottomed in medicine, and may
raise yourself to the summit of fame on the shoulders of my long
experience. You may enter into partnership at once, by keeping
the books in the morning, and going out to visit patients in the
afternoon. While I dose the nobility and clergy, you shall labour
in your vocation among the lower orders; and when you have felt
your ground a little, I will get you admitted into our body. You
are a philosopher, Gil Blas, though you have never graduated; the
common herd of them, though they have graduated in due form and
order, are likely to run out the length of their tether without
knowing their right hand from their left.

I thanked the doctor for having so speedily enabled me to serve
as his deputy; and, by way of acknowledging his goodness,
promised to follow his system to the end of my career, with a
magnanimous indifference about the aphorisms of Hippocrates. But
that engagement was not to be taken to the letter. This tender
attachment to water went against the grain, and I had a scheme
for drinking wine every day snugly among the patients. I left off
wearing my own suit a second time, to take up one of my master's,
and look like an inveterate practitioner. After which I brought
my medical theories into play, leaving them to look to the event
whom it might concern. I began on an alguazil in a pleurisy; he
was condemned to be bled with the utmost rigour of the law, at
the same time that the system was to be replenished copiously
with water. Next I made a lodgment in the veins of a gouty
pastry-cook, who roared like a lion by reason of gouty spasms. I
stood on no more ceremony with his blood than with that of the
alguazil, and laid no restriction on his taste for simple
liquids. My prescriptions brought me in twelve rials; an incident
so auspicious in my professional career, that I only wished for
the plagues of Egypt on all the hale subjects of Valladolid. As I
was coming out of the pastry-cook's whom should I meet but
Fabricio, a total stranger since the death of the licentiate
Sédillo! He looked at me with astonishment for some seconds; then
set up a laugh with all his might, and held his sides. He had no
reason to be grave, for I had a cloak trailing on the ground,
with a doublet and breeches of four times my natural dimensions.
I was certainly a complete original. I suffered him to make merry
as long as he liked, and could scarcely help joining in the
ridicule; but I kept a guard on my muscles to preserve a becoming
dignity in public, and the better to enact the physician, whose
part in society is not that of a buffoon. If the absurdity of my
appearance excited Fabricio's merriment, my affected gravity
added zest to it; and when he had nearly exhausted his lungs --
By all the powers, Gil Blas, quoth he, thou art in complete
masquerade. Who the devil has dressed you up in this manner? Fair
and softly, my friend, replied I, fair and softly, be a little on
your good behaviour with a modern Hippocrates. Understand me to
be the substitute of Doctor Sangrado, the most eminent physician
in Valladolid. I have lived with him these three weeks. He has
bottomed me thoroughly in medicine; and, as he cannot perform the
obsequies of all the patients who send for him, I visit a part of
them to take the burden off his conscience. He does execution in
great families, I among the vulgar. Vastly well, replied
Fabricio; that is to say, he grants you a lease on the blood of
the commonalty, but keeps to himself the fee-simple of the
fashionable world. I wish you joy of your lot; it is a pleasanter
line of practice among the populace than among great folk. Long
live a snug connection in the suburbs! a man's mistakes are
easily buried, and his murders elude all but God's revenge. Yes,
my brave boy, your destiny is truly enviable; in the language of
Alexander, were I not Fabricio, I could wish to be Gil Blas.

To show the son of Nunez, the barber, that he was not much out in
his reckoning on my present happiness, I chinked the fees of the
alguazil and the pastry-cook; and this was followed by an
adjournment to a tavern, to drink to their perfect recovery. The
wine was very fair, and my impatience for the well-known smack
made me think it better than it was. I took some good long
draughts, and without gainsaying the Latin oracle, in proportion
as I poured it into its natural reservoir, I felt my
accommodating entrails to owe me no grudge for the hard service
into which I pressed them. As for Fabricio and myself, we sat
some time in the tavern, making merry at the expense of our
masters, as servants are too much accustomed to do. At last,
seeing the night approach, we parted, after engaging to meet at
the same place on the following day after dinner.



CH. IV. -- Gil Blas goes on practising physic with equal success
and ability. Adventure of the recovered ring.


I WAS no sooner at home than Doctor Sangrado came in. I talked to
him about the patients I had seen, and paid into his hands eight
remaining rials of the twelve I had received for my
prescriptions. Eight rials! said he, as he counted them, mighty
little for two visits! But we must take things as we find them.
In the spirit of taking things as he found them, he laid violent
hands on six, giving me the other two -- Here, Gil Blas,
continued he, see what a foundation to build upon. I make over to
you the fourth of all you may bring me. You will soon feather
your nest, my friend; for, by the blessing of Providence, there
will be a great deal of ill health this year.

I had reason to be content with my dividend; since, having
determined to keep back the third part of what I received in my
rounds, and afterwards touching another fourth of the remainder,
half of the whole, if arithmetic is anything more than a
deception, would become my perquisite. This inspired me with new
zeal for my profession. The next day, as soon as I had dined, I
resumed my medical paraphernalia, and took the field once more. I
visited several patients on the list, and treated their several
complaints in one invariable routine. Hitherto things went on
under the rose, and no individual, thank heaven, had risen up in
rebellion against my prescriptions. But let a physician's cures
be as

extraordinary as they will, some quack or other is always ready
to rip up his reputation. I was called in to a grocer's son in a
dropsy. Whom should I find there before me but a little black-
looking physician, by name Doctor Cuchillo, introduced by a
relation of the family. I bowed round most profoundly, but dipped
lowest to the personage whom I took to have been invited to a
consultation with me. He returned my compliment with a distant
air; then, having stared me in the face for a few seconds --
Signor Doctor, said he, I beg pardon for being inquisitive, I
thought I had been acquainted with all my brethren in Valladolid,
but I confess your physiognomy is altogether new. You must have
been settled but a short time in town. I avowed myself a young
practitioner, acting as yet under the direction of Doctor
Sangrado. I wish you joy, replied he politely, you are studying
under a great man. You must doubtless have seen a vast deal of
sound practice, young as you appear to be, He spoke this with so
easy an assurance, that I was at a loss whether he meant it
seriously, or was laughing at me. While I was conning over my
reply, the grocer, seizing on the opportunity, said -- 
Gentlemen, I am persuaded of your both being perfectly competent
in your art; have the goodness without ado to take the case in
hand, and devise some effectual means for the restoration of my
son's health.

Thereupon the little pulse-counter set himself about reviewing
the patient's situation; and after having dilated to me on all
the symptoms, asked me what I thought the fittest method of
treatment. I am of opinion, replied I, that he should be bled
once a day, and drink as much warm water as he can swallow. At
these words, our diminutive doctor said to me with a malicious
simper -- And so you think such a course will save the patient?
Never doubt it, exclaimed I in a confident tone; it must produce
that effect, because it is a certain method of cure for all
distempers. Ask Signor Sangrado. At that rate, retorted he,
Celsus is altogether in the wrong; for he contends that the
readiest way to cure a dropsical subject is to let him almost die
of hunger and thirst. Oh! as for Celsus, interrupted I, he is no
oracle of mine, as fallible as the meanest of us; I often have
occasion to bless myself for going contrary to his dogmas. I
discover by your language, said Cuchillo, the safe and sure
method of practice Doctor Sangrado instils into his pupils.
Bleeding and drenching are the extent of his resources. No wonder
so many worthy people are cut off under his direction . . . . No
defamation! interrupted I with some acrimony; a member of the
faculty had better not begin throwing stones. Come, come, my
learned doctor, patients can get to the other world without
bleeding and warm water; and I question whether the most deadly
of us has ever signed more passports than yourself. If you have
any crow to pluck with Signor Sangrado, write against him, he
will answer you, and we shall soon see who will have the best of
the battle. By all the saints in the calendar! swore he, in a
transport of passion, you little know whom you are talking to. I
have a tongue and a fist, my friend; and am not afraid of
Sangrado, who, with all his arrogance and affectation, is but a
ninny. The size of the little death-dealer made me hold his anger
cheap. I gave him a sharp retort; he sent back as good as I
brought, till at last we came to cuffs. We had pulled a few
handfuls of hair from each other's heads before the grocer and
his kinsman could part us. When they had brought this about, they
feed me for my attendance, and retained my antagonist, whom they
thought the more skilful of the two.

Another adventure succeeded close on the heels of this. I went to
see a huge chanter in a fever. As soon as he heard me talk of
warm water, he showed himself so averse to this specific, as to
fall into a fit of swearing. He abused me in all possible shapes,
and threatened to throw me out at window. I was in a greater
hurry to get out of his house than to get in. I did not choose to
see any more patients that day, and repaired to the inn where I
had agreed to meet Fabricio. He was there first. As we found
ourselves in a tippling humour, we drank hard, and returned to
our employers in a pretty pickle, that is to say, so-so in the
upper story. Signor Sangrado was not aware of my being drunk,
because he took the lively gestures which accompanied the
relation of my quarrel with the little doctor, for an effect of
the agitation not yet subsided after the battle. Besides, he came
in for his share in my report; and feeling himself nettled by
Cuchillo --  You have done well, Gil Blas, said he, to defend the
character of our practice against this little abortion of the
faculty. So he takes upon him to set his face against watery
drenches in dropsical cases? An ignorant fellow! I maintain, I
do, in my own person, that the use of them may be reconciled to
the best theories. Yes, water is a cure for all sorts of
dropsies, just as it is good for rheumatisms and the green
sickness. It is excellent, too, in those fevers where the effect
is at once to parch and to chill, and even miraculous in those
disorders ascribed to cold, thin, phlegmatic, and pituitous
humours. This opinion may seem strange to young practitioners
like Cuchillo; but it is right orthodox in the best and soundest
systems: so that if persons of that description were capable of
taking a philosophical view, instead of crying me down, they
would become my most zealous advocates.

In his rage, he never suspected me of drinking: for, to
exasperate him still more against the little doctor, I had thrown
into my recital some circumstances of my own addition. Yet,
engrossed as he was by what I had told him, he could not help
taking notice that I drank more water than usual that evening.

In fact, the wine had made me very thirsty. Any one but Sangrado
would have distrusted my being so very dry, as to swallow down
glass after glass: but as for him, he took it for granted, in the
simplicity of his heart, that I began to acquire a relish for
aqueous potations. Apparently, Gil Blas, said he with a gracious
smile, you have no longer such a dislike to water. As heaven is
my judge! you quaff it off like nectar. It is no wonder, my
friend, I was certain you would take a liking to that liquor.
Sir, replied I, there is a tide in the affairs of men: with my
present lights, I would give all the wine in Valladolid for a
pint of water. This answer delighted the doctor, who would not
lose so fine an opportunity of expatiating on the excellence of
water. He undertook to ring the changes once more in its praise,
not like a hireling pleader, but as an enthusiast in the cause. A
thousand times, exclaimed he, a thousand and a thousand times of
greater value, as being more innocent than our modern taverns,
were those baths of ages past, whither the people went not
shamefully to squander their fortunes and expose their lives, by
swilling themselves with wine, but assembled there for the decent
and economical amusement of drinking warm water. It is difficult
enough to admire the patriotic forecast of those ancient
politicians, who established places of public resort, where water
was dealt out gratis to all comers, and who confined wine to the
shops of the apothecaries, that its use might be prohibited but
under the direction of physicians. What a stroke of wisdom! It is
doubtless to preserve the seeds of that antique frugality,
emblematic of the golden age, that persons are found to this day,
like you and me, who drink nothing but water, and are persuaded
they possess a prevention or a cure for every ailment, provided
our warm water has never boiled; for I have observed that water,
when it has boiled, is heavier, and sits less easily on the
stomach.

While he was holding forth thus eloquently, I was in danger more
than once of splitting my sides with laughing. But I contrived to
keep my countenance: nay, more; to chime in with the doctor's
theory. I found fault with the use of wine, and pitied mankind
for having contracted an untoward relish to so pernicious a
beverage. Then, finding my thirst not sufficiently allayed, I
filled a large goblet with water, and after having swilled it
like a horse: Come, sir, said I to my master, let us drink
plentifully of this beneficial liquor. Let us make those early
establishments of dilution you so much regret, to live again in
your house. He clapped his hands in ecstacy at these words, and
preached to me for a whole hour about suffering no liquid but
water to pass my lips. To confirm the habit, I promised to drink
a large quantity every evening; and, to keep my word with less
violence to my private inclinations, I went to bed with a
determined purpose of going to the tavern every day.

The trouble I had got into at the grocer's did not discourage me
from phlebotomizing and prescribing warm water in the usual
course. Coming out of a house where I had been visiting a poet in
a phrenzy, I was accosted in the street by an old woman who came
up and asked me if I was a physician. I said yes. As that is the
case, replied she, I entreat you with all humility to go along
with me. My niece has been ill since yesterday, and I cannot
conceive what is the matter with her. I followed the old lady to
her house, where I was shown into a very decent room, occupied by
a female who kept her bed. I went near, to consider her case. Her
features struck me from the first; and I discovered beyond the
possibility of a mistake, after having looked at her some little
time, the she-adventurer who had played the part of Camilla so
adroitly. For her part, she did not seem to recollect me at all,
whether from the oppression of her disorder, or from my dress as
a physician rendering me not easy to be known again. I took her
by the hand, to feel her pulse; and saw my ring upon her finger.
I was all in a twitter at the discovery of a valuable, on which I
had a claim both in law and equity. Great was my longing to make
a snatch at it; but considering that these fair ones would set up
a great scream, and that Don Raphael or some other defender of
injured innocence might rush in to their rescue, I laid an
embargo on my privateering. I thought it best to come by my own
in an honest way, and to consult Fabricio about the means. To
this last course I stuck. In the mean time the old woman urged me
to inform her with what disease her niece was troubled. I was not
fool enough to own my ignorance; on the contrary, I took upon
myself as a man of science, and after my master's example,
pronounced solemnly that the disorder accrued to the patient from
the defect of natural perspiration; that consequently she must
lose blood as soon as possible, because if we could not open one
pore, we always open another: and I finished my prescription with
warm water, to do the thing methodically.

I shortened my visit as much as possible, and ran to the son of
Nunez, whom I met just as he was going out on an errand for his
master. I told him my new adventure, and asked his advice about
laying an information against Camilla. Pooh! Nonsense! replied
he; that would not be the way to get your ring again. Those
gentry think restitution double trouble. Call to mind your
imprisonment at Astorga; your horse, your money, your very
clothes, did not they all centre in the hands of justice? We must
rather set our wits to work for the recovery of your diamond. I
take on myself the charge of inventing some stratagem for that
purpose. I will deliberate it in my way to the hospital, where I
have to say but two words from my master to the purveyor. Do you
wait for me at our house of call, and do not be on the fret: I
will be with you shortly.

I had waited, however, more than three hours at the appointed
place, when he arrived. I did not know him again at first.
Besides that he had changed his dress and platted his hair, a
pair of false whiskers covered half his face. He wore an immense
sword with a hilt of at least three feet in circumference, and
marched at the head of five men of as swaggering an air as
himself, with bushy whiskers and long rapiers. Good day to you,
Signor Gil Blas, said he by way of salutation; behold an alguazil
upon a new construction, and marshalmen of like materials in
these brave fellows my companions. We have only to be shown where
the woman lodges who purloined the diamond, and we will obtain
restitution, take my word for it. I hugged Fabricio at this
discourse, which let me into the plot, and testified loudly my
approval of the expedient. I paid my respects also to the
masquerading marshalmen. They were three servants and two
journeymen barbers of his acquaintance, whom he had engaged to
act this farce. I ordered wine to be served round to the
detachment, and we all went together at night-fall to Camilla's
residence. The door was shut, and we knocked. The old woman,
taking my companions to be on the scent of justice, and knowing
they would not come into that neighbourhood for nothing, was
terribly frightened. Cheer up again, good mother, said Fabricio;
we are only come here upon a little business which will be soon
settled. At these words we made our entry, and found our way to
the sick chamber, under the guidance of the old dowager who
walked before us, and by favour of a wax taper which she carried
in a silver candlestick. I took the light, went to the bed-side,
and, making Camilla take particular notice of my features,
Traitress, said I, call to mind the too credulous Gil Blas whom
you have deceived Ah! thou wickedness personified, at last I have
caught thee. The corregidor has taken down my deposition, and
ordered this alguazil to arrest you. Come, officer, said I to
Fabricio, do your duty. There is no need, replied he, swelling
his voice, to inflame my severity. The face of that wretch is not
new to me: she has long been marked with red letters in my
pocket-book. Get up, my princess, dress your royal person with
all possible dispatch. I will be your squire, and lodge you in
durance vile, if you have no objection.

At these words, Camilla, ill as she was, observing two marshalmen
with large whiskers ready to drag her out of bed by main force,
sat up of herself, clasped her hands in an attitude of
supplication; and looking at me ruefully, said, Signor Gil Blas,
have compassion on me: I call as a witness to my entreaties the
chaste mother whose virtues you inherit. Guilty as I am, my
misfortunes are greater than my crimes. I will give you back your
diamond, so do not be my ruin. Speaking to this effect, she drew
my ring from her finger, and gave it me back. But I told her my
diamond was not enough, and that she must refund the thousand
ducats they had embezzled in the ready-furnished lodging. Oh! as
for your ducats, replied she, ask me not about them. That false-
hearted deceiver, Don Raphael, whom I have not seen from that
time to this, carried them off the very same night. O ho! my
little darling, said Fabricio in his turn, that will not do, you
had a hand in the robbery, whether you went snacks in the profit
or no. You will not come off so cheaply. Your having been
accessory to Don Raphael's manoeuvres is enough to render you
liable to an examination. Your past life is very equivocal; and
you must have a good deal upon your conscience. You will have the
goodness, if you please, just to step into the town jail, and
there unburden yourself by a general confession. This good old
lady shall keep you company; it is hard if she cannot tell a
world of curious stories, such as Mr Corregidor will be delighted
to hear.

The two women, at these words, brought every engine of pity into
play to soften us. They filled the air with cries, complaints,
and lamentations. While the old woman on her knees, sometimes to
the alguazil and sometimes to his attendants, endeavoured. to
melt their stubborn hearts, Camilla implored me, in the most
touching terms, to save her from the hands of justice. I
pretended to relent. Officer, said I to the son of Nunez, since I
have got my diamond, I do not much care about anything else. It
would be no pleasure to me to be the means of pain to that poor
woman; I want not the death of a sinner. Out upon you, answered
he, you set up for humanity! you would make a bad tipstaff. I
must do my errand. My positive orders are to arrest these virgins
of the sun; his honour the corregidor means to make an example of
them. Nay! for mercy's sake, replied I, pay some little deference
to my wishes, and slacken a little of your severity, on the
ground of the present these ladies are on the point of offering
to your acceptance. Oh! that is another matter, rejoined he; that
is what you may call a figure of rhetoric suited to all
capacities and all occasions. Well, then, let us see, what have
they to give me? I have a pearl necklace, said Camilla, and drop
ear-rings of considerable value. Yes; but, interrupted he
roughly, if these articles are the produce of the Philippine
Isles, I will have none of them. You may take them in perfect
safety, replied she: I warrant them real. At the same time she
made the old woman bring a little box, whence she took out the
necklace and ear-rings, which she put within the grasp of this
incorruptible minister. Though he was much such a judge of
jewellery as myself, he had no doubt of the drops being real, as
well as the pearls. These trinkets, said he, after having looked
at them minutely, seem to be of good quality and fashion: and if
the silver candlestick is thrown into the bargain, I would not
answer for my own honesty. You had better not, said I in my turn
to Camilla, for a trifle, reject so moderate and fair a
composition. While uttering these words, I returned the taper to
the old woman, and handed the candlestick over to Fabricio, who,
stopping there because perhaps he espied nothing else that was
portable in the room, said to the two women: Farewell, my dainty
misses, set your hearts at rest, I will report you to his worship
the corregidor, as purer than unsmutched snow. We can turn him
round our finger; and never tell him the truth, but when we are
not paid for our lies.



CH. V. -- Sequel of the foregoing adventure. Gil Blas retires
from practice, and from the neighbourhood of Valladolid.


AFTER having thus carried Fabricio's plan into effect, we took
our leave of Camilla's lodging, hugging ourselves on a success
beyond our expectation; for we had only reckoned on the ring. We
carried off without ceremony all we could get besides. Far from
making it a point of conscience not to steal from a description
of ladies whose names are commonly associated with rogues, we
thought to cover some scores of other sins by so meritorious an
action. Gentle men, said Fabricio, when we were in the street, my
counsel is for returning to our tavern, and devoting the night to
a regale. To-morrow we will sell the candlestick, the necklace,
the drop ear-rings, and then share the prize money like brother
adventurers, after which every man shall tramp home again, and
make the best excuse he can to his master. His worship the
alguazil's idea seemed equally bright and judicious. We returned
rank and file to the tavern, some in the pious hope of finding a
plausible excuse for having slept abroad, others in a desperate
indifference about being turned out of doors without a character.

We ordered a good supper to be got ready, and sat down to table
with our physical and mental powers in full vigour. The relish
was heightened by a thousand pleasant anecdotes. Fabricio, of all
men in the world, having the happy knack of a chairman in a
company of jovial spirits, kept the table in a roar. There
escaped from him I know not how many charges of true Castilian
wit, worth more either in the schools of philosophy or the
exchange of commerce than the drug of Attic salt. While we were
in a full peal of laughter, we were made to laugh on the other
side of our mouths by an unforeseen occurrence. There appeared at
table a man of no contemptible prowess, followed by two other as
ill-looking dogs as ever existed. After this specimen we had
three others, and reckoned up to a dozen, marching in by
triplets. They were armed with carbines, swords, and bayonets. We
could not mistake their office, and were at no loss to guess
their business. At first we had a mind to be refractory; but they
beset us in an instant, and kept us under, as much by their
numbers as by their weapons. Gentlemen, said the captain
commandant in a jeering strain, I have been informed by what
ingenious artifice you have recovered a ring from the custody of
a lady no better than she should be. Undoubtedly, the device was
admirable, and well deserves a civic crown; the patriotism of our
police will not be found wanting. Justice, with her lodgings to
let for gentry of your description, will not be deficient in her
acknowledgments for so brilliant a display of genius. The company
to whom this introductory address was directed, looked a little
sheepish on the occasion. Our countenances fell; and Camilla had
her full revenge. Fabricio, however, though pale and puzzled,
made an attempt at a defence. Sir, said he, we did it in the
innocence of our hearts, and. of course we shall be forgiven this
not immoral fraud? What the devil, replied the commandant in a
rage, do you call this a not immoral fraud? Moral or immoral, it
may bring you to the gallows. Besides that the power of
restitution is too sacred to be assumed by the individual, you
have made away with a candlestick, a necklace, and a pair of drop
ear-rings: and what is worse, you have committed your rascalities
in the livery of the law. Scoundrels dressing them selves up like
the pillars of morality to undermine its very foundation! I shall
wish you much joy if you are condemned to nothing worse than
mowing the salt marsh. When he had impressed it on our
convictions that the affair was even more serious than our first
fears, we threw ourselves on his mercy, and implored him to have
pity on our tender years, but his stubborn heart was relentless.
He rejected moreover the proposal of relinquishing the necklace,
ear-rings, and candlestick; nay, he was deaf to the rhetoric of
my ring: perhaps because I offered it before too many witnesses:
in short, he was the most obdurate dog of his kennel. He ordered
my companions to be handcuffed, and sent us in a body to the
public prison. As we were on our way, one of the marshalmen
acquainted me that Camilla's old vixen, suspecting us not to be
licensed scouts of justice, had dogged us to the tavern; and
having satisfied her doubts, in revenge informed against us to
the patrole.

We were searched in the first instance. Away went the necklace,
the ear rings, and the candlestick. They picked my pocket of my
ring, and my ruby of the Philippine Isles; without even sparing
the few fees I had received in the forenoon for my prescriptions:
so that it was plain trade was carried on by the same firm at
Valladolid as at Astorga, and that all these reformers held the
same creed. While they rifled me of my trinkets and money, the
lord in waiting of the patrole made known our adventure to the
inferior agents of legal rapine. The trespass appeared so
audacious that the majority voted it capital. A few kind souls
were of opinion that we might come off for two hundred lashes a
piece, with a few years on board the galleys. Waiting his
worship's sentence, we were locked up in a cell, where we lay
upon straw, spread over our stable like a litter for horses.
There might we have foddered for an age, and at last have been
turned out to grass in the galleys, if on the morrow Signor
Manuel Ordonnez had not got wind of our affair, and determined to
release Fabricio; which he could not do without making a general
gaol delivery. He was a man of the first credit in the town: his
interest was exerted for us, and partly by his own influence, and
partly by that of his friends, he obtained our enlargement at the
end of three days. But the period of delivery is always moulting
time with gaol birds; the candlestick, the necklace, the ear-
rings, my ring, and the ruby, all was left behind. One could not
help repeating those excellent lines of Virgil, beginning with
Sic vos non vobis.

As soon as we were at liberty we returned to our masters. Doctor
Sangrado received me kindly; My poor Gil Blas, said he, it was
but this morning I was acquainted with thy misfortune. I was just
setting about an active canvass for thee. We must derive comfort
from adversity, my friend, and attach ourselves more than ever to
the practice of physic. I affirmed that to be my intention; and
in truth I laid about me. Far from wanting employment, it
happened by a kind providence, as my master had foretold, to be a
very sickly season. The smallpox and a malignant fever took
alternate possession of the town and the suburbs. All the
physicians in Valladolid had their share of business, and we not
the least. We saw eight or ten patients a day; so that the kettle
was kept on the simmer, and the blood in the action of
transpiring. But things will happen cross; they died to a man,
either by our fault or their own. If their case was hopeless, we
were not to blame; and if it was not hopeless, they were. Three
visits to a patient was the length of our tether. About the
second, we sometimes ran foul of the undertaker; or when we had
been more fortunate than usual, the patient had got no further
than the point of death. As I was but a young physician, not yet
hardened to the trade of an assassin, I grieved over the
melancholy issue of my own theory and practice. Sir, said I, one
evening to Doctor Sangrado, I call heaven to witness on the spot
that I have never strayed from your infallible method; and yet I
have never saved a patient: one would think they died out of
spite, and were on the other side of the great medical question.
This very day I came across two of them, going into the country
to be buried. My good lad, replied he, my experience nearly comes
to the same point. It is but seldom I have the pleasure of curing
my kind and partial friends. If I had less confidence in my
principles, I should think my prescriptions had set their faces
against the work they were intended to perform. If you will take
a hint, sir, replied I, we had better vary our system. Let us
give, by way of experiment, chemical preparations to our
patients; the worst they can do is to tread in the steps of our
pure dilutions and our phlebotomizing evacuations. I would
willingly give it a trial, rejoined he, if it were a matter of
indifference, but I have published on the practice of bleeding
and the use of drenches: would you have me cut the throat of my
own fame as an author! Oh! you are in the right, resumed I; our
enemies must not gain this triumph over us; they would say that
you were out of conceit with your own systems, and would ruin
your reputation for consistency. Perish the people, perish rather
our nobility and clergy! But let us go on in the old path. After
all, our brethren of the faculty, with all their tenderness about
bleeding, have no patent for longevity any more than ourselves;
and we may set off their drugs against our specifics.

We went on working double tides, and did so much execution, that
in less than six weeks we made as many widows and orphans as the
siege of Troy. The plague must have got into Valladolid by the
number of funerals. Day after day came some father or other to
know what was become of his son, who was last seen in our hands;
or else a stupid fellow of an uncle, who had a foolish hankering
after a deceased nephew. With respect to the nephews and sons, on
whose uncles and fathers we had equalized our system of
destruction, they thought that least said was soonest mended.
Husbands were altogether on their good behaviour, they would not
split a hair about the loss of a wife or two. The real sufferers
to whose reproaches we were exposed, were sometimes quite savage
in their grief; without being mealy-mouthed in their expressions,
they called us blockheads and assassins. I was concerned at their
bad language; but my master, who was up to every circumstance,
listened to their abuse with the utmost indifference. Yet I might
have grown as callous as himself to popular reproach, if heaven,
interposing its shield between the invalids of Valladolid and one
of their scourges, had not providentially raised up an incident
to disgust me with medicine, which from the outset had been
disgusted with me.

The idle fellows about town assembled every day in our
neighbourhood for a game at tennis. Among the number was one of
those professed bullies who set up for great Dons, and are the
complete cocks of the tennis-court. He was a Biscayan, and
assumed the title of Don Roderic de Mondragon. His age might be
about thirty. His size was somewhat above the common, but he was
lean and bony. Besides two sparkling little eyes rolling about in
his head, and throwing out defiance against all bystanders, a
very broad nose came in between a pair of red whiskers, which
turned up like a hook as high as the temples. His phraseology was
so rough and uncouth that the very sound of his voice would throw
a quiet man into an ague. This tyrant over both the rackets and
the game was lord paramount in all disputes between the players;
and there was no appeal from his decisions, but at the risk of
receiving a challenge the next day. Precisely as I have drawn
Signor Don Roderic, whom the Don in the foreground of his titles
could never make a gentleman, Signor Don Roderic was sweet upon
the mistress of the tennis-court. She was a woman of forty, in
good circumstances, as charming as forty can well be, just
entering on the second year of her widowhood. I know not how he
made himself agreeable; certainly not by his exterior
recommendations, but probably by that within which passeth show.
However that might be, she took a fancy to him, and began to turn
her thoughts towards the holy state of matrimony; but while that
great event was in agitation, for the punishment of her sins she
was taken with a malignant fever, and with me for a physician.
Had the disorder been ever so slight, my practice would have made
a serious job of it. At the expiration of four days there was not
a dry eye in the tennis-court. The mistress joined the outward-
bound colony of my patients, and her family administered to her
effects. Don Roderic, distracted at the loss of his mistress, or
rather disappointed of a good establishment, was not satisfied
with fretting and fuming at me, but swore he would run me through
the body, or even frown me into a nonentity. A good-natured
neighbour apprised me of this vow, with a caution to keep at
home, for fear of coming across this devil of a fellow. This
warning, though taken in good part, was a source of anxiety and
apprehension. I was eternally fancying the enraged Biscayan
laying siege to the outworks of my citadel. There was no getting 
a moment's respite from alarm. This circumstance weaned me from
the practice of medicine, and I thought of nothing but
deliverance from my horrors. On went my embroidered suit once
more. Taking leave of my master, who did all he could to detain
me, I got out of town with the dawn, not heedless of that
terrible Don Roderic, who might waylay me on the road.



CH. VI.  -- His route from Valladolid, with a description of his
fellow-traveller.


I TRUDGED on at a great rate, and looked behind from time to
time, to see if that dreadful Biscayan was not following me. My
imagination was so engrossed by the fellow, that he haunted me in
every tree and bush; my heart was in my mouth for fear at every
foot-fall. But I took courage again at the distance of about a
league, and went on more gently towards Madrid, whither I
proposed directing my steps. I had no attachment to Valladolid.
All my regret was at tearing myself from Fabricio, my dear
Pylades, of whom I had not so much as taken my leave. It was no
grievance to give up physic; on the contrary, I prayed heaven to
forgive me for having tampered with it. Yet I did not count over
the contents of my purse with less pleasure, because they were
the wages of murder. In this I took after those ladies who retire
with a fortune to lead pious lives, and think it hard if they may
not fatten religiously on the hard earnings of their libertine
profession. I had, in rials, somewhere about the value of five
ducats, and this was the sum total of my property. With these I
designed repairing to Madrid, where I had no doubt of finding a
good service. Besides, I wished above all things to be in that
magnificent city, the boasted epitome of the world and all its
wonders.

While I was recollecting what I had heard of it, and enjoying
beforehand the pleasures it affords, I heard the voice of a man
coming after me, and singing till he had scraped his throat. He
had a wallet on his back, a guitar suspended from his neck, and a
long sword by his side. He got on at such a rate, as soon to
overtake me. Who should it be but one of the two journeymen
barbers with whom I had been in gaol for the adventure of the
ring. We knew one another at once, though we had shifted our
dresses, and were in a thousand marvels at meeting so
unexpectedly on the highway. If I testified my delight at having
such a fellow-traveller, he seemed on his side to feel an excess
of rapture at the renewal of our acquaintance. I told him why I
had left Valladolid, and he trusted his own secret to me in
return, by stating himself to have had a little brush with his
master, on which they had taken an everlasting leave of one
another. Had it been my pleasure, continued he, to have taken up
my abode longer in Valladolid, ten shops would take me in for one
that would have turned me out; since, vanity apart, I may safely
say there is not a barber in all Spain better qualified to shave
all sorts of beards, with the grain or against the grain, and to
curl a pair of whiskers. But I could no longer fight against a
hankering after my native place, whence I departed full ten years
since. I wish to inhale a little of my own country air, and to
learn the present situation of my family. I shall be among them
the day after to-morrow, at a place called Olmédo, a populous
village on this side of Segovia.

I resolved on accompanying this barber home, and going to Segovia
for the chance of a cast to Madrid. We began entertaining one
another with indifferent subjects as we went along. The young
fellow was perfectly good-humoured, with a ready wit. After an
hour's conversation, he asked me if I was hungry. I referred him
to the first house of call for my answer. To stop dilapidations 
till we get there, said he, we may renew our term by a little
breakfast from my wallet. When I am on a journey I am always my
own caterer. None of your woollen drapery, nor linen drapery, nor
any of your frippery or trumpery. I hate ostentation. My wallet
contains nothing but a little exercise for my grinders, my
razors, and a wash-ball. I extolled his discretion, and agreed
with all my heart to the bargain he proposed. My appetite was
keen and sharp set for a comfortable meal; after what he had
said, I could expect no less. We drew aside a little from the
high road, and sat down upon the grass. There my little
journeyman barber laid out his provisions, consisting of five or
six onions, with some scraps of bread and cheese; but the best
lot in the auction was a little leathern bottle, full, as he
said, of choice, delicate wine. Though the solids were not very
relishing, the calls of hunger did not allow either of us to be
dainty; and we emptied the bottle too, containing about two pints
of a wine one could not recommend without some remorse of
conscience. We then rose from table and set out again on the
tramp in high glee. The barber, who had heard some little
snatches of my story from Fabricio, entreated me to furnish him
with the whole from the best authority. It was impossible to
refuse so munificent a host; I therefore gave him the
satisfaction he required. In my turn I called on him, as an
acknowledgement of my frankness, to communicate the leading
circumstances of his terrestrial peregrinations. Oh! as for my
adventures, exclaimed he, they are scarcely worth re cording, a
mere catalogue of common occurrences. Nevertheless, since we have
nothing else to do, I will run over the narrative, such as it is.
At the same time he entered on the recital nearly in the
following terms.



CH. VII.  --  The journeyman barber's story.


I TAKE up my tale from the origin of things. My grandfather,
Ferdinand Perez de la Fuenta, barber-general to the village of
Olmédo for fifty years, died, leaving four sons. The eldest,
Nicholas, succeeded to the shop, and lathered himself into the
good graces of the customers. Bertrand, the next, having taken a
fancy to trade, set up for a mercer; and Thomas, who was the
third, turned schoolmaster. As for the fourth, by name Pedro,
feeling within himself the high destinies of learning, he sold a
dirty acre or two which fell to his share, and went to settle at
Madrid, where he hoped one day to distinguish himself by his
genius and erudition. The other three brothers would not part;
they fixed their quarters at Olmédo, marrying peasants'
daughters, who brought their husbands very little dowry, except
an annual present of a chopping young rustic. They had a most
public-spirited emulation in child-bearing. My mother, the
barber's wife, favoured the world with a contribution of six
within the first five years of her marriage. I was among the
number. My father initiated me betimes in the mysteries of
shaving; and when he saw me grown up to the age of fifteen, laid
this wallet across my shoulders, presented me with a long sword,
and said -- Go, Diego, you are now qualified to gain your own
livelihood; go and travel about. You want a little acquaintance
with the world to give you a polish, and improve you in your art.
Off with you! and do not return to Olmédo till you have made the
tour of Spain, nor let me hear of you till that is accomplished.
Finishing with this injunction, he embraced me with fatherly
affection, and shoved me out of doors by the shoulders.

Such were the parting benedictions of my sire. As for my mother,
who had more the touch of nature in her manners, she seemed to
feel somewhat at my departure. She dropped a few tears, and even
slipped a ducat by stealth into my hand.. Thus was I sent from
Olmédo into the wide world, and took the road of Segovia. I did
not go two hundred yards without stopping to examine my bag. I
had a mind to view its contents, and to know the precise amount
of my possessions. There I found a case with two razors, which
must have travelled post over the chins of ten generations, by
the evidence of their wear and tear, with a strap to set them,
and a bit of soap. In addition to this, a coarse shirt quite new,
a pair of my father's shoes quite old, and what rejoiced me more
than all the rest, a rouleau of twenty rials in a linen bag.
Behold the sum total of my personals. You may conclude master
Nicholas, the barber, to have reckoned a good deal on my
ingenuity, by his turning me adrift with so slender a provision.
Yet a ducat and twenty rials, by way of fortune, was enough to
turn the head of a young man unaccustomed to money concerns. I
fancied my stock of cash inexhaustible; and pursued my journey in
the sun shine of brilliant anticipation, looking from time to
time at the hilt of my rapier, while the blade was striking
against the calf of my leg at every step, or tripping up my
heels.

In the evening I reached the village of Ataquinés with a very
catholic stomach. I put up at the inn; and, as if I meant to
spend freely, asked, in a lofty tone, what there was for supper.
The landlord examined my pretensions with his eye, and finding
according to what cloth my coat was cut, said with true
publican's civility -- Yes, yes, my worthy master, you shall have
no reason to complain; we will treat you like a lord. With this
assurance, he showed me into a little room, whither he brought
me, a quarter of an hour afterwards, a ragout made of a great he
cat, on which I feasted with as famous an appetite as if it had
been hare or rabbit. This excellent dish was washed down by so
choice a wine, that the king had no better in his cellars. I
found out, however, that it was pricked; but that was no
hindrance to my doing it as much honour as the he cat. The last
article in this entertainment for a lord was a bed better adapted
to drive sleep away than to invite it. Figure it to yourself
about the width of a coffin, and so short that I could not
stretch my legs, though none of the longest. Besides, there was
neither mattress nor feather bed, but merely a little straw sewed
up in a sheet folded double, which was laid down clean for every
hundredth traveller, and served the other ninety-nine, one after
another, without washing. Nevertheless, in such a bed, with a
stomach distended to a surfeit by fricasseed cat, and then raked
by sour wine, thanks to youth and a good constitution, I slept
soundly, and passed the night without being disturbed.

On the following day when I had breakfasted, and paid the
reckoning as I had been treated, like a lord, I made but one
stage to Segovia. On my arrival, I had the good fortune to find a
shop, where they took me in for my board and lodging; but I staid
there only six months; a journeyman barber, with whom I got
acquainted, was going to Madrid, and drew me in to set off with
him. I had no difficulty in procuring a situation on the same
footing as at Segovia. I got into a shop of the very best custom.
It is true, it was near the church of the Holy Cross, and that
the neighbourhood of the Prince's Theatre brought a great deal of
business. My master, two stirring fellows, and myself, could
scarcely lather the chins of the people who came to be shaved.
They were of all trades and conditions; among the rest, players
and authors. One day, two persons of the last description
happened to meet. They began conversing about the poets and
pieces in vogue, when one of them mentioned my uncle's name: a
circumstance which drew my attention more particularly to their
discourse. Don Juan de Zavaleta, said one, will never do any good
as an author. A man of a cold genius, without a spark of fancy!
he has written himself down at a terrible rate by his last
publication. And Louis Velez de Guevara, said the other, what has
he done? A fine work to bring before the public! Was there ever
anything so wretched? They mentioned I know not how many poets
besides, whose names I have forgotten: I only recollect that they
said no good of them. As for my uncle, they made a more
honourable mention of him, agreeing that he was a personage of
merit, Yes, said one, Don Pedro de la Fuenta is an excellent
author; there is a sly humour in his compositions, blended with
solid sense, which communicates an attic poignancy to their
general effect. I am not surprised at his popularity both in
court and city, nor at the pensions settled on him by the great.
For many years past, said the other, he has enjoyed a very large
income. He lives at the Duke de Medina Coeli's table, and has an
apartment in his house, so that he is at no expense: he must be
very well in the world.

I lost not a syllable of what these poets were saying about my
uncle. We had learnt in the family, that he made a noise in
Madrid by his works; some travellers, passing through Olmédo, had
told us so; but as he took no notice of us, and seemed to have
weaned himself from all natural ties, we on our side lived in a
state of perfect indifference about him. Yet nature will prevail:
as soon as I had heard that he was in a fair way, and had learned
where he lived, I was tempted to go and call upon him. One thing
staggered me a little; the literati had styled him Don Pedro.
This don was an awkward circumstance: I had my doubts whether he
might not be some other poet of the name, and not my uncle. Yet
that apprehension did not damp my ardour. I thought he might have
been ennobled for his wit, and determined to pay him a visit. For
this purpose, with my master's leave, I tricked myself out one
morning as well as I could, and sallied from our shop, a little
proud of being nephew to a man who had gained so high a character
by his genius. Barbers are not the most diffident people in the
world. I began to conceive no mean opinion of myself; and riding
the high horse with all the arrogance of greatness, inquired my
way to the Duke de Medina Coeli's palace. I rang at the gate, and
said, I wanted to speak with Signor Don Pedro de la Fuenta. The
porter pointed with his finger to a narrow staircase at the fag
end of the court, and answered --  Go up there, then knock at the
first door on your right. I did as he directed me; and knocked at
a door. It was opened by a young man, whom I asked if those were
the apartments of Signor Don Pedro de la Fuenta. Yes, answered
he, but you cannot speak to him at present. I should be very
glad, said I, just to say, How are you? I bring him news of his
family. An you brought him news of the pope, replied he, I could
not introduce you just now. He is writing, and while his wits are
at work, he must not be disturbed. He will not be able to receive
company till noon; take a turn, and come back about that time.

I departed, and walked about town all the morning, incessantly
meditating on the reception my uncle would give me. I think, said
I within myself; he will be overjoyed to see me. I measured his
feelings by my own, and prepared myself for a very affecting
discovery. I returned punctually to the appointed hour. You are
just in time, said the servant: my master was going out. Wait
here a moment: I will announce you. With these words, he left me
in the ante-chamber. He returned almost immediately, and showed
me into his master's room. The face struck me all at once as a
family likeness. To be sure he was the very image of my uncle
Thomas; they might have been taken for twins. I bowed down to the
ground, and introduced myself as the son of Master Nicholas de la
Fuenta, the barber of Olmédo. I likewise informed him, that I had
been working at my father's trade in Madrid, for these three
weeks, as a journeyman, and intended making the tour of Spain to
complete my education. While I was speaking, my uncle was
evidently in a brown study. He seemed to doubt whether he should
disown me at once, or get rid of me with some little sacrifice to
decency. The latter course he adopted. Affecting the affable:
Well, my good kinsman, how are your father and your uncles? Do
they get on in the world? I began thereupon by laying before him
the family knack at propagation. All the children, male and
female, called over by their names, with their godfathers and
godmothers included in the list! He took no extravagant interest
in the particulars of my tale; but leading to his own purposes,
Diego, replied he, I am quite of your mind. You should go from
place to place, and see a variety of practice. I would not have
you tarry longer at Madrid: it is a very dangerous residence for
youth; you may get into bad habits, my sweet fellow. Other towns
will suit you better; the state of society in the provinces is
more patriarchal and philosophical. Determine on emigration; and
when your departure is fixed, come and take your leave. I will
contribute a pistole to the tour of Spain. With this kind
assurance, he handed me out of the room, and sent me packing.

I had not worldly wisdom enough to find out that he wanted to get
quit of me. I went back to our shop, and gave my master an
account of the visit I had paid. He looked no deeper than myself
into Signor Don Pedro's motives, and observed: I cannot help
differing from your worthy uncle, so far from advising you to
travel the provinces, the real thing would be, in my opinion, to
give you a comfortable settlement in this city. He is hand in
glove with the first people; it is an easy matter for him to
establish you in a great family; and that is a for tune at once.
Struck with this lucky discovery, which seemed to settle the
point without difficulty, I called on my uncle again two days
afterwards, and made a  proposal to him for a situation about
some leading character at court. But the hint was not taken
kindly. A proud man, living at free quarters among the great, and
dining with them in a family party, did not exactly wish that,
while he was sitting at my lord's table, his nephew should be a
guest in the servants' hall. Little Diego might bring a scandal
on Signor Don Pedro. He had no hesitation, therefore, in fairly
turning me out of doors, and that with a flea in my ear. What,
you little rascal, said he in a fit of extravagance, do you mean
to relinquish your calling? Begone, I consign you to the reptile
whose pernicious counsels will be your ruin. Take your leave of
these premises, and never set your foot on them again, or you
shall have the reception you deserve! I was absolutely stunned at
this language, and still more at the peremptory tone my uncle
assumed. With tears in my eyes I withdrew, quite overcome by his
severity. Yet, as I had always been lively and confident in my
temper, I soon wiped away my tears. My grief was even turned into
resentment, and I determined to take no further notice of this
unnatural relative, whose kind offices I had hitherto been
contented to want.

My attention was henceforth directed to the cultivation of my
professional talent; I was quite a plodding fellow at my trade. I
scraped away all day; and in the evening, by way of relief to my
scraping, I twanged the guitar. My master on that instrument was
an old Senor Escudero whom I shaved. He taught me music in
return; and he was an adept. To be sure he had formerly been a
chorister in a cathedral. His name was Marcos de Obregon. He was
a man of the world, with good natural parts and acquired
knowledge, which jointly induced him to fix on me as an adopted
son. He was engaged as an attendant on a physician's lady,
resident within thirty yards of our house. I went to him in the
evening, when shop was shut, and we two, sitting on the threshold
of the door, made up a little concert not displeasing to the
neighbourhood. It was not that our voices were very fine; but in
thrumming on the catgut, we made a pretty regular accompaniment
to our duet, and filled up the harmony sufficiently for the
gratification of our hearers. Our music was particularly
agreeable to Donna Mergelina, the physician's wife; she came into
the passage to hear us, and sometimes encored us in her favourite
airs. Her husband did not interfere with her amusement. Though a
Spaniard and in years, he was not possessed with jealousy;
besides, his profession took up all his time; and as he came home
in the evening, worn out with his numerous visits, he went to bed
at an early hour, without troubling himself about his wife or our
concerts. Possibly, if he thought about them at all, he might
consider them as little likely to produce dangerous consequences.
He had an additional security in his wife. Mergelina was young
and handsome with a witness; but of so fierce a modesty, that she
started at the very shadow of a man. How could he take umbrage at
an amusement of so harmless and decorous a nature? He gave us
leave to sing our hearts out.

One evening, as I came to the physician's door, intending to take
my usual recreation, I found the old squire waiting for me. He
took me by the hand: saying that he wished to take a little walk
with me before we struck up our little concert. At the same time
he drew me aside into a by-street, where, finding an opportunity
of opening his mind: Diego, my good lad, said he with a 
melancholy air, I want to give you a hint in private. I much
fear, my good and amiable youth, that we shall both have reason
to repent of beguiling our evenings with little musical parties
at my master's door. Rely on my sincere friendship: I do not
grudge your lessons in singing and on the guitar; but if I could
have foreseen the storm now brewing, in the name of charity! I
would have selected some other spot to communicate my
instructions. This address alarmed me. I entreated the gentle
squire to be more explicit, and to tell me what we had to fear;
for I was no Hector, and the tour of Spain was not yet finished.
I will relate to you, replied he, what it concerns you to know,
that you may take proper measure of our present danger.

When I got into the service of the physician, about a year ago,
he said one morning, after having introduced me to his wife:
There, Marcos, you see your mistress; that is the lady you are to
accompany in all her peregrinations. I was smitten with Donna
Mergelina: she was lovely in the extreme, a model for an artist,
and her principal attraction was the pleasantness of her
deportment. Honoured sir, replied I to the physician, it is too
great a happiness to be in the train of so charming a lady. My
answer was taken amiss by Mergelina, who said rather crustily, A
pleasant gentleman this! He is perfectly free and easy. Believe
me! His fine speeches may go a begging for me. These words,
dropped from such lovely lips, seemed rather inconsistent; the
manners and ideas of bumpkins and dairy-maids coupled with all
the graces of the most lovely woman in the world! As for her
husband, he was used to her ways; and, hugging himself on the
unrivalled character of his rib, Marcos, said he, my wife is a
miracle of chastity. Then, observing her put on her veil, and
make herself ready to go to mass, he told me to attend on her at
church. We were no sooner in the street than we met, and it was
no wonder, blades who, struck with Donna Mergelina's genteel
carriage, told her a thousand flattering tales as they passed by.
She was not backward in her answers; but silly and ill-timed,
beyond what you can conceive. They were all in amaze, and could
not imagine how a woman should take it amiss to be complimented.
Why really! madam, said I to her at first, you had better be
silent, or shut your ears to their addresses, than reply with
asperity. No, no, replied she: I will teach these coxcombs that I
am not a woman to put up with impertinence. In short, her
absurdity went so far, that I could not help telling her my mind,
at the hazard of her displeasure. I gave her to understand, yet
with the greatest possible caution, that she was unjust to
nature, whose handiwork she marred by her preposterous ferocity;
that a woman of mild and polished manners might inspire love
without the aid of beauty; whereas the loveliest of the sex,
divested of female softness, was in danger of becoming the public
scorn. To this ratiocination, I added collateral arguments,
always directed to the amendment of her manners. After having
moralized to no purpose, I was afraid my freedom might exasperate
my mistress, and draw upon me some taunting repartee.
Nevertheless she did not mutiny against my advice; but silently
rendered it of no avail, and thus we went on from day to day.

I was weary of pointing out her errors to no purpose, and gave
her up to the ferocious temperament of her nature. Yet, could you
think it? the savage humour of that proud woman is entirely
changed within these two months. She has a kind word for all the
world, and manners the most accommodating. It is no longer the
same Mergelina who gave such homely answers to the compliments of
her swains: she is become assailable by flattery; loves to be
told she is handsome, that a man cannot look at her without
paying for it: her ears itch for fine speeches, and she is become
a very woman. Such a change is almost inconceivable: and the best
of the joke is, that you are the worker of this unparalleled
miracle. Yes, my dear Diego, it is you who have transformed Donna
Mergelina; you have softened down the tigress into a domestic
animal; in a word, you have made her feel. I have observed it
more than once; and never trust my knowledge of the sex, if she
is not desperately in love with you. Such, my dear boy, is the
melancholy news I have to communicate, the awkward predicament in
which we stand.

I do not see, said I in my turn to the old man, that there is
anything so melancholy in this accident, or any peculiar
awkwardness in being the object of a pretty woman's partiality.
Ah! Diego, replied he, you argue like a young man: you only see
the bait, without guarding against the hook: pleasure is your
lure; while my thoughts are directed to the unpleasant
circumstances attending it. Murder will out. If you go on singing
at our door, you will provoke Mergelina's passion; and she
probably, losing all command over herself; will betray her 
weakness to her husband, Doctor Oloroso. That wretched husband,
so complying now that he thinks there is no ground for jealousy,
will run wild, take signal vengeance upon her, and perhaps play
some dog's trick or other to you and me. Well, then! rejoined I,
your reasons shall be conclusive with me, and your sage counsels
my rule. Lay down the line of conduct I am to adopt for the
prevention of any left-handed catastrophe. We will have no more
concerts, was his peremptory decree. Do not show yourself any
more to my mistress: when the sight of you does not inflame her,
she will recover her composure. Stay within doors: I will call in
upon you, and we will torture the guitar with impunity. With all
my heart, said I, and I will never set my foot again in your
premises. In good truth, I was determined to serenade no longer
before the physician's door, but henceforth to keep within the
precincts of my shop, since my attractions as a man were so
formidable.

In the mean time good Squire Marcos, with all his prudence,
experienced in the course of a few days that the plan he had
devised to quench Donna Mergelina's flame produced a directly
opposite effect. The lady on the second night not hearing me
sing, asked why we had discontinued our concerts, and the reason
of my absence. He told her I was so busy as not to have a moment
to spare for relaxation. She seemed satisfied with that excuse,
and for three days longer bore the disappointment of all her
hopes like a heroine; but at the end of that period, my martyr to
the tender passion lost all patience, and said to her conductor -
- You are playing false with me, Marcos; Diego has not
discontinued his visits without a cause. This mystery must be
unravelled. Speak, I command you; conceal nothing from me. Madam,
answered he, making use of another subterfuge, since the truth
must be told, it has often happened to him to find the cloth
taken away at home after the concert; he cannot run the risk any
longer of going to bed without his supper. What, without his
supper! exclaimed she in an agony, why did not you tell me so
sooner? Go to bed without his supper! Oh! the poor little
sufferer! Go to him this instant, and let him come again this
evening; he shall not go home starving any more, there shall
always be a luncheon for him.

What do I hear? said the squire, affecting astonishment at this
language; oh heaven, what a reverse! Is this you, madam, and are
these your sentiments? Well-a-day! Since when are you so
compassionate and tender-hearted? Since, replied she
significantly, since you have lived in this house, or rather
since you disapproved my disdainful manners, and have laboured to
soften the acrimony of my temper. But, alas! added she, in a
melting mood, I have gone from one extreme to the other. Proud
and insensible as I was, I am become too susceptible, too tender.
I am enamoured of your young friend Diego, and I can not help
myself; his absence, far from allaying my ardour, only adds fuel
to the fire. Is it possible, resumed the old man, that a young
fellow with neither face nor person should have inspired so
strong a passion? I could make allowance for your feelings, if
they had been set afloat by some nobleman of distinguished merit
-- Ah! Marcos, interrupted Mergelina, I am not like the rest of
my sex; or rather, spite of your long experience, your
penetration is but shallow if you fancy merit to have much share
in our choice. Judging by myself, we all leap before we look.
Love is a mental derangement, forcibly drawing all our views and
attachments into one vortex; a species of hydrophobia. Have done
then with your hints that Diego is not worthy of my tenderness;
that he has it is enough, to invest him with a thousand
perfections too aetherial for your gross sight, and perhaps too
unsubstantial for any but a lover's perception. In vain you
disparage his features or his stature; in my eyes he was created
to undo, and encircled by the hand of nature with the glories of
the opening day. Nay, more, there is a thrilling sweetness in his
voice; his touch on the guitar has the taste of an amateur, and
the execution of a professor. But, madam, subjoined Marcos, do
you consider who Diego is? The meanness of his station -- My own
is very little better, interrupted she again; though were I of
noble birth, it would make no difference in my sensations.

The result of that conference was that the squire, concluding he
should make no impression on the mind of his mistress, gave over
struggling with her obstinacy, as a skilful pilot runs before the
storm, though it carries him out to sea from his intended port.
He did more: to satisfy his patroness he paid me a visit, took me
aside, and after having related what had passed between them
 -- You see, Diego, said he, that we cannot dispense with the
performance of our concerts at Mergelina's door. Absolutely, my
friend, that lady must see you again; otherwise she may commit
some act of desperation fatal to her good name. I was not
inexorable, but answered Marcos that I would attend with my
guitar early in the evening; and dispatched him to his mistress
with the happy tidings. He executed his office, and the
impassioned dame was out of her wits with joy, in the delicious
prospect of hearing and seeing me in a few hours.

A most disagreeable circumstance, however, was very near
disappointing her in that hope. I could not leave home before
night, and for my sins, it was dark as pitch. I went groping
along the street, and had got, may be, half way, when down from a
window came upon my head the contents of a perfuming pan, which
did not tickle my olfactory nerves very pleasantly. I may say
that not a whiff was wasted, so exactly had the giver taken
measure of the receiver. In this situation I was at a loss on
what to resolve: to go back by the way I came, what an exhibition
before my comrades! It was surrendering myself to all their nasty
witticisms. Then again, go to Mergelina in such a glorious trim,
that hurt my feelings on the other side. I determined, at length,
to get on towards the physician's. The old usher was waiting for
me at the door. He said that Doctor Oloroso was gone to bed, and
we might amuse ourselves as we liked. I answered that the first
thing was to purify my drapery, at the same time relating my
misfortune. He seemed to feel for me, and showed me into a hall
where his mistress was sitting. As soon as the lady got wind of
my adventure, and had confirmed the testimony of her nose by the
evidence of her eyes, she mourned over me as grievously as if my
miseries had been mortal; then, apostrophising the absent cause
of my foul array, she uttered a thousand imprecations. Well, but
madam! said Marcos, do moderate this ecstacy of grief; consider
that such casualties will happen, there is no occasion to take on
so bitterly. Why, exclaimed she with vehemence, why would you
debar me from the privilege of weeping over the injuries of this
tender lamb, this dove without gall, who does not so much as
murmur at the affront he has sustained? Alas! why am I not a man
at this moment to avenge him!

She uttered numberless soothing expressions besides, to mark
distinctly the excess of her devotion, and her actions
corresponded with her words; for while Marcos was employed in
wiping me down with a towel, she ran into her chamber and brought
out a box furnished with every variety of perfumes. She burned
sweet-smelling drugs, and perfumed my clothes with them, after
which she drenched me in a deluge of essences. The fumigation and
aspersion ended, this bountiful lady went herself and fetched
from the kitchen bread, wine, and some good slices of roast
mutton, set by on purpose for me. She forced me to eat, and
taking a pleasure in waiting on me, sometimes carved for me, and
some times filled my glass, in spite of all that Marcos and
myself could do to anticipate her condescension. When I had done
supper, the gentlemen of the orchestra struck the key note, and
tuned their sweet voices to the pitch of their guitars. We played
and sung to the heart's delight of Mergelina. To be sure we took
care to carol none but amorous ditties; and as we sung, I every
now and then leered at her with such a roguish meaning, as to
throw oil upon the fire, for the game began to be interesting.
The concert, though the acts were long, was not tedious. As for
the lady, to whom hours seemed to fly like seconds, she could
have been content to exhaust the night in listening, if the old
squire, with whom the seconds seemed to lag like hours, had not
hinted how late it was. She gave him the trouble of enforcing his
moral on the lapse of time by at least ten repetitions. But she
was in the hands of a man not to be turned aside from his
purpose, he let her have no rest till I was gone. Sensible and
provident as he was, seeing his mistress given up to a mad
passion, he dreaded lest our harmony should be resolved by some
discord. His fears were ominous: the physician, whether his mind
misgave him of foul play, or the spirit of jealousy, hitherto on
its good behaviour, had a mind to harass him gratuitously,
bethought himself of quarrelling with our concerts. He did more,
he put a broad negative upon them; and, without assigning his
reasons for acting in this violent way, declared that he would
suffer no more strangers to come about his premises.

Marcos acquainted me with this mortifying declaration,
particularly levelled against my rising hopes. I had begun
bobbing at this dainty cherry, and did not like to lose my game.
Nevertheless, to act the part of a faithful reporter and true
historian, I must own my impatience did not affect my health or
spirits. Not so with Mergelina, her feelings were more alive than
ever. My dear Marcos, said she to her usher, it is only from you
that I look for succour. Contrive, I beseech you, that I may see
Diego in private. What do you require? asked the old man with a
reproachful accent. I have been but too indulgent to you. I am
not a person to crown your wanton wishes at the expense of my
master's honour, your good fame, and my own eternal infamy; the
infamy of a man whose past life has been one continued series of
faithful service and exemplary conduct. I had rather leave the
family than stay in it on such scandalous conditions. Alas!
Marcos, interrupted the lady, frightened out of her wits at these
last words, you wring my heart by talking in this manner.
Obdurate man! Can you bear the thought of sacrificing her who
lays all her present agony to your account? Give me back my
former pride, and that savage soul you have taken from me. Why am
I no longer happy in my very imperfections? I might now have been
at peace, but your rash counsels have robbed me of the repose I
then enjoyed. You, the corrector of my manners, have tampered
with my morals -- But why do I rave, unhappy wretch as I am? why
upbraid you thus wrongfully? No, my guardian angel, you are not
the fatal source of my miseries; my evil destiny had decreed
these tortures to await me. Lay not to heart, I conjure you on my
knees, these transports of a disordered imagination. Oh mercy! my
passion drives me mad, have compassion on my weakness; you are my
sole support and stay: if then my life is not indifferent to you,
deny me not your aid.

At these words her tears flowed in fresh torrents, and stifled
her lugubrious accents. She took out her handkerchief, and
throwing it over her face, fell into a chair, like a person
overcome by her affliction. Old Marcos, who was perhaps one of
the most tractable go-betweens in the world, could no longer
steel his heart against so touching a spectacle. Pierced to the
quick, he even mingled his tears with those of his mistress, and
spoke to her in a softened tone  -- Ah! madam, why are you thus
bewitching! I cannot hold out against your sorrowful complaints,
my virtue yields under the pressure of my pity. I promise you all
the relief in my power. No longer do I marvel at the oblivious
influence of passion over duty, since mere sympathy can mislead
my footsteps from its thorny paths. Thus did this pander, whose
past life had been one continued series of faithful service and
exemplary conduct, sell himself to the devil to feed Mergelina's
illicit flame. One morning he came and talked over the whole
business with me, saying at his departure, that he had a scheme
in his head, to bring about a private interview between us. At
the thought my hopes were all re-kindled, but they glimmered
tremblingly in the socket at a piece of news I heard two hours
afterwards. A journeyman apothecary in the neighbourhood, one of
our customers, came in to be shaved. While I was making ready to
trim his bushy honours, he said -- Master Diego, do you know
anything about your friend, the old usher, Marcos de Obregon? Is
he not going to leave Doctor Oloroso? I said, No. But he is
though, replied he; he will get his dismission this very day. His
master and mine were talking about it just now in my hearing, and
their conversation was to the following effect: -- Signor
Apuntador, said the physician, I have a favour to beg of you. I
am not easy about an old usher of mine, and should like to place
my wife under the eye of a trusty, strict, and vigilant duenna. I
understand you, interrupted my master. You want Dame Melancia, my
wife's directress, and indeed mine for the last six weeks, since
I have been a widower. Though she would be very useful to me in
housewifery, I give her up to you, from a paramount regard to
your honour. You may rely upon her for the security of your brow;
she is the phoenix of the duenna tribe -- a spring-gun and a man-
trap set in the purlieus of female chastity. During twelve whole
years that she was about my wife, whose youth and beauty, you
know, were not without their attractions, I never saw the least
semblance of manhood within my doors. No, no! by all the powers!
That game was not so easily played. And yet I must let you know
that the departed saint, heaven rest her soul! had in the outset
a great hankering after the delights of the flesh; but Dame
Melancia cast her in a new mould, and regenerated her to virtue
and self-denial. In short, such a guardian of the weaker sex is a
treasure, and you will never have done thanking me for my
precious gift. Hereupon the doctor expressed his rapture at the
issue of the conference; and they agreed, Signor Apuntador and
he, on the duenna's succeeding the old usher on this very day.

This news, which I thought probable, and turned out to be true,
disturbed the pleasurable ideas, just beginning to flow afresh,
and renovate my soul. After dinner, Marcos completed the
convulsion, by confirming the young drugpounder's story: My dear
Diego, said the good squire, I am heartily glad that Doctor
Oloroso has turned me off; it spares me a world of trouble.
Besides that it hurt my feelings to be invested with the office
of a spy, endless must have been the shifts and subterfuges to
bring you and Mergelina together in private. We should have been
rarely gravelled! Thanks to heaven, I am set free from all such
perplexing cares, to say nothing of their attendant danger. On
your part, my dear boy, you ought to be comforted for the loss of
a few soft moments, which must have been dogged at the heels by a
thousand fears and vexations. I relished Marcos' sermon well
enough, because my hopes were at an end, the game was lost. I was
not, it must be confessed, among the number of those stubborn
lovers who bear up against every impediment; but though I had
been so, Dame Melancia would have made me let go my hold. The
established character of that duenna would have daunted the
adventurous spirit of a knight-errant. Yet, in whatever colours
this phoenix of the duenna tribe might have been painted, I had
reason to know, two or three days after wards, that the
physician's lady had unset the man-trap and spring-gun, and given
a stop to this watch-dog of lubricity. As I was going out to
shave one of our neighbours, a civil old gentlewoman stopped me
in the street, and asked if my name was Diego de la Fuenta. I
said, Yes. That being the case, replied she, I have a little
business with you. Place yourself this evening at Donna
Mergelina's door; and when you are there, give a signal, and you
shall be let in. Vastly well! said I, what must the signal be? I
can take off a cat to the life: suppose I was to mew a certain
number of times? The very thing, replied this Iris of intrigue; I
will carry back your answer. Your most obedient, Signor Diego!
Heaven protect the sweet youth! Ah! you are a pretty one! By St
Agnes, I wish I was but sweet fifteen, I would not go to market
for other folks! With this hint, the old procuress waddled out of
sight.

You may be sure this message put me in no small flutter. Where
now was the morality of Marcos? I waited for night with
impatience, and, calculating the time of Dr Oloroso's going to
bed, took my station at his door. There I set up my caterwauling,
till you might hear me ever so far off, to the eternal honour of
the master who instructed me in that imitative art. A moment
after Mergelina opened the door softly with her own dear hands,
and shut it again with me on the inside. We went into the hall,
where our last concert had been performed. It was dimly lighted
by a small lamp, which twinkled in the chimney. We sat down side
by side, and began our tender parley, each of us overcome by our
emotions, but with this difference; that hers were all inspired
by pleasure, while mine were somewhat tainted by fear. In vain
did the divinity of my adorations assure me that we had nothing
to fear from her husband. I felt the access of an ague, which
unmanned my vigour. Madam, said I, how have you eluded the
vigilance of your directress? After what I have heard of Dame
Melancia, I could not have conceived it possible for you to
contrive the means of sending me any intelligence, much less of
seeing me in private. Donna Mergelina smiled at this remark, and
answered: You will no longer be surprised at our being together
to-night, when I tell you what has passed between my duenna and
me. As soon as she came to her place, my husband paid her a
thousand compliments, and said to me: Mergelina, I consign you to
the guidance of this wary lady, herself an abstract of all the
virtues: in this glass you may look without a blush, and array
yourself in habits of wisdom. This extraordinary personage has
for these twelve years been a light to the ways of an
apothecary's wife of my acquaintance; but how has she been a
light to them? -- why, as ways never were enlightened before: she
turned a very slippery piece of mortal flesh into a downright
nun.

This panegyric, not belied by the austere mien of Dame Melancia,
cost me a flood of tears, and reduced me to despair. I fancied
the din of eternal lectures from morning till night, and daily
rebukes too harsh to be endured. In short, I laid my account in a
life of wretchedness, beyond the patience of a woman. Keeping no
measures in the expectation of such cruel sufferings, I said
bluntly to the duenna, the moment I was alone with her: You mean,
no doubt, to exercise your tyranny most wantonly on my poor
person; but I cannot bear much severity, I warn you before-hand.
I give you, moreover, fair notice, that I shall be as savage as
you can be. My heart cherishes a passion, which not all your
remonstrances shall tear from it: so you may act accordingly.
Watch me as closely as you please; it is hard if I cannot outwit
such an old thing as you. At these taunting words, I thought this
saracen in petticoats was going to give me a specimen of her
discipline. But so far from it, she smoothed her brow, relaxed
her surly features, and primming up her mouth into a smile,
promulgated this comfortable doctrine: Your temper charms me, and
your frankness calls for a return. We must have been made for one
another. Ah! lovely Mergelina, little do you fathom my character,
to be deceived by the fine compliments of your husband the
Doctor, or by my Tartar contour. There never was a creature more
fortified against moral prejudices! My inducement for getting
into the service of jealous husbands is to lend myself to the
enjoyments of their pretty wives. Long have I trodden the stage
of life in masquerade; and I may call myself doubly happy, in the
spiritual rewards of virtue, and the temporal indulgences of the
opposite side. Between ourselves, mine is the system of all
mankind in the long run. Real virtue is a very expensive article;
plated goods look just as well, and are within the reach of all
purchasers.

Put yourself under my direction. We will make Doctor Oloroso pay
the piper to our dancing, or I am no duenna. By my troth, he
shall go the way of Signor Apuntador and all mankind. There is no
reason why the forehead of a physician should be smoother than
the brow of an apothecary. Poor dear Apuntador! What fun have we
had with him, his wife and I! A charming woman, that wife of his!
A dear little creature, open to all mankind, and prejudiced by
none! Well! she is at peace, and has not left her fellow behind
her! Take my word, short as her time was, she made the most of
it. Let me see how many rampant chaps have been brought to their
bearings in that house, without the dear deluded husband being
waked out of his evening's nap! Now, madam, you may see me in my
true light; and assure yourself, whatever might be the abilities
of your old usher, you will not fare the worse for going further.
If he was a benefit to you, I shall be a blessing.

You may judge for yourself, Diego, continued Mergelina, how well
I took it of the duenna, that she laid herself open so frankly. I
had taken her virtue to be of the impenetrable cast. Look you
now, how much women are liable to be scandalized. But her
character of plain dealing won my heart at once. I threw my arms
about her neck in a rapture, which bespoke my warm and tender
feelings at the thoughts of such a mother abbess. I gave her
carte blanche of all my private thoughts, and put in for a speedy
tête-à-tête with your own dear self. She met me on my own ground.
This very morning she engaged the old woman who spoke to you, to
take the field: she is an old stager, a veteran in the service of
the apothecary's wife. But the best of the joke in this comedy,
added she in a paroxysm of laughter, is that Melancia, on my
assurance that my husband's habit is to pass the night without
stirring, is gone to bed by his side, and drones out my useless
office at this moment. So much the worse, madam, said I then to
Mergelina; your device is more plausible than profitable. Your
husband is very likely to wake, and discover the fraud. He will
not discover anything about it, replied she with no little
urgency; set your heart at rest about that, and let not an empty
fear poison the fountains of a pleasure, which ought to drown
every vulgar and earthly consideration in the arms of a young
lady who is yours for ever and ever.

The old doctor's help-mate, finding that her assurances had
little effect upon my courage, left no stone unturned to put me
in heart again; and she had so many encouraging ways with her,
that a very coward must have plucked up a little. My thoughts
were all with Jupiter and Alcmena; but at the very moment that
the urchin Cupid, with his train of smiles and antics, was
weaving a garland to compliment the crisis of our endeavours, we
were stopped in our career by an importunate knocking at the
street door. In a moment, away flew love and all his covey, like
game at the report of a fowling-piece. Mergelina popped me like
an article of household furniture under the hall table, blew out
the lamp, and, by previous agreement with her governess, in the
event of so unlucky an accident, placed herself at the door of
her husband's bedchamber. In the mean time, the knocking
continued with reiterated violence, till the whole house
resounded. The physician awoke suddenly, and called Melancia. The
duenna flung herself out of bed, though the doctor, taking her
for his wife, begged of her not to disturb herself. She ran to
her mistress, who, catching hold of her in the dark, began
calling Melancia! and told her to go and see who was at the door.
Madam, answered the directress, here I am at your service, go to
bed again if you please; you shall soon know who it is. During
this parley, Mergelina having undressed, got into bed to the
doctor, who had not the least suspicion of the farce that was
playing. To be sure the stage was darkened, and the actresses had
very little occasion for a prompter; one of them was familiar
with the boards, and the other wanted only a rehearsal or two to
be perfect in her part.

The duenna, in her night-gown, made her appearance soon after,
with a candle in her hand -- Good doctor, said she to her master,
have the goodness to get up. Our neighbour Fernandez de Buendia,
the bookseller, is in an apoplectic fit: you are sent for; time
presses. The physician got on his clothes as fast as he could,
and went out. His wife, in her bed-gown, came into the hall with
the duenna. They dragged me from under the table more dead than
alive. You have nothing to fear, Diego, said Mergelina, put
yourself in proper order. At the same time she told me how things
were in two words. She had half a mind to renew our amorous
intercourse; but the directress knew better. Madam, said she,
your husband may possibly be too late to help the bookseller to
the other world, and then he will return immediately. Besides,
added she, observing me benumbed with fright, it would be all
lost labour upon this poor youth! He is not in a condition to
answer your demands. You had better send him home, and defer the
debate till to-morrow evening. Donna Mergelina was sorry for the
delay, as well knowing that a bird in hand is worth two in the
bush; and I flatter myself she was disappointed at not putting a
cuckold's night-cap on the doctor's head.

As for me, less grieved at having drawn a blank in the lottery of
love, than rejoiced at getting my neck out of an halter, I
returned to my master's, where I passed the remainder of the
night in moralizing on the scene I had left. For some time, I was
in doubt whether to keep my appointment on the following evening.
I thought it was a foolish business from first to last; but the
devil, who is always lurking for his prey, or rather taking
possession of us as his lawful property, whispered in my ear that
I should be a great fool to pack up my alls when the prize was
falling into my hands. Mergelina too with opening and
unfathomable charms! The exquisite pleasures that awaited me! I
determined to stick to my text; and promising myself a larger
share of self-possession, took my station the next evening at the
doctor's door, between eleven and twelve, in a most spirit-
stirring humour. The heavens were completely darkened, not a star
to prate of my whereabout. I mewed twice or thrice to give
warning of my being in the street; and, as no one answered my
signal, I was not satisfied with going over the old ground, but
ran up and down the cat's gamut from bass to treble, and from
treble to bass, just as I used to sol-fa with a shepherd of
Olmédo. I tuned my fundamental bass so musically, that a
neighbour, on his return home, taking me for one of those animals
whose mewings I counterfeited, picked up an unlucky flint lying
at his feet, and threw it at me with all his force, saying -- 
The devil fetch that tom cat! I received the blow on my head, and
was so stunned for the moment, that I was very near falling
backwards. I found the skin was broken. This was enough in all
conscience to give me a surfeit of gallantry; so that, my passion
oozing out with my blood, I made the best of my way homewards,
where I rendered night hideous by my howling, and knocked all the
family up. My master probed my wound, and played the true surgeon
on it; he pronounced the consequences to be uncertain. He did all
he could to make them certain; but flesh will heal in spite of
the faculty; and there was not a scar remaining in three weeks.
During all this time, I heard not a word from Mergelina. The
probability is that Dame Melancia, to wean her impure thoughts
from me, engaged her in some better sport. However, I did not
concern myself about the matter; but left Madrid to continue my
tour of Spain, as soon as I found myself perfectly recovered.



CH. VIII. -- The meeting of Gil Blas and his companion with a man
soaking crusts of bread at a spring, and the particulars of their
conversation.


SIGNOR Diego de la Fuenta related some other adventures which had
since happened to him; but they were so little worthy of
preservation, that I shall pass them by in silence. Yet there was
no getting rid of the recital, which was tedious enough: it
lasted as far as Ponte de Duero. We halted in that town the
remainder of the day. Our commons at the inn consisted of a
vegetable soup and a roast hare, whose genus and species we took
especial pains to verify. At daybreak on the following morning we
resumed our journey, after having replenished our flask with some
very tolerable wine, and our wallet with some pieces of bread,
and half the hare we had left at supper.

When we had gone about two leagues we waxed hungry; and, espying
at about two hundred yards from the high road some spreading
trees, which threw an agreeable shade over the plain, we made up
to the spot, and rested on our arms. There we met with a man from
seven to eight and twenty, who was dipping crusts of bread into a
spring. He had a long sword lying by him on the grass, with a
soldier's knapsack, of which he had eased his shoulders. We
thought his air and person better than his attire. We accosted
him with civility; and he returned our salutation. He then
offered us his crusts, and asked with a smile if we would take
potluck with him. We answered in the affirmative, provided he had
no objection to our clubbing our own breakfast, by way of making
the meal more substantial. He agreed to it with the utmost
readiness, and we immediately produced our provisions; which were
not unacceptable to the stranger. What is all this, gentlemen,
exclaimed he in a transport of joy, here is ammunition for an
army! By your forecast, you must be commissaries or
quartermasters. I do not travel with so much contrivance, for my
part; but depend a good deal on the chances of the road. At the
same time, though appearances may be against me, I can say,
without vanity, that I sometimes make a very brilliant figure in
the world. Would you believe that princely honours are commonly
bestowed on me, and that I have guards in attendance? I
comprehend you, said Diego; you mean to tell us, you are a
player. You guess right, replied the other; I have been an actor
for these fifteen years at least. From my very infancy, I was
sent on the boards in children's parts. To deal freely, rejoined
the barber, shaking his head, I do not believe a word of it. I
know the players; those gentry do not travel on foot, like you,
nor do they mess with St Anthony. I doubt whether you are
anything better than a candle-snuffer. You may, quoth the son of
Thespis, think of me as you please; but my parts, for all that,
are in the first line; I play the lovers. If that be the case,
said my companion, I wish you much joy, and am delighted that
Signor Gil Blas and myself have the honour of breakfasting with
so eminent a character.

We then began to pick up our crumbs, and to gnaw the precious
relics of the hare, bestowing such hearty smacks upon the bottle,
as to empty it very shortly. We were all three so deeply engaged
in the great affair of eating, that we said very little till we
had finished, when we resumed our conversation. I wonder, said
the barber to the player, that you should be so much out at
elbows. For a theatrical hero, you have but a needy exterior! I
beg pardon if I speak rather freely. Rather freely! exclaimed the
actor; Ah! by my troth, you are not yet acquainted with Melchior
Zapata. Heaven be praised, I have no mind to see things in a
wrong light. You do me a pleasure by speaking so confidently: for
I love to unbosom myself without reserve. I honestly own I am not
rich. Here, pursued he, showing us his doublet lined with
playbills, this is the common stuff which serves me for linings;
and if you are curious to see my wardrobe, you shall not be
disappointed. At the same time he took out of his knapsack a
dress, laced with tarnished frippery, a shabby head-dress for an
hero, with an old plume of feathers; silk stockings full of
holes, and red morocco shoes a great deal the worse for wear. You
see, said he again, that I am very little better than a beggar.
That is astonishing, replied Diego: then you have neither wife
nor daughter? I have a very handsome young wife, rejoined Zapata,
and yet I might just as well be without her. Look with awe on the
lowering aspect of my horoscope. I married a personable actress,
in the hope that she would not let me die of hunger; and, to my
cost, she is cursed with incorruptible chastity. Who the devil
would not have been taken in as well as myself? There was but one
virtuous princess in a whole strolling company, and she, plague 
take her! fell into my hands. It was throwing with bad luck most
undoubtedly, said the barber. But then, why did not you look out
for an actress in the regular theatre at Madrid? You would have
been sure of your mark. You are perfectly in the right, replied
the stroller; but the mischief is, we underlings dare not raise
our thoughts to those illustrious heroines. It is as much as an
actor of the prince's company can venture on; nay, some of them
are obliged to match with citizens' daughters. Happily for our
fraternity, citizens' daughters now-a-days contract theatrical
notions; and you may often meet with characters among them, to
the full as eccentric as any bona roba of the green-room.

Well! but have you never thought, said my fellow-traveller, of
getting an engagement in that company? Is it necessary to be a
Roscius for that purpose? That is very well of you! replied
Melchior, you are a wag, with your Roscius! There are twenty
performers. Ask the town what it thinks of them, and you will
hear a pretty character of their acting. More than half of them
deserve to carry a porter's knot. Yet for all that, it is no easy
matter to get upon the boards. Bribery or interest must make up
for the defect of talent. I ought to know what I say since my
debut at Madrid, where I was hissed and cat-called as if the
devil had got among the grimalkins, though I ought to have been
received with thunders of applause; for I whined, ranted, and
offered all sorts of violence to nature's modesty: nay, I went so
far as to clench my list at the heroine of the piece; in a word,
I adopted the conceptions of all the great performers; and yet
that same audience condemned by bell, book, and candle in me,
what was thought to be the first style of playing in them. Such
is the force of prejudice! So that, being no favourite with the
pit, and not having wherewithal to insinuate myself into the good
graces of the manager, I am on my return to Zamora. There we
shall all huddle together again, my wife and my fellow-comedians,
who are making but little of the business. I wish we may not be
obliged to beg our way out of town; a catastrophe of too frequent
occurrence!

At these words, up rose the stage-struck hero, slung across him
his knapsack and his sword, and made his exit with due theatric
pomp: Farewell, gentlemen; may all the gods shower all their
bounties on your heads! And you, answered Diego with
corresponding emphasis, may you find your wife at Zamora,
softened down in her relentless virtue, and in comfortable
keeping. No sooner had Signor Zapata turned upon his heel, than
he began gesticulating and spouting as he went along. The barber
and myself immediately began hissing, to remind him of his first
appearance at Madrid. The goose grated harsh upon his tympanum;
he took it for a repetition of signals from his old friends. But
looking behind him, and seeing that we were diverting ourselves
at his expense, far from taking offence at this merry conceit of
ours, he joined with good humour in the joke, and went his way
laughing as hard as he could. On our part, we returned the
compliment in kind. After this, we got again into the high road,
and pursued our journey.


CH. IX.  --  The meeting of Diego with his family; their
circumstances in life; great rejoicings on the occasion; the
parting scene between him and Gil Blas.
WE stopped for the night at a little village between Moyados and
Valpuesta; I have forgotten the name: and the next morning, about
eleven, we reached the plain of Olmédo. Signor Gil Blas, said my
companion, behold my native place. So natural are these local
attachments, that I can hardly contain myself at the sight of it.
Signor Diego, answered I, a man of so patriotic a soul as you
profess to be, might, methinks, have been a little more florid in
his descriptions. Olmédo looks like a city at this distance, and
you called it a village; it cannot be anything less than a
corporate town. I beg its township's pardon, replied the barber;
but you are to know that after Madrid, Toledo, Saragossa, and all
the other large cities I have passed through in my tour of Spain,
these little ones are mere villages to me. As we got further on
the plain, there appeared to be a great concourse of people about
Olmédo: so that, when we were near enough to distinguish objects,
we were in no want of food for speculation.

There were three tents pitched at some distance from each other;
and hard by, a bevy of cooks and scullions preparing an
entertainment. Here a party was laying covers on long tables set
out under the tents; there a detachment was crowning the pitchers
of Tellus with the gifts of Bacchus. The right wing was making
the pots boil, the left was turning the spits and basting the
meat. But what caught my attention more than all the rest, was a
temporary stage of respectable dimensions. It was furnished with
pasteboard scenes, painted in a tawdry style, and the proscenium
was decorated with Greek and Latin mottoes. No sooner did the
barber spy out these inscriptions, than he said to me -- All
these Greek words smell strongly of my uncle Thomas's lamp. I
would lay a wager he has a hand in them, for between ourselves,
he is a man of parts and learning. He knows all the classics by
heart. If he would keep them to himself it would be very well,
but he is always quoting them in company, and that people do not
like. But then to be sure he has a right, because this uncle of
mine has translated ever so many of the Latin poets and hard
Greek authors with his own hand and pen. He has got all antiquity
at his fingers' ends, as you may know by his ingenious and
profound criticisms. If it had not been for him, we might never
have learned that the Athenian school boys cried when they were
flogged; we owe that fact in the history of education to his
fundamental knowledge of the subject.

After my fellow-traveller and myself had looked about us, we had
a mind to inquire what these preparations were for. Going about
on the hunt, Diego recognized in the manager Signor Thomas de la
Fuenta, to whom we made up with great eagerness. The schoolmaster
did not recollect the young barber at first, such a difference
had ten years made. But when convinced of his being his own flesh
and blood, he gave him a cordial embrace, and said with much
appearance of kindness -- Ah! here you are, Diego, my dear
nephew, here you are, restored after your wanderings to your
native land. You come to revisit your household gods, your
Penates, and heaven delivers you back safe and sound into the
bosom of your family. Oh happy day, happy in all the proportions
of arithmetic! A day worthy to be marked with a white stone and
inserted among the Fasti! We have annals in abundance for you, my
friend; your uncle Pedro, the poetaster, has fallen a sacrifice
at the shrine of Pluto: to speak to the comprehension of the
vulgar, he has been dead these three months. That miser, in his
lifetime, was afraid of wanting necessaries  --  Argenti pallebat
amore. Though the great were heaping wealth upon his head, his
annual expenditure did not amount to ten pistoles. He had but one
miserable attendant, and him he starved. This crazy fellow, more
wrong-headed than the Grecian Aristippus, who ordered his slaves
to leave all their costly baggage in the heart of Lybia, as an
incumbrance on their march, heaped up all the gold and silver he
could scrape together. And to what end? for those very heirs whom
he refused to acknowledge. He died worth thirty thousand ducats,
shared between your father, your uncle Bertrand, and myself. We
shall be able to do very well for our children. My brother
Nicholas has already married off your sister Theresa to the son
of a magistrate in this place -- Connubio junxit stabili
propriamque dica vit. These very hymeneals, greeted auspiciously
by all the nuptial powers, have we been celebrating for these two
days with all this pomp and luxury. These tents in the plain are
of our pitching. Pedro's three heirs have each a booth of his
own, and we defray the expenses of the day alternately. I wish
you had come sooner, you might have seen the whole progress of
our festivities. The day before yesterday, the wedding-day, your
father gave his treat. It was a superb entertainment, succeeded
by running at the ring. Your uncle, the mercer, regaled us
yesterday with a fête champêtre, and paid the piper handsomely.
There were ten of the best grown boys, and ten young girls,
dressed out in pastoral weeds; all the frippery in his shop was
brought out to prank them up. This assemblage of Ganymedes and
Houris ran through all the mazes of the dance, and warbled forth
a thousand tender and spirit-stirring lays. And yet, though
nothing was ever more genteel, the effect was not thought
striking; but that must be owing to the bad taste of the
spectators, the simplicity of pastoral is lost upon the present
age.

To-day, the wheels are greased by your humble servant, and I mean
to pre sent the burgesses of Olmédo with a pageant of my own
invention --  Finis coronabit opus. I have got a stage erected,
on which, God willing, shall be represented by my scholars a
piece of my own composing, entitled and called --  The Amusements
of Muley Bugentuf, King of Morocco. It will be played to
perfection, for my pupils declaim like the players of Madrid.
They are lads of family at Penafiel and Segovia, boarders with
me. They know how to touch the passions! To be sure they have
rehearsed under my tuition; their emphasis will seem as if struck
in the mint of their master --  ut ita dicam. With respect to the
piece I shall not say a word about it, you shall be taken by
surprise. I shall simply state that it must produce a deep
impression on the audience. It is one of those tragic subjects
which harrow up the soul, by images of death presented to the
senses in all their fearful forms. I am of Aristotle's mind,
terror is a principal engine. Oh! if I had written for the stage,
I would have introduced none but bloody tyrants, and death-
dispensing heroes. Not all the perfumes of Arabia should have
sweetened this blood-polluted hand, I would have been up to my
elbows in gore. There would have been tragedy with a vengeance;
principal characters! ay, guards and attendants, should all have
been sprawling together. I would have butchered every man of
them, and the prompter into the bargain. In a word, I refine upon
Aristotle, and border on the horrible, that is my taste. These
plays to tear a cat in, are the only things for popularity; the
actors live merrily on their own dying speeches, and the authors
roll in luxury on the devastation of mankind.

Just as this harangue was over, we saw a great crowd of both
sexes coming out of town into the plain. Who should it be but the
new-married couple, attended by their families and friends, with
ten or twelve musicians in the van, producing a most obstreperous
din of harmony. We went up to them, and Diego introduced himself.
Peals of congratulation were immediately rung through the
assembly, and every one was eager to shake him by the hand. He
had enough upon his shoulders to receive all their fraternal
embraces. Relations and strangers all were for having a pull at
him. At length his father said -- You are welcome, Diego. You
find your kinsmen living upon the fat of the land, my friend. I
shall say no more at present, a nod is as good as a wink.
Meanwhile the company went forward upon the plain, took their
stations under the tents, and sat down to table. I kept close to
my companion, and we both dined with the happy couple, who
appeared to be suitably matched. The meal was not soon over, for
the schoolmaster had the vanity to give three courses, for the
purpose of cutting out his brothers, who had not been so
magnificent in their hospitalities.

After the banquet, all the guests expressed their longing to see
Signor Thomas's play, not doubting but the performance of so
extraordinary a genius would deserve all their ears. We came in
front of the stage; the musicians had taken possession of the
orchestra, for the overture and act-tunes. While every one was
waiting in profound silence for the rising of the curtain, the
actors appeared on the boards; and the author, with the piece in
his hand, sat down at the wing, in the prompter's place. Well
might he call it a tragedy, for in the first act the King of
Morocco, by way of diversion, shot an hundred Moorish slaves with
arrows; in the second he beheaded thirty Portuguese officers,
taken prisoners by one of his captains: and in the third and
last, this monarch, surfeited with long-indulged libertinism, set
fire with his own hands to the seraglio where his wives were
confined, and reduced it to ashes with its inhabitants. The
Moorish slaves, as well as the Portuguese officers, were puppets
on a very curious construction; and the palace, built of
pasteboard, looked very naturally in flames by means of an
artificial firework. This conflagration, accompanied by a
thousand piercing cries, issuing from the ruins, concluded the
piece, and the curtain dropped upon this amiable entertainment.
The whole plain resounded with the applause of this fine tragedy;
which spoke for the good taste of the poet, and proved that he
knew where to look out for a subject.

I did not suppose there was anything more to be seen after The
Amusements of Muley Bugentuf, but I was mistaken. Kettle-drums
and trumpets announced a new exhibition -- the distribution of
prizes -- for Thomas de la Fuenta, to give additional solemnity
to his olympics, had made all his boys, as well dayscholars as
boarders, write exercises; and on this occasion he was to give to
those who had succeeded best, books bought at Segovia out of his
own pocket. All at once were brought upon the stage two long
forms out of the school, with a press full of old worm-eaten
books in fine new bindings. At this signal all the actors
returned upon the stage, and took their places round Signor
Thomas, who looked as big as the head of a college. He had a
sheet of paper in his band, with the names of the successful
candidates. This he gave to the King of Morocco, who began
calling over the list with an authoritative voice. Each scholar,
answering to his name, went humbly to receive a book from the
hands of the bum-jerker; after this he was crowned with laurel,
and seated on one of the two benches to be exposed to the gaze of
the admiring company. Yet, desirous as the schoolmaster might be
to send the spectators away in good humour, he brought his eggs
to a bad market; for, having distributed almost all the prizes to
the boarders, according to the usual etiquette of pedagogues,
that those who pay most must necessarily be the cleverest
fellows, the mammas of certain day-scholars caught fire at this
instance of partiality, and fell foul of the disciplinarian
thereupon: so that the festival, hitherto so much to the glory of
the donor, seemed likely to have ended to the same tune as the
carousal of the Lapithae.


BOOK THE THIRD

CH. I. -- The arrival of Gil Blas at Madrid. His first place
there.

I MADE some stay with the young barber. At my departure, I met
with a traveller of Segovia passing through Olmédo. He was
returning with four mules from a trading expedition to
Valladolid, and took me by way of back carriage. We got
acquainted on the road, and he took such a fancy to me that
nothing would serve him but I must be his guest at Segovia. He
gave me free quarters for two days, and when he found me
determined to leave him for Madrid under convoy of a muleteer, he
troubled me with a letter, begging me to deliver it in person
according to the superscription, without hinting that it was a
letter of recommendation. I was punctual in calling on Signor
Matheo Melendez. He was a woollen-draper, living at the gate of
the Sun, at the corner of Trunkmaker street. No sooner had he
broken the cover and read the contents, than he said with an air
of complacency -- Signor Gil Blas, my correspondent, Pedro
Palacio, has written to me so pressingly in your favour, that I
cannot do otherwise than offer you a bed at my house; moreover,
he desires me to find you a good master, and I undertake the
commission with pleasure. I have no doubt of suiting you to a
hair.

I embraced the offer of Melendez the more gratefully because my
funds were getting much below par; but I was not long a burden on
his hospitality. At the week's end, he told me that he had
mentioned my name to a gentleman of his acquaintance, who wanted
a valet-de-chambre, and, according to present appearances, the
place would not be long vacant. In fact, this gentleman happened
to make his appearance in the very nick --  Sir, said Melendez,
pushing me forward, you see before you the young man as by former
advice. He is a pupil of honour and integrity. I can answer for
him as if he was one of my own family. The gentleman looked at me
with attention, said that my face was in my favour, and hired me
at once. He has nothing to do but to follow me, added he, I will
put him into the routine of his employment. At these words he
wished the tradesman good morning, and took me into the High-
street, directly over against St Philip's church. We went into a
very handsome house, of which he occupied one wing; then going up
five or six steps, he took me into a room secured by strong
double doors, with an iron grate between. From this room we went
into another, with a bed and other furniture, rather neat than
gaudy.

If my new master had examined me closely, I had all my wits about
me as well as he. He was a man on the wrong side of fifty, with a
saturnine and serious air. His temper seemed to be even, and I
thought no harm of him. He asked me several questions about my
family; and liking my answers  -- Gil Blas, said he, I take you
to be a very sensible lad, and am well pleased to have you in my
service. On your part, you shall have no reason to complain. I
will give you six rials a day board wages, besides vails. Then I
require no great attendance, for I keep no table, but always dine
out. You will only have to brush my clothes, and be your own
master for the rest of the day. Only take care to be at home
early in the evening, and to be in waiting at the door, that is
your chief duty. After this lecture, he took six rials out of his
purse, and gave them to me as earnest. We then went out, he
locked the doors after him, and taking care of the keys -- My
friend, said he, you need not go with me, follow the devices of
your own heart; but on my return this evening, let me find you on
that staircase. With this injunction he left me to dispose of
myself as seemed best in my own eyes.

In good sooth, Gil Blas, said I in a soliloquy, you have got a
jewel of a master. What! fall in with an employer to give you six
rials a day for wiping off the dust from his clothes, and putting
his room to rights in the morning, with the liberty of walking
about and taking your pleasure like a schoolboy in the holidays!
By my troth! it is a place of ten thousand. No wonder I was in a
hurry to get to Madrid, it was doubtless some mysterious boding
of good fortune prepared for me. I spent the day in the streets,
diverting myself with gaping at novelties  --  a busy occupation.
In the evening, after supping at an ordinary not far from our
house, I squatted myself down in the corner pointed out by my
master. He came three quarters of an hour after me, and seemed
pleased with my punctuality. Very well, said he, this is right, I
like attentive servants. At these words, he opened the doors of
his apartment, and closed them upon us again as soon as we had
got in. As we had no candle, he took his tinder-box and struck a
light. I then helped him to undress. When he was in bed, I
lighted, by his order, a lamp in his chimney, and carried the
wax-light into the antechamber, where I lay in a press-bed
without curtains. He got up the next day between nine and ten
o'clock; I brushed his clothes. He paid me my six rials, and sent
me packing till the evening. My mysterious master went out
himself too, not without great caution in fastening the doors,
and we parted for the remainder of the day.

Such was our course of life, very agreeable to me. The best of
the joke was, that I did not know my master's name. Melendez did
not know it himself. The gentleman came to his shop now and then,
and bought a piece of cloth. My neighbours were as much at a loss
as myself; they all assured me that my master was a perfect
stranger, though he had lived two years in the ward. He visited
no soul in the neighbourhood, and some of them, a little given to
scandal, concluded him to be no better than he should be.
Suspicions got to be more rife; he was suspected of being a spy
of Portugal, and it was thought but fair play to give a hint for
my own good. This intimation troubled me. Thought I to myself,
should this turn out to be a fact, I stand a chance for seeing
the inside of a prison at Madrid. My innocence will be no
security; my past ill-usage makes me look on justice with
antipathy. Twice have I experienced that if the innocent are not
condemned in a lump with the guilty, at least the rights of
hospitality are too little regarded in their persons to make it
pleasant to pass a summer in the purlieus of the law.

I consulted Melendez in so delicate a conjuncture. He was at a
loss how to advise me. Though he could not bring himself to
believe that my master was a spy, he had no reason to be
confident on the other side of the question. I determined to
watch my employer, and to leave him if he turned out to be an
enemy of the state; but then prudence and personal comfort
required me to be certain of my fact. I began, therefore, to pry
into his actions; and to sound him, Sir, said I one evening while
he was undressing, I do not know how one ought to live so as to
be secure from reflections. The world is very scurrilous! We,
among others, have neighbours not worth a curse. Sad dogs! You
have no notion how they talk of us. Do they indeed, Gil Blas?
quoth he. Be it so! but what can they say of us, my friend? Ah!
truly, replied I, evil tongues never want a whet. Virtue herself
furnishes weapons for her own martyrdom. Our neighbours say that
we are dangerous people, that we ought to be looked after by
government; in a word, you are taken for a spy of Portugal. In
throwing out this hint, I looked hard at my master, just as
Alexander squinted at his physician, and pursed up all my
penetration to remark upon the effect of my intelligence. There
seemed to be a hitch in the muscles of my mysterious lord,
altogether in unison with the suspicions of the neighbourhood;
and he fell into a brown study, which bore no very auspicious
interpretation. However, he put a better face on the matter, and
said with sufficient composure: Gil Blas, leave our neighbours to
discourse as they please, but let not our repose depend on their
judgments. Never mind what they think of us, provided our own
consciences do not wince.

Hereupon he went to bed, and I did the like, without knowing what
course to take. The next day, just as we were on the point of
going out in the morning, we heard a violent knocking at the
outer door on the staircase. My master opened the inner, and
looked through the grate. A well-dressed man said to him: Please
your honour, I am an alguazil, come to inform you that Mr
Corregidor wishes to speak a word with you. What does he want?
answered my pattern of secrecy. That is more than I know, sir,
replied the alguazil; but you have only to go and wait on him;
you will soon be informed. I am his most obedient, quoth my
master; I have no business with him. At the tail of this speech,
he banged the inner door; then, after walking up and down a
little while, like one who pondered on the discourse of the
alguazil, he put my six rials into my hand, and said: Gil Blas,
you may go out, my friend; for my part, I shall stay at home a
little longer, but have no occasion for you. He made an
impression on my mind, by these words, that he was afraid of
being taken up, and was therefore obliged to remain in his
apartments. I left him there; and, to see how far my suspicions
were founded, hid myself in a place whence I could see if he went
out. I should have had patience to have staid there all the
morning, if he had not saved me the trouble. But an hour after, I
saw him walk the street with an ease and confidence which dumb-
founded my sagacity. Yet far from yielding to these appearances,
I mistrusted them; for my verdict went to condemnation. I
considered his easy carriage as put on; and his staying at home
as a finesse to secure his gold and jewels, when probably he was
going to consult his safety by speedy flight. I had no idea of
seeing him again, and doubted whether I should attend at his door
in the evening; so persuaded was I, that the day would see him on
the outside of the city, as his only refuge from impending
danger. Yet I kept my appointment; when, to my extreme surprise,
my master returned as usual. He went to bed without betraying the
least uneasiness, and got up the next morning with the same
composure.

Just as he had finished dressing, another knock at the door! My
master looked through the grate His friend the alguazil was there
again, and he asked him what he wanted. Open the door, answered
the alguazil; here is Mr Corregidor. At this dreadful name, my
blood froze in my veins. I had a devilish loathing of those
gentry since I had passed through their hands, and could have
wished myself at that moment an hundred leagues from Madrid. As
for my employer, less startled than myself; he opened the door,
and received the magistrate respectfully. You see, said the
corregidor, that I do not break in upon you with a whole posse:
my maxim is to do business in a quiet way. In spite of the ugly
reports circulated about you in the city, I think you deserve
some little attention. What is your name, and business at Madrid?
Sir, answered my master, I am from New Castile, and my title is
Don Bernard de Castil Blazo. With respect to my way of life, I
lounge about, frequent public places, and take my daily pleasure
in a select circle of polite company. Of course you have a
handsome fortune! replied the judge. No, sir, interrupted my
Mecaenas, I have neither annuities, nor lands, nor houses. How do
you live then? rejoined the corregidor. I will show you, replied
Don Bernard. At the same time he lifted up a part of the
hangings, before a door I had not observed, opened that and one
beyond, then took the magistrate into a closet containing a large
chest chuck full of gold.

Sir, said he again, you know that the Spaniards are proverbially
indolent; yet, whatever may be their general dislike to labour, I
may compliment myself on bettering the example. I have a stock of
laziness, which disqualifies me for all exertion. If I had a mind
to puff my vices into virtues, I might call this sloth of mine a
philosophical indifference, the work of a mind weaned from all
that worldlings court with so much ardour; but I will frankly own
myself constitutionally lazy, and so lazy, that rather than work
for my subsistence, I would lay myself down and starve.
Therefore, to lead a life befitting my fancy, not to have the
trouble of looking after my affairs, and above all to do without
a steward, I have converted all my patrimony, consisting of
several considerable estates, into ready money. In this chest
there are fifty thousand ducats; more than enough for the
remainder of my days, should I live to be an hundred! For I do
not spend a thousand a year, and am already more than fifty years
old. I have no fears, therefore, for futurity, since I am not
addicted, heaven be praised, to any one of the three things which
usually ruin men. I care little for the pleasures of the table; I
only play for my amusement; and I have given up women. There is
no chance of my being reckoned, in my old age, among those
libidinous grey-beards to whom jilts sell their favours by troy
weight.

You are a happy man! said the corregidor. They are in the wrong
to suspect you of being a spy: that office is quite out of
character for a man like you. Take your own course, Don Bernard:
continue to live as you like. Far from disturbing your peace, I
declare myself your protector; I request your friendship, and
pledge my own. Ah! sir, exclaimed my master, thrilled with these
kind expressions, I accept with equal joy and gratitude your
precious offer. In giving me your friendship you augment my
wealth, and carry my happiness to its height. After this
conversation, which the alguazil and myself heard; from the
closet door, the corregidor took his leave of Don Bernard, who
could not do enough to express his sense of the obligation. On my
part, mimicking thy master in doing the honours of the house, I
overburdened the alguazil with civilities. I made him a thousand
low bows, though I felt for him in my sleeve the contempt and
hatred which every honest man naturally entertains for an
alguazil.



CH. II.  --  The astonishment of Gil Blas at meeting Captain
Rolando in Madrid, and that robber's curious narrative.


DON Bernard de Castil Blazo, having attended the corregidor to
the street, returned in a hurry to fasten his strong box, and all
the doors which secured it. We then went out, both of us well
satisfied, he at having acquired a friend in power, and myself at
finding my six rials a day secured to me. The desire of relating
this adventure to Melendez made me bend my steps towards his
house; but, near my journey's end, whom should I meet but Captain
Rolando! My surprise was extreme, and I could not help quaking at
the sight of him. He recollected me at once, accosted me gravely,
and, still keeping up his tone of superiority, ordered me to
follow him. I tremblingly obeyed, saying inwardly: Alas! he
means, doubtless, to make me pay my debts! Whither will he lead
me? There may, perhaps, be some subterraneous retreat in this
city. Plague take it! If I thought so, I would soon show him I
have not got the gout. I walked, therefore, behind him carefully
looking out where he might stop, with the pious design of putting
my best leg foremost, if there was anything in the shape of a
trap-door.

Rolando soon dispersed my alarms. He went into a well-frequented
tavern; I followed him. He called for the best wine, and ordered
dinner. While it was getting ready, we went into a private room,
where the captain addressed me as follows: You may well be
astonished, Gil Blas, to renew your acquaintance with your old
commander; and you will be still more so, when you have heard my
tale. The day I left you in the cave, and went with my troop to
Mansilla, for the purpose of selling the mules and horses we had
taken the evening before, we met the son of the corregidor of
Leon, attended by four men on horseback well armed, following his
carriage. Two of his people we made to bite the dust, and the
other two ran away. On this the coachman, alarmed for his master,
cried out to us in a tone of supplication --  Alas! my dear
gentlemen, in God's name, do not kill the only son of his worship
the corregidor of Leon. These words were far from softening my
comrades; on the contrary, their fury knew no bounds. Good folks,
said one of them, let not the son of a mortal enemy to men like
us escape our vengeance. How many ornaments of our profession has
his father cut off in their prime! Let us repay his cruelty with
interest, and sacrifice this victim to their offended ghosts. The
whole troop applauded the fineness of this feeling, and my
lieutenant himself was preparing to act as high priest at this
unhallowed altar, when I interdicted the rites. Stop, said I; why
shed blood without occasion? Let us rest contented with the
youth's purse. As he makes no resistance, it would be against the
laws of war to cut his throat. Besides, he is not answerable for
his father's misdeeds; nay, his father only does his duty in
condemning us to death, as we do ours in rifling travellers.

Thus did I plead for the corregidor's son, and my intercession
was not unavailing. We only took every farthing of his money, and
carried off with us the horses of the two men whom we had slain.
These we sold with the rest at Mansilla. Thence we returned to
the cavern, where we arrived the following morning a little
before daybreak. We were not a little surprised to find the trap
open, and still more so, when we found Leonarda handcuffed in the
kitchen. She unravelled the mystery in two words. We wondered how
you could have overreached us; no one could have thought you
capable of serving us such a trick, and we forgave the effect for
the merit of the invention. As soon as we had released our
kitchen wench, I gave orders for a good luncheon. In the mean
time we went to look after our horses in the stable, where the
old negro, who had been left to himself for four-and-twenty
hours, was at the last gasp. We did all we could for his relief,
but he was too far gone; indeed so much reduced, that, in spite
of our endeavours, we left the poor devil on the threshold of
another world. It was very sad; but it did not spoil our
appetites, and, after an abundant breakfast, we retired to our
chambers, and slept away the whole day. On our awaking, Leonarda
apprized us that Domingo had paid the debt of nature. We carried
him to the charnel-house where you may recollect to have lodged,
and there performed his obsequies, just as if he had been one of
our own order.

Five or six days afterwards, it fell out that one morning, on a
sally, we encountered three companies of the Holy Brotherhood, on
the outskirts of the wood. They seemed waiting to attack us. We
perceived but one troop at first. These we despised, though
superior in number to our party, and rushed forward to the onset.
But while we were at loggerheads with the first, the two others
in ambuscade came thundering down upon us; so that our valour was
of no use. There was no withstanding such a host of enemies. Our
lieutenant and two of our gang gave up the ghost on this
occasion. As for the two others and myself, we were so closely
pressed and hemmed in, as to be taken prisoners: and, while two
detachments convoyed us to Leon, the third went to destroy our
retreat. How it was discovered, I will briefly tell you. A
peasant of Luceno, crossing the forest on his way home, by chance
espied the trap-door of our subterraneous residence, which a
certain young runaway had not shut down after him, for it was
precisely the day when you took yourself off with the lady. He
had a violent suspicion of its being our abode, without having
the courage to go in. It was enough to mark the adjacent parts, 
by lightly peeling with his knife bark from the nearest trees,
and so on, from distance to distance, till he was quite out of
the wood. He then betook himself to Leon, with this grand
discovery for the corregidor, who was so much the better pleased,
as his son had been robbed by our gang. This magistrate collected
together three companies to lay hold of us, and the peasant
showed them the way.

My arrival in the town of Leon was as good as that of a wild
beast to the inhabitants. Even though I had been a Portuguese
general made prisoner of war, the people could not have been more
anxious to see me. There he goes, was the cry; that is he, the
famous captain, the terror of these parts. It would serve him
right to tear him piecemeal with pincers, and make his comrades
join in the chorus. To the corregidor, was the universal cry; and
his worship began insulting me. So, so! said he, scoundrel as you
are, the powers of justice, worn to a thread with your past
irregularities, hand over the task of punishment to me as their
delegate. Sir, answered I, great as my crimes may have been, at
least the death of your only son is not to be laid at my door.
His life was saved by me; you owe me some acknowledgment on that
score. Oh! wretch, exclaimed he, there are no measures to be kept
with people of your description. And though it were my wish to
save you, my sacred office would not allow me to indulge my
feelings. Having spoken to this effect, he committed us to a
dungeon, where my companions had no time to lament their hard
fate. They got out of confinement, at the end of three days, to
expatiate with tragic energy at the place of execution. For my
part, I took up my quarters in limbo for three complete weeks. My
punishment seemingly was deferred only to render it more
terrible; and I was looking out for some refinement on the
ordinary course of criminal justice, when the corregidor, having
summoned me before him, said: Give ear to your sentence. You are
free. Had it not been for you, my only son would have been
assassinated on the highway. As a father, my gratitude was due
for this service; but not being competent to acquit you in my
capacity of a magistrate, I have written up to court in your
favour; have solicited your pardon, and have obtained it. Go,
then, whithersoever it may seem good to you. But take my advice;
profit by this lucky escape. Look to your paths, and give up the
trade of a highwayman for good and all.

I was deeply impressed by this advice, and took my departure for
Madrid, in the firm determination of mending my ways, and living
quietly in that city. There I found my father and mother dead,
and what they left behind them in the hands of an old kinsman,
who administered duly and truly, as all trustees of course do. I
saved three thousand ducats out of the fire; scarcely a quarter
of what I was entitled to. But where was the remedy? There was no
standing to the quirks and evasions of the law. Just to be doing
something, I have purchased an alguazil's place. My colleagues
would have set their faces against my admission, for the honour
of the cloth, had they known my history. Luckily they did not, or
at least affected not to know it, which was just as good as the
reality; for, in that illustrious body, it is the bounden duty
and interest of every member to wear a mask. The pot cannot call
the kettle hard names, thank heaven. The devil would have no
great catch in the best of us. And yet, my friend, I could
willingly unbosom myself to you without disguise. My present
occupation is much against the grain; it requires too circumspect
and too mysterious a conduct; there is nothing to be done but by
underhand dealings, gravity, and cunning. Oh! for my first trade!
The new one is safer, to be sure; but there is more fun in the
other, and liberty is my motto. I feel disposed to get rid of my
office, and to set out some sunshiny morning for the mountains at
the source of the Tagus. I know of a retreat thereabouts,
inhabited by a numerous gang, composed chiefly of Catalonians;
when I have said that, I need say no more. If you will go along
with me, we will swell the number of those heroes. I shall be
second in command. To make your footing respectable at once, I
will swear that you have fought ten times by my side. Your valour
shall mount to the very skies. I will tell more good of you than
a commander-in-chief of a favourite officer. I will not say a
word about the run-away trick, that would render you suspected of
turning nose, therefore mum is the word. What say you to it? Are
you ready to set off? I am impatient to know your mind.

Every one to his own fancy, said I then to Rolando, you were born
for bold exploits, and your friend for a serene and quiet life. I
understand you, interrupted he; the lady whom love induced you to
carry off still preserves her influence over your heart, and you
doubtless lead with her that serene life of which you are
enamoured. Own the truth, master Gil Blas, she is become a thing
of your own, and you are both living on the pistoles carried off
from the subterraneous retreat. I told him he was mistaken; and,
to set him right, related the lady's adventures and my own while
we sat at dinner. When our meal was finished he led back to the
subject of the Catalonians, and attempted once more to engage me
in his project. But finding me inflexible, he looked at me with a
terrific frown, and said seriously -- Since you are dastard
enough to prefer your servile condition to the honour of
enlisting in a troop of brave fellows, I turn you adrift to your
own grovelling inclinations. But mark me well, a lapse may be
fatal. Forget our meeting of to-day, and never prate about me to
any living soul; for if I catch you bandying about my name in
your idle talk . . . . you know my ways, I need say no more. With
these words he called for the landlord, paid the reckoning, and
we rose from table to go away.



CH. III -- Gil Blas is dismissed by Don Bernard de Castil Blazo,
and enters into the service of a beau.


As we were coming out of the tavern, and taking our leave, my
master was passing along the street. He saw me, and I observed
him look more than once at the captain. I had no doubt but he was
surprised at meeting me in such company. It is certain that
Rolando's physiognomy and air were not much in favour of moral
qualities. He was a gigantic fellow, with a long face, a parrot's
beak, and a very rascally contour, without being absolutely ugly.

I was not mistaken in my guess. In the evening I found Don
Bernard harping on the captain's figure, and charmingly disposed
to believe all the fine things I could have said of him, if my
tongue had not been tied. Gil Blas, said he, who is that great
shark I saw with you awhile ago? I told him it was an alguazil,
and thought to have got off with that answer, but he returned to
the charge; and observing my confusion, from the remembrance of
the threats used by Rolando, broke off the conversation abruptly
and went to bed. The next morning, when I had performed my
ordinary duties, he counted me over six ducats instead of six
rials, and said -- Here, my friend, this is what I give you for
your services up to this day. Go and look out for another place.
A servant keeping such high company is too much for me. I
bethought myself of saying, in my own defence, that I had known
that alguazil, by having prescribed for him at Valladolid, while
I was practising medicine. Very good, replied my master, the
shift is ingenious enough; you might have thought of it last
night, and not have looked so foolish. Sir, rejoined I, in good
truth prudence kept me silent, and gave to my reserve the aspect
of guilt. Undoubtedly, resumed he, tapping me softly on the
shoulder, it was carrying prudence very far, even to the confines
of cunning. Go, lad, I have no further occasion for your
services.

I went immediately to acquaint Melendez with the bad news, who
told me, for my comfort, that he would engage to procure me a
better berth. Indeed, some days after, he said -- Gil Blas, my
friend, you have no notion of the good luck in store for you. You
will have the most agreeable post in the world. I am going to
settle you with Don Matthias de Silva. He is a man of the first
fashion, one of those young noblemen commonly distinguished by
the appellation of beaus. I have the honour of his custom. He
takes up goods of me, on tick, indeed, but these great men are
good pay in the long run, they often marry rich heiresses, and
then old scores are wiped off; or, should that fail, a tradesman
who understands his business puts such a price upon his articles,
that if three-fourths of his debts are bad, he is no loser. Don
Matthias's steward is my intimate friend. Let us go and look for
him. It will be for him to present you to his master, and you may
rely upon it, that for my sake he will treat you with high
consideration.

As we were on our way to Don Matthias's house, this honest
shopkeeper said -- It is fit, methinks, that you should be let
into the steward's character. His name is Gregorio Rodriguez.
Between ourselves, he is a man of low birth, with a talent for
intrigue, in which vocation he has laboured till a stewardship in
two distressed families completed their ruin, and made his
fortune. I give you notice, that his vanity is excessive; he
loves to see the under-servants creeping and crawling at his
feet. It is with him they must make interest if they have any
favour to beg of their master, for should they happen to obtain
it without his interference, he has always some shift or other at
hand to get the boon revoked, or at least render it of no avail.
Regulate your conduct on this hint, Gil Blas; pay court to Signor
Rodriguez in preference to your master himself, and leave no
stone unturned to get into his good graces. His friendship will
be of material service to you. He will pay your wages to the day;
and, if you have management enough to worm yourself into his
confidence, you may chance to pick up some of the fragments which
fall from his table. There are enough for an hungrier dog than
you! Don Matthias is a young nobleman, with no thought to throw 
away but on his pleasures, nor the slightest suspicion how his
own affairs are going on. What a house for a steward who knows
how to be a steward!

When we got to our journey's end, we asked to speak with Signor
Rodriguez. We were told that we should find him in his own
apartment. There he was, sure enough, and with him a clownish
sort of fellow holding a blue bag, full of money. The steward,
looking more wan and yellow than a girl in a hurry for a husband,
ran up to Melendez with open arms; the draper was not behindhand
with him, and they each hugged the other with a shew of
friendship, at least as much indebted to art as nature for its
plausible effect. After this, the next question was about me.
Rodriguez examined me from top to toe; saying very civilly at the
same time that I was just such an one as Don Matthias wanted, and
that he would with pleasure take upon himself to present me to
that nobleman. Thereupon Melendez gave him to understand how
deeply he was interested in my behalf; he begged the steward to
take me under his protection, and leaving me with him, after
plenty of compliments, withdrew. As soon as he was gone out,
Rodriguez said, I will introduce you to my master the moment I
have dispatched this honest husbandman. He called the country man
to him forthwith, and taking his bag, Talego, said he, let us see
if the five hundred pistoles are all right. He counted over the
money himself. As the sum was found to be exact, the countryman
took a receipt and went away. The cash was put back again into
the bag. It was my turn next to be attended to. We may now, said
my new patron, go to my master's levee. He usually gets up about
noon, it is now near one o'clock, and must be daylight in his
apartment.

Don Matthias had indeed just risen. He was still in his morning
gown, kicking his heels in a great chair, with a leg tossed over
one of the elbows, swinging backwards and forwards, and
manufacturing his own snuff. His conversation was addressed to a
footman in waiting, who officiated as a temporary valet-de-
chambre. My lord, said the steward, here is a young man whom I
take the liberty of presenting to your lordship in the place of
him you discharged the day before yesterday. Your draper,
Melendez, has given him a character; he undertakes for his
qualifications, and I believe you will be very well pleased with
him. That is enough, answered the young nobleman, since he has
your recommendation, I adopt him blindfold into my retinue. He is
my valet-de-chambre at once; that business is settled. Let us
talk of other matters, Rodriguez, you are come just in time, I
was going to send for you. I have a budget of bad news, my dear
Rodriguez. I played with ill luck last night, an hundred pistoles
in my pocket lost, and two hundred more on credit. You know how
indispensable it is for persons of high rank to pay their debts
of honour. As for any other, it is no matter when they are paid.
Punctuality is all very well between one tradesman and another,
but they cannot expect it from one of us. These two hundred
pistoles must be raised forthwith and sent to the Countess de
Pedrosa. Sir, quoth the steward, that is sooner said than done.
Where, prythee, am I to get such a sum? Threaten as I will, I
never touch a maravedi from your tenants. And yet your
establishment is to be kept up in style, and I am wearing myself
to a thread in furnishing the ways and means. It is true that
hitherto, heaven be praised, we have rubbed on, but what witch to
conjure for a wind, now, I know not, the case is desperate. All
this prosing is extremely impertinent, interrupted Don Matthias;
this countinghouse talk makes me hideously nervous. So then,
Rodriguez, you really think to undertake my reform, and
metamorphose me into a plodding manager of my own estates? A very
elegant sort of pastime for a man in my station of life; a man of
rank and fashion! Grant me patience, replied the steward; at the
rate we are driving now, it is easily calculated how soon you
will be released from all those cares. You are a very great bore,
resumed the young nobleman rather peevishly, this brutal
importunity is downright murder to one's feelings. I hate loud
music, be so good as to let me be ruined pianissimo. I tell you I
want two hundred pistoles, and I must have them. Why, then, said
Rodriguez, we must have recourse to the old rascal who has lent
you so much already on usurious terms. Have recourse to the
devil, if he will do you any good, answered Don Matthias; only
let me have two hundred pistoles, and it is the same thing to me
how you manage to get them.

While he was uttering these words in a hasty and fretful tone,
the steward went out; and Don Antonio Centellés, a young man of
quality, came in. What is the matter, my friend? said this last
to my master: your atmosphere is overcast; I trace passion in the
lines of your countenance. Who can have ruffled that sweet
temper? I would lay a wager, it was that booby just gone out.
Yes, answered Don Matthias, he is my steward. Every time he comes
to speak to me, I am in an agony for a quarter of an hour or
twenty minutes. He rings the changes on the state of my affairs;
and tells me that I am spending principal and interest   A beast!
He will say next, that I have ruined him into the bargain! My
dear fellow, replied Don Antonio, I am exactly in the same
situation. My man of business is just such another scarecrow as
your steward. When the sneaking scoundrel, after repeated
demands, brings me some niggardly supply, it is just as if he was
lending me his own. He expostulates most barbarously. Sir, says
he, you are going to rack and ruin; there is an execution out
against you. I am obliged to cut him short, and beg him to
remonstrate in epitome. The worst of it is, said Don Matthias,
that there is no doing without these fellows; they are the
penance attached to our elegant indiscretions. Just so, replied
Centellés. But listen, pursued he, bursting into a fit of
laughter; a pleasant idea has just struck me. Nothing was ever
more farcically fancied. We may introduce a buffo caricato into
our serious opera, and relieve the knell of our departed goods
and chattels with an humorous divertissement. The plot is thus:
let me try to borrow from your steward whatever you want. You
shall do the same with my man of business. Then let them both
preach as they please; we shall hearken with the utmost
composure. Your steward will come and open his case to me; my man
of business will plead the poverty of the land to you. I shall
hear of nothing but your extravagance; and you will see your own
in mine as in a glass. It will be vastly entertaining.

A thousand brilliant conceits followed this flight of genius, and
put the young patricians into high spirits, so that they kept up
the ball with vivacity, if not with wit. Their conversation was
interrupted by Gregorio Rodriguez, who brought back with him a
little old man with a bald head. Don Antonio was for moving off.
Farewell, Don Matthias, said he, we shall meet again anon. I
leave you with these gentlemen; you have, doubtless, some state
affairs to discuss in council. Oh! no, no, answered my master,
you had better stop; you will not interrupt us. This warm old
gentleman has the moderation to lend me money at twenty per cent.
What! at twenty per cent! exclaimed Centellés in a tone of
astonishment. In good truth! I wish you joy on being in such
hands. I do not come off so cheaply, for my part: I pay through
the nose for every farthing I get. My loans are generally raised
at double that per cent. There is usury! said the father of the
usurious tribe; unconscionable dogs! Where do they expect to go
when they die? I do not wonder there is so strong a prejudice
against money-lenders. It is the exorbitant profit which some of
them derive from their discounts, that brings reproach and ill-
will upon us all. If all my brethren of the blue balls were like
me, we should not be treated so scurvily; for my part, I only
lend to do my duty towards my neighbour. Ah! if times were as
good now as in my early days, my purse should be at your service
as a friend; and even now, in the present distress of the money-
market, it goes against the grain to take a poor twenty per cent.
But one would think the money was all gone back to the mines
whence it came: there is no such thing to be had, and the
scarcity compels me to depart a little from the disinterested
severity of my benevolence. How much do you want? pursued he,
addressing my master. Two hundred pistoles, answered Don
Matthias. I have four hundred here in a bag, replied the usurer;
it is only to give you half of them. At the same time he drew
from underneath his cloak a blue bag, looking just like that in
which farmer Talego had left five hundred pistoles with
Rodriguez. I was not long in forming my judgment of the matter,
and saw plainly that Melendez had not bragged without reason of
the steward's aptness in the ways of the world. The old man
emptied the bag, displayed the cash on a table, and set about
counting it. The sight set all my master's extravagant passions
in a flame; the sum total proved very striking to his
comprehension. Signor Descomulgado, said he to the usurer, I have
just made a very sensible reflection: I am a great fool. I only
borrow enough to redeem my credit, without thinking of my empty
pockets. I should be obliged to give you the trouble of coming
again to-morrow. I think, therefore, it will be best to spare
your age and infirmities, and ease you of the four hundred at
once. My lord, answered the old man, I had destined half of this
money to a good licentiate, who lays out the income of his large 
preferments in those pious and charitable uses for which they
were originally given to the clergy, as stewards of the poor, and
guides to the young and unwary. In pursuance of this end, it is
his great delight to wean young girls from the seductions of a
wicked world, and place them in a snug well-furnished little box
of his own, where they may be obnoxious to his ghostly
admonitions by day and by night. But, since you have occasion for
the whole sum, it is at your disposal. Some thing by way of
security . . . . Oh! as for security, interrupted Rodriguez,
taking a paper out of his pocket, you shall have as good as the
bank. Here is a note which Signor Don Matthias has only just to
sign. He makes over five hundred pistoles, due from one of his
tenants, Talego, a wealthy yeoman of Mondejar. That is enough,
replied the usurer, I never split hairs, but deal upon the
square. The steward insinuated a pen between his master's
fingers, who signed his name at the bottom of the note, without
reading it; and whistled as he signed, for want of thought.

That business settled, the old man took his leave of my noble
employer, who shook him cordially by the hand, saying: Till I
have. the pleasure of seeing you again, good master pounds,
shillings, and pence, I am your most devoted humble servant. I do
not know why you should all be lumped together for a set of
blood-suckers; you seem to me a necessary link in the chain of
well-ordered society. You are as good as a physician to us
pecuniary invalids of quality, and keep us alive by artificial
restoratives in the last stage of a consumptive purse. You are in
the right, exclaimed Centellés. Usurers are a very gentlemanly
order in society, and I must not be denied the privilege of
paying my compliments to this illustrious specimen, for the sake
of his twenty per cent. With this banter, he came up and threw
his arms about the old man's neck: and these two overgrown
children, for their amusement, began sending him backward. and
forward between them like a shuttlecock. After they had tossed
him about from pillar to post, they suffered him to depart with
the steward, who ought to have come in for his share of the game,
and for something a little more serious.

When Rodriguez and his stalking-horse had left the room, Don
Matthias sent, by the lacquey in waiting, half his pistoles to
the Countess de Pedrosa, and deposited the other half in a long
purse worked with gold and silk, which he usually wore in his
pocket. Very well pleased to find himself in cash, he said to Don
Antonio, with an air of gaiety: What shall we do with ourselves
to-day? Let us call a council. That is talking like a statesman,
answered Centellés: I am your man: let us ponder gravely. While
they were collecting their deliberative wisdom on the course they
were to pursue for the day, two other noblemen came in; Don Alexo
Segiar and Don Ferdinand de Gamboa; both nearly about my master's
age, that is, from eight and twenty to thirty. These four jolly
blades began with such hearty salutations, as if they had not met
for these ten years. After that, Don Ferdinand, a professed
bacchanalian, made his proposals to Don Matthias and Don Antonio:
Gentlemen, said he, where do you dine to-day? If you are not
engaged, I will take you to a tavern, where you shall quaff
celestial liquor. I supped there last night, and did not come
away till between five and six this morning. Would to heaven,
exclaimed my master, I had done the same! I should not have lost
my money.

For my part, said Centellés, I treated myself yesterday evening
with a new amusement; for variety has always its charms for me.
Nothing but a change of pleasures can make the dull round of
human life supportable. One of my friends introduced me neck and
heels to one of those gentry ycleped tax-gatherers, who do the
government business and their own at the same time. There was no
want of magnificence, good taste, or a well-designed set out
table! but I found in the family itself an highly seasoned relish
of absurdity. The farmer of the revenues, though the most meanly
extracted of the whole party, must set up for a great man; and
his wife, though hideously ugly, was a goddess in her own
estimation, and made a thousand silly speeches, the zest of which
was heightened by a Biscayan accent. Add to this, that there were
four or five children with their tutor at table. Judge if it must
not have been an amusing family party.

As for me, gentlemen, said Don Alexo Segiar, I supped with
Arsenia the actress. We were six at table: Arsenia, Florimonde, a
coquette of her acquaintance, the Marquis de Zenette, Don Juan de
Moncade, and your humble servant. We passed the night in drinking
and talking bawdy. What a flow of soul! To be sure, Arsenia and
Florimonde are not strong in their upper works; but then they
have a facility in their vocation which is more than all the wit
in the world. They are the dearest madcaps, gay, romping, and
rampant: they are an hundred times better than your modest women
of sense and discretion.



CH. IV. -- Gil Blas gets into company with his fellows; they shew
him a ready road to the reputation of wit, and impose on him a
singular oath.


THOSE noblemen pursued this strain of conversation, till Don
Matthias, about whose person I was fiddling all the while, was
ready to go out. He then told me to follow him; and this bevy of
fashionables set sail together for the tavern, whither Don
Ferdinand de Gamboa proposed to conduct them. I began my march in
the rear rank with three other valets; for each of the gentlemen
had his own. I remarked with astonishment that these three
servants copied their masters, and assumed the same follies. I
introduced myself as a new comer. They returned my salute in
form; and one of them, after having taken measure of me very
accurately, said -- Brother, I perceive, by your gait, that you
have never yet lived with a young nobleman. Alas! no, answered I,
neither have I been long in Madrid. So it appears, replied he,
you smell strong of the country. You seem timid and embarrassed;
there is an hitch in your deportment. But no matter, we will soon
wear off all stiffness, take my word for it. Perhaps you think
better of me than I deserve, said I. No, resumed he, no; there is
no such cub as we cannot lick into shape; assure yourself of
that.

This specimen was enough to convince me that I had hearty fellows
for my comrades, and that I could not be in better hands to
initiate me into high life below-stairs. On our arrival at the
tavern, we found an entertainment ready which Signor Don
Ferdinand had been so provident as to order in the morning. Our
masters sat down to table, and we arranged ourselves behind their
chairs. The conversation was spirited and lively. My ears tingled
to hear them. Their humour, their way of thinking, their mode of
expression diverted me. What fire! what sallies of imagination!
They appeared like a new order of beings. With the dessert, we
set before them a great choice of the best wines in Spain, and
left the room, to go to dinner in a little parlour, where our
cloth was laid.

I was not long in discovering that the combatants in our lists
had more to recommend them than appeared at first sight. They
were not satisfied with aping the manners of their masters, but
even copied their phrases; and these varlets gave such a
facsimile, that bating a little vulgarity, they might have passed
themselves off very well. I admired their free and easy carriage;
still more was I charmed with their wit, but despaired of ever
coming up to them in my own person. Don Ferdinand's servant, on
the score of his master treating ours, did the honours; and,
determined to do the thing genteelly, he called the landlord, and
said to him  -- Master tapster, give us ten bottles of your very
best wine; and, as you have an happy knack of doing, make the
gentlemen up stairs believe that they have drank them. With all
my heart, answered the landlord; but, Master Gaspard, you know
that Signor Don Ferdinand owes me for a good many dinners
already. If through your kind intervention I could get some
little matter on account . . . . Oh! interrupted the valet, do
not be at all uneasy about your debt: I will take it upon myself;
put it down to me. It is true that some unmannerly creditors have
preferred legal measures to a reliance on our honour; but we
shall take the first opportunity of obtaining a replevy, and will
pay you without looking at your bill. To have my master on your
books is like so many ingots of gold. The landlord brought us the
wine, in spite of unmannerly creditors; and we drank to a speedy
replevy. It was as good as a comedy to see us drinking each
other's health every minute, under our masters' titles. Don
Antonio's servant called Don Ferdinand's plain Gamboa, and Don
Ferdinand's servant called Don Antonio's Centellés: they dubbed
me Silva; and we kept pace in drunkenness, under these borrowed
names, with the noblemen to whom they properly belonged.

Though my wit was less conspicuous than that of the other guests,
they lost no opportunity of testifying their pleasure in my
acquaintance. Silva, said one of our merriest soakers, we shall
make something of you, my friend. I perceive that you have wit at
will, if you did but know how to draw upon it. The fear of
talking absurdly prevents you from throwing out at all; and yet
it is only by a bold push that a thousand people now-a-days set
themselves up for good companions. Do you wish to be bright? You
have only to give the reins to your loquacity, and to venture
indiscriminately on whatever comes uppermost: your blunders will
pass for the eccentricities of genius. Though you should utter an
hundred extravagances, let but a single good joke be packed up in
the bundle, the nonsense shall be all forgotten, the witticism
bandied about, and your talent be puffed into high repute. This
is the happy method our masters have devised, and it ought to be
adopted by all new candidates. Besides that I had but too strong
a wish to pass for a clever fellow, the trick they taught me
appeared so easy in the performance, that it ought not to be
buried in obscurity. I tried it at once, and the fumes of the
wine contributed to my success; that is to say, I talked at
random, and had the good luck to strike out of much absurdity
some flashes of merriment, very acceptable to my audience. This
first essay inspired me with confidence. I redoubled my
sprightliness, to sparkle in repartee; and chance gave a
successful issue to my endeavours.

Well done! said my fellow-servant who had addressed me in the
street, do not you begin to shake off your rustic manners? You
have not been two hours in our company, and you are quite another
creature: your improvement will be visible every day. This it is
to wait on people of quality. It causes an elevation, which the
mind can never attain under a plebeian roof. Doubtless, answered
I -- and for that reason I shall henceforth dedicate my little
talents to the nobility. That is bravely said, roared out Don
Ferdinand's servant, half seas over, commoners are not entitled
to possess such a fund of superior genius as exists in us. Come,
gentlemen, let us make a vow never to colleague with any such
beggarly fellows; let us swear to that by Styx. We laughed
heartily at Gaspard's conceit: the proposal was received with
applause: and we took this mock oath with our glasses in our
hands.

Thus sat we at table till our masters were pleased to get up from
it. This was at midnight; an outrageous instance of sobriety, in
the opinion of my colleagues. To be sure, these noble lords left
the tavern so early only to visit a celebrated wanton, lodging in
the purlieus of the court, and keeping open house night and day
for the votaries of pleasure. She was a woman from five and
thirty to forty, still in the height of her charms, entertaining
in her discourse, and so perfect a mistress in the art of
pleasure, that she sold the waste and refuse of her beauty at a
higher price than the first sample of the unadulterated article.
She had always two or three other pieces of damaged goods in the
house, who contributed not a little to the great concourse of
nobility resorting thither. The afternoon was spent in play; then
supper, and the night passed in drinking and making merry. Our
masters staid till morning, and so did we, without thinking the
time long; for, while they were toying with the mistresses, we
attacked the maids. At length, we all parted when daylight peeped
in on our festivities, and went to bed each of us at our separate
homes.

My master getting up at his usual time, about noon, dressed
himself. He went out. I followed him, and we paid a visit to Don
Antonio Centellés, with whom we found one Don Alvaro de Acuna. He
was an old gentleman, who gave lectures on the science of
debauchery. The rising generation, if they wanted to qualify
themselves for fine gentlemen, put themselves under his tuition.
He moulded their ductile habits to pleasure, taught them to make
a distinguished figure in the world, and to squander their
substance: he had no qualms as to running out his own, for the
deed was done. After these three blades had exchanged the
compliments of the morning, Centellés said to my master -- In
good faith, Don Matthias, you could not have come at a more lucky
time. Don Alvar is come to take me with him to a dinner, given by
a citizen to the Marquis de Zenette and Don Juan de Moncade; and
you shall be of the party. And what is the citizen's name? said
Don Matthias. Gregorio de Noriega, said Don Alvar, and I will
describe the young man in two words. His father, a rich jeweller,
is gone abroad, to attend the foreign markets, and left his son,
at his departure, in the enjoyment of a large income. Gregorio is
a blockhead, with a turn for every sort of extravagance, and an
awkward hankering after the reputation of wit and fashion, in
despite of nature. He has begged of me to give him a few
instructions. I manage him completely; and can assure you,
gentlemen, that I lead him a rare dance. His estate is rather
deeply dipped already. I do not doubt it, exclaimed Centellés; I
see the vulgar dog in an almshouse. Come, Don Matthias: let us
honour the fellow with our acquaintance, and be in at the death
of him. Willingly, answered my master, for I delight in seeing
the fortune of these plebeian upstarts kicked over, when they
affect to mix among us. Nothing, for instance, ever entertained
me so much as the downfall of the toll-gatherer's son, whom play,
and the vanity of figuring among the great, have stripped, till
he has not a house over his head. Oh! as for that, replied Don
Alvar, he deserves no pity, he is as great a coxcomb in his
poverty as he was in his prosperity.

Centellés and my master accompanied Don Alvar to Gregorio de
Noriega's party. We went there also, that is, Mogicon and myself;
both in ecstasy at having an opportunity of spunging on a
citizen, and pleasing ourselves with the thought of being in at
the death of him. At our entrance, we observed several men
employed in preparing dinner; and there issued from the ragouts
they were taking up, a vapour which conciliated the palate
through the medium of the nostrils. The Marquis de Zenette and
Don Juan de Moncade were just come. The founder of the feast
seemed a great simpleton. He aped the man of fashion with a most
clumsy grace; a wretched copy of admirable originals, or, more
properly, an idiot in the chair of wisdom and taste. Figure to
yourself a man of this character in the centre of five bantering
fellows, all intent on making a jest of him, and drawing him into
ridiculous expenses. Gentlemen, said Don Alvar, after the first
interchange of civilities, give me leave to introduce you to
Signor Gregorio de Noriega, a most brilliant star in the
hemisphere of fashion. He owns a thousand amiable qualities. Do
you know that he has an highly cultivated understanding? Choose
your own subject, he is equally at home in every branch, from the
subtilty and closeness of logic, to the elementary science of the
criss-cross-row. Oh! this is really too flattering, interrupted
the scot and lot gentleman with a very uncouth laugh. I might,
Signor Alvaro, put you to the blush as you have put me; for you
may truly be termed a reservoir as it were, a common sewer of
erudition. I had no intention, replied Don Alvaro, to draw upon
myself so savoury an encomium; but truly, gentlemen, Signor
Gregorio cannot fail of establishing a name in the world. As for
me, said Don Antonio, what is so delightful in my eyes, far above
the honours of logic or the criss-cross row, is the tasteful
selection of his company. Instead of demeaning himself to the
level of tradesmen, he associates only with the young nobility,
and sets the expense at nought. There is an elevation of
sentiment in this conduct which enchants me: and this is what you
may truly call disbursing with taste and judgment.

These ironical speeches were only the preludes to a continual
strain of banter. Poor Gregorio was attacked on all hands. The
wits shot their bolts by turns, but they made no impression on
the fool; on the contrary, he took all they said literally, and
seemed highly pleased with his guests, as if they did him a
favour by making him their laughing-stock. In short, he served
them for a butt while they sat at table, which they did not quit
during the afternoon, nor till late at night. We, as well as our
masters, drank as we liked, so that the servants'-hall and the
dining-room were in equally high order when we took our leave of
the young jeweller.



CH. V.  -- Gil Blas becomes the darling of the fair sex, and
makes an interesting acquaintance.


AFTER some hours' sleep I got up in fine spirits; and calling the
advice of Melendez to mind, went, till my master was stirring, to
pay my court to our steward, whose vanity was rather flattered by
this attention. He received me with a gracious air, and inquired
how I was reconciled to the habits and manners of the young
nobility. I answered, that they were strange to me as yet, but
that use and good example might work wonders in the end.

Use and good example did work wonders, and that right soon. My
temper and conduct were quite altered. From a discreet, sober
lad, I got to be a lively, heedless merry-andrew. Don Antonio's
servant paid me a compliment on my transformation, and told me
that there wanted nothing but a tender interest in the lovely
part of the creation to shine like a new star dropped from the
heavens. He pointed out to me that it was an indispensable
requisite in the character of a pretty fellow, that all our set
were well with some fine woman or other; and that he himself; to
his own share, engrossed the favours of two beauties in high
life. I was of opinion that the rascal lied. Master Mogicon, said
I, you are doubtless a very dapper, lively little fellow, with a
modest assurance; but still I do not comprehend how women of
quality, not having your sweet person on their own private
establishments, should run the risk of being detected in an
intrigue with a footman out of doors. Oh! as for that, answered
he, they do not know my condition. To my master's wardrobe, and
even to his name, am I indebted for these conquests. I will tell
you how it is. I dress myself up as a young nobleman, and assume
the manners of one. I go to public places, and tip the wink first
to one woman and then to another, till I meet with one who
returns the signal. Her I follow, and find means to speak with
her. I take the name of Don Antonio Centellés. I plead for an
assignation, the lady is squeamish about it; I am pressing, she
is kind, et caetera. Thus it is, my fine fellow, that I contrive
to carry on my intrigues, and I would have you profit by the
hint.

I was too ambitious of shining like a new star dropped from the
heavens, to turn a deaf ear to such counsel; besides, there was
about me no aversion to an amour. I therefore laid a plan to
disguise myself as a young nobleman, and look out for adventures
of gallantry. There was a risk in assuming my masquerade dress at
home, lest it might be observed. I took a complete suit from my
master's wardrobe, and made it up into a bundle, which I carried
to a barber's, where I thought I could dress and undress
conveniently. There I tricked myself out to the best advantage.
The barber too lent a helping hand to my attire. When we thought
it adjusted to a nicety, I sauntered towards Saint Jerome's
meadow, whence I felt morally certain that I should not return
without making an impression. But I could not even get thither,
without a proof of my own attractions.

As I was crossing a bye-street, a lady of genteel figure,
elegantly dressed, came out of a small house, and got into an
hired carriage standing at the door. I stopped short to look at
her, and bowed significantly, so as to convey an intimation that
my heart was not insensible. On her part, to show me that her
face was not less lovely than her person, she lifted up her veil
for a moment. In the mean time the coach set off, and I stood
stock still in the street, not a little stiffened at this vision.
A vastly pretty woman! said I to myself, bless us! this is just
what is wanting to make me perfectly accomplished. If the two
ladies who share Mogicon between them are equally handsome, the
scoundrel is in luck! I should be delighted with her for a
mistress. Ruminating on these things, I looked by chance towards
the house whence that lovely creature had glided, and saw at a
window on the ground floor an old woman beckoning me to come in.

I flew like lightning into the house, and found, in a very neat
parlour, this venerable and wary matron, who, taking me for a
marquis at least, dropped a low curtsey, and said -- I doubt not,
my lord, but you must have a bad opinion of a woman who, without
the slightest acquaintance, beckons you out of the street; but
you will perhaps judge more favourably of me when you shall know
that I do not pay that compliment promiscuously. You look like a
man of fashion! You are perfectly in the right, my old girl,
interrupted I, stretching out my right leg, and throwing the
weight of my body on my left hip; mine is, vanity apart, one of
the best families in Spain. It must be so by your looks, replied
she, and I will fairly own that I delight in doing a kindness to
people of quality, that is my weak side. I watched you through my
window. You looked very earnestly at a lady who has just left me.
Perhaps you may have taken a fancy to her? tell me so plainly. By
the honour of my house, answered I, she has shot me through the
heart. I never saw anything so tempting; a most divine creature!
Do bring us acquainted, my dear, and rely on my gratitude. It is
worth while to do these little offices for us of the beau monde;
they are better paid than our bills.

I have told you once for all, replied the old woman, I am
entirely devoted to people of condition; it is my passion to be
useful to them: I receive here, for example, a certain class of
ladies, whom appearances prevent from seeing their favourites at
home. I lend them my house, and thus the warmth of their
constitutions is indulged, without risk to their characters.
Vastly well, quoth I, and you have just done that kindness to the
lady in question? No, answered she, this is a young widow of
quality, in want of an admirer; but so difficult in her choice,
that I do not know whether you will do for her, however great
your requisites may be. I have already introduced to her three
well-furnished gallants, but she turned up her nose at them. Oh!
egad, my life, exclaimed I confidently, you have only to stick me
in her skirts, I will give you a good account of her, take my
word for it. I long to have a grapple with a beauty of such
peremptory demands, they have not yet fallen in my way. Well,
then, said the old woman, you have only to come hither to-morrow
at the same hour, your curiosity shall be satisfied. I will not
fail, rejoined I; we shall see whether a young nobleman can miss
a conquest.

I returned to the little barber's without looking for other
adventures, but deeply interested in the event of this.
Therefore, on the following day, I went, in splendid attire, to
the old woman's an hour sooner than the time. My lord, said she,
you are punctual, and I take it kindly. To be sure the game is
worth the chase. I have seen our young widow, and we have had a
good deal of talk about you. Not a word was to be said; but I
have taken such a liking to you that I cannot hold my tongue. You
have made yourself agreeable, and will soon be a happy man.
Between ourselves, the lady is a relishing morsel, her husband
did not live long with her; he glided away like a shadow: she has
all the merit of an absolute girl. The good old lady, no doubt,
meant one of those clever girls, who contrive not to live single,
though they live unmarried.

The heroine of the assignation came soon in an hired carriage, as
on the day before, dressed very magnificently. As soon as she
came into the room, I led off with five or six coxcombical bows,
accompanied by the most fashionable grimaces. After this, I went
up to her with a very familiar air, and said --  My adored angel,
you behold a gentleman of no mean rank, whom your charms have
undone. Your image, since yesterday, has taken complete
possession of my fancy; you have turned a duchess neck and heels
out of my heart, who was beginning to establish a footing there.
The triumph is too glorious for me, answered she, throwing off
her veil, but still my transports are not without alloy. Young
men of fashion love variety, and their hearts are, they say,
bandied about from one to the other like a piece of base money.
Ah! my sovereign mistress, replied I, let us leave the future to
shift for itself; and think only of the present. You are lovely,
I am in love. If my passion is not hateful to you, let it take
its course at random. We will embark like true sailors, set the
storms and shipwreck of a long voyage at defiance, and only take
the fair weather of the time present into the account.

In finishing this speech, I threw myself in raptures at the feet
of my nymph; and the better to hit off my assumed character,
pressed her with some little peevishness not to delay my bliss.
She seemed a little touched by my remonstrances, but thought it
too soon to yield, and giving me a gentle rebuff -- Hold, said
she, you are too importunate, this is like a rake. I fear you are
but a loose young fellow. For shame, madam, exclaimed I; can you
set your face against what women of the first taste and condition
encourage? A prejudice against what is vulgarly called vice may
be all very well for citizens' wives. That is decisive, replied
she, there is no resisting so forcible a plea. I see plainly that
with men of your order dissimulation is to no purpose; a woman
must meet you half way. Learn then your victory, added she with
an appearance of disorder, as if her modesty suffered by the
avowal; you have inspired me with sentiments such as are new to
my heart, and I only wait to know who you are, that I may take
you for my acknowledged lover. I believe you a young lord and a
gentleman, yet there is no trusting to appearances; and however
prepossessed I may be in your favour, I would not give away my
affections to a stranger.
I recollected at the moment how Don Antonio's servant had got out
of a similar perplexity; and determining, after his example, to
pass for my master --  Madam, said I to my dainty widow, I will
not excuse myself from telling you my name, it is one that will
not disparage its owner. Have you ever heard of Don Matthias de
Silva? Yes, replied she; indeed I have seen him with a lady of my
acquaintance. Though considerably improved in impudence, I was a
little troubled by this discovery. Yet I rallied my forces in an
instant, and extricated myself with a happy presence of mind.
Well then, my fair one, retorted I, the lady of your acquaintance
. . . . knows a lord . . . . of my acquaintance . . . . and I am
of his acquaintance; of his own family, since you must know it.
His grandfather married the sister-in-law of my father's uncle.
You see we are very near relations. My name is Don Caesar. I am
the only son of the great Don Ferdinand de Ribera, slain fifteen
years ago, in a battle on the frontiers of Portugal. I could give
you all the particulars of the action; it was a devilish sharp
one . . . . but to fight it over again would be losing the
precious moments of mutual love.

After this discourse I got to be importunate and impassioned, but
without bringing matters at all forwarder. The favours which my
goddess winked at my snatching, tended only to make me languish
for what she was more chary of. The tyrant got back to her coach,
which was waiting at the door. Nevertheless, I withdrew, well
enough pleased with my success, though it still fell short of the
only perfect issue. If said I to myself, I have obtained
indulgences but by halves, it is because this lady, forsooth, is
a high-born dame, and thinks it beneath her quality to play the
very woman at the first interview. The pride of pedigree stands
in the way of my advancement just now, but in a few days we shall
be better acquainted. To be sure, it did not once come into my
head. that she might be one of those cunning gipsies always on
the catch. Yet I liked better to look at things on the right side
than on the wrong, and thus maintained a favourable opinion of my
widow. We had agreed at parting to meet again on the day after
the morrow; and the hope of arriving at the summit of my wishes
gave me a foretaste of the pleasures with which I tickled my
fancy.

With my brain full of joyous traces, I returned to my barber.
Having changed my dress, I went to attend my master at the
tennis-court. I found him at play, and saw that he won; for he
was not one of those impenetrable gamesters who make or mar a
fortune without moving a muscle. In prosperity he was flippant
and overbearing, but quite peevish on the losing side. He left
the tennis-court in high spirits, and went for the Prince's
Theatre. I followed him to the boxdoor, then putting a ducat into
my hand-- Here, Gil Blas, said he, as I have been a winner to-
day, you shall not be the worse for it; go, divert yourself with
your friends, and come to me about midnight at Arsenia's, where I
am to sup with Don Alexo Segiar. He then went in, and I stood
debating with whom I should disburse my ducat, according to the
pious will of the founder. I did not muse long. Clarin, Don
Alexo's servant, just then came in my way. I took him to the next
tavern, and we amused ourselves there till midnight. Thence we
repaired to Arsenia's house, where Clarin had orders to attend. A
little footboy opened the door, and showed us into a room down-
stairs, where Arsenia's waiting-woman, and the lady who held the
same office about Florimonde, were laughing ready to split their
sides, while their mistresses were above-stairs with our masters.

The addition of two jolly fellows just come from a good supper,
could not be unwelcome to abigails, and to the abigails of
actresses too; but what was my astonishment when in one of these
lowly ladies I discovered my widow, my adorable widow, whom I
took for a countess or a marchioness! She appeared equally amazed
to see her dear Don Caesar de Ribera metamorphosed into the valet
of a beau. However, we looked at one another without being out of
countenance; indeed, such a tingling sensation of laughter came
over us both, as we could not help indulging in. After which
Laura, for that was her name, drawing me aside while Clarin was
speaking to her fellow-servant, held out her hand to me very
kindly, and said in a low voice -- Accept this pledge, Signor Don
Caesar; mutual congratulations are more to the purpose than
mutual reproaches, my friend. You topped your part to perfection,
and I was not quite contemptible in mine. What say you? confess
now, did not you take me for one of those precious peeresses who
are fond of a little smuggled amusement? It is even so, answered
I, but whoever you are, my empress, I have not changed my
sentiments with my paraphernalia. Accept my services in good
part, and let the valet-de-chambre of Don Matthias consummate
what Don Caesar has so happily begun. Get you gone, replied she,
I like you ten times better in your natural than in your
artificial character. You are as a man what I am as a woman, and
that is the greatest compliment I can pay you. You are admitted
into the number of my adorers. We have no longer any need of the
old woman as a blind, you may come and see me whenever you like.
We theatrical ladies are no slaves to form, but live higgledy-
piggledy with the men. I allow that the effects are sometimes
visible, but the public wink hard at our irregularities; the
drama's patrons, as you well know, give the drama's laws, and
absolve us from all others.

We went no further, because there were bystanders. The
conversation be came general, lively, jovial, inclining to loose
jokes, not very carefully wrapped up. We all of us bore a bob.
Arsenia's attendant above all, my amiable Laura, was very
conspicuous; but her wit was so extremely nimble, that her virtue
could never overtake it. Our masters and the actresses on the
floor above, raised incessant peals of laughter, which reached us
in the regions below; and probably the entertainment was much
alike with the celestials and the infernals. If all the knowing
remarks had been written down, which escaped from the
philosophers that night assembled at Arsenia's, I really think it
would have been a manual for the rising generation. Yet we could
not arrest the chaste moon in her progress; the rising of that
blab, the sun, parted us. Clarin followed the heels of Don Alexo,
and I went home with Don Matthias.



CH. VI.  --  The Prince's company of comedians.


My master getting up the next day, received a note from Don Alexo
Segiar, desiring his company immediately. We went, and found
there the Marquis de Zenette, and another young nobleman of
prepossessing manners, whom I had never seen. Don Matthias, said
Segiar to my protector, introducing the stranger, give me leave
to present Don Pompeyo de Castro, a relation of mine. He has been
at the court of Portugal almost from his childhood. He reached
Madrid last night, and returns to Lisbon to-morrow. He can allow
me only one day. I wish to make the most of the precious moments,
and thought of asking you and the Marquis de Zenette to make out
the time agreeably. Thereupon my master and Don Alexo's relation
embraced heartily, and complimented one an other in the most
extravagant manner. I was much pleased with Don Pompeyo's
conversation, it showed both acuteness and solidity.

They dined with Segiar; and the gentlemen, after the dessert,
amused themselves at play till the theatre opened. Then they went
all together to the Prince's House, to see a new tragedy, called
The Queen of Carthage. At the end of the piece they returned to
supper, and their conversation ran first on the composition, then
upon the actors. As for the work, cried Don Matthias, I think
very lightly of it. Eneas is a more pious blockhead there than in
the Eneid. But it must be owned that the piece was played
divinely. What does Signor Don Pompeyo think of it? He does not
seem to agree with me. Gentlemen, said the illustrious stranger
with a smile, you are so enraptured with your actors, and still
more with your actresses, that I scarcely dare avow my dissent.
That is very prudent, interrupted Don Alexo with a sneer, your
criticisms would be ill received. You should be tender of our
actresses before the trumpeters of their fame. We carouse with
them every day, we warrant them sound in their conceptions: we
would give vouchers for the justness of their expression if it
were necessary. No doubt of it, answered his kinsman, you would
do the same kind office by their lives and their manners, from
the same motives of companionable feeling.

Your ladies of the sock and buskin at Lisbon, said the Marquis de
Zenette, laughing, are doubtless far superior? They certainly
are, replied Don Pompeyo. They are some of them at least perfect
in their cast. And these, resumed the Marquis, would be warranted
by you in their conceptions and expressions? I have no personal
acquaintance with them, rejoined Don Pompeyo. I am not of their
revels, and can judge of their merit without partiality. Do you,
in good earnest, think your company first-rate? No, really, said
the Marquis, I think no such thing, and only plead the cause of a
few individuals. I give up all the rest. Will you not allow
extraordinary powers to the actress who played Dido? Did she not
personate that queen with the dignity, and at the same time with
all the bewitching charms, calculated to realize our idea of the
character? Could you help admiring the skill with which she
seizes on the passions of the spectator, and harmonizes their
tone to the vibrations she purposes to produce? She may be called
perfect in the exquisite art of declaiming. I agree with you,
said Don Pompeyo, that she can touch the string either of terror
or of pity: never did any actress come closer to the heart, and
the performance is altogether fine; but still she is not without
her defects. Two or three things disgusted me in her playing.
Would she denote surprise? she glances her eyes to and fro in a
most extravagant manner, altogether unbecoming her supposed
majesty as a princess. Add to this, that in swelling her voice,
which is of itself sound and mellifluous, she goes out of her
natural key, and assumes a harsh ranting tone. Besides, it would
seem as if she might be suspected in more than one passage, of
not very clearly comprehending her author. Yet I would in candour
rather suppose her wanting in diligence than capacity.

As far as I see, said Don Matthias to the critic, you will never
write complimentary odes to our actresses! Pardon me, answered
Don Pompeyo. I can discover high talent through all their
imperfections. I must say that I was enchanted with the
chambermaid in the interlude. What fine natural parts! With what
grace she treads the stage! Has she anything pointed to deliver?
she heightens it by an arch smile, with a keen glance and
sarcastic emphasis, which convey more to the understanding than
the words to the ear. It might be objected that she sometimes
gives too much scope to her animal spirits, and exceeds the
limits of allowable freedom, but that would be hypercritical.
There is one bad habit I should strongly advise her to correct.
Sometimes in the very crisis of the action, and in an affecting
passage, she bursts in all at once upon the interest with some
misplaced jest, to curry favour with the mob of barren
spectators. The pit, you will say, is caught by her artifice;
that may be well for her popularity, but not for their taste.

And what do you think of the men? interrupted the Marquis; you
must give them no quarter, since you have handled the women so
roughly. Not so, said Don Pompeyo. There are some promising young
actors, and I am particularly well pleased with that corpulent
performer who played the part of Dido's prime minister. His
recitation is unaffected, and he declaims just as they do in
Portugal. If you can bear such a fellow as that, said Segiar, you
must be charmed with the representative of Eneas. Did not you
think him a great, an original performer? Very original, indeed,
answered the critic; his inflections are quite his own, they are
as shrill as an hautboy. Almost always out of nature, he rattles
the impressive words of the sentence off his tongue, while he
labours and lingers on the expletives; the poor conjunctions are
frightened at their own report as they go off. He entertained me
excessively, and especially when he was expressing in confidence
his distress at abandoning the princess; never was grief more
ludicrously depicted. Fair and softly, cousin, replied Don Alexo;
you will make us believe at last that good taste is not greatly
cultivated at the court of Portugal. Do you know that the actor
of whom we are speaking is esteemed a phenomenon? Did you not
observe what thunders of applause he called down? He cannot
therefore be contemptible. That therefore does not prove the
proposition, replied Don Pompeyo. But, gentlemen, let us lay
aside, I beseech you, the injudicious suffrages of the pit; they
are often given to performers very unseasonably. Indeed, their
boisterous tokens of approbation are more frequently bestowed on
paltry copies than on original merit, as Phedrus teaches us by an
ingenious fable. Allow me to repeat it as follows: --  The whole
population of a city was assembled in a large square to see a
pantomime played. Among the performers there was one whose feats
were applauded every instant. This buffoon, at the end of the
entertainment, wished to close the scene with a new device. He
came alone upon the stage, stooping clown, covering his head with
his mantle, and began counterfeiting the squeak of a pig. He
acquitted himself so naturally as to be suspected of having the
animal itself concealed within the folds of his drapery. He
stripped, but there was no pig. The assembly rang with more
furious applause than ever. A peasant, among the spectators, was
disgusted at this misplaced admiration. Gentlemen, exclaimed he,
you are in the wrong to be so delighted with this buffoon, he is
not so good a mimic as you take him for. I can enact the pig
better; if you doubt it, only attend here this time to-morrow.
The people, prejudiced in the cause of their favourite, collected
in greater numbers on the next day, rather to hiss the countryman
than to see what he could do. The rivals appeared on the stage.
The buffoon began, and was more applauded than the day before.
Then the farmer stooping down in his turn, with his head wrapped
up in his cloak, pulled the ear of a real pig under his arm, and
made it squeal most horribly. Yet this enlightened audience
persisted in giving the preference to their favourite, and hooted
the countryman off the boards; who producing the pig before he
went, said -- Gentlemen, you are not hissing me, but the original
pig. So much for your judgment.

Cousin, said Don Alexo, your fable is rather satirical.
Nevertheless, in spite of your pig, we will not bate an inch of
our opinion. But let us change the subject, this is grown
threadbare. Then you set off to-morrow, do what we can to keep
you with us longer? I should like, answered his kinsman, to
protract my stay with you, but it is not in my power. I have told
you already that I am come to the court of Spain on an affair of
state. Yesterday, on my arrival, I had a conference with the
prime minister; I am to see him to-morrow morning, and shall set
out immediately afterwards on my return to Lisbon. You are become
quite a Portuguese, observed Segiar, and, to all appearance, we
shall lose you entirely from Madrid. I think otherwise, replied
Don Pompeyo, I have the honour to stand well with the King of
Portugal, and have many motives of attachment to that court; yet
with all the kindness that sovereign has testified towards me,
would you believe that I have been on the point of quitting his
dominions for ever. Indeed! by what strange accident? said the
Marquis. Give us the history, I beseech you. Very readily,
answered Don Pompeyo, and at the same time my own, for it is
closely interwoven with the recital for which you have called.



CH. VII. -- History of Don Pompeyo de Castro.


DON ALEXO knows, that from my boyish days, my passion was for a
military life. Our own country being at peace, I went into
Portugal; thence to Africa with the Duke of Braganza, who gave me
a commission. I was a younger brother, with as slender a
provision as most in Spain; so that my only chance was in
attracting the notice of the commander-in-chief by my bravery. I
was so far from deficient in my duty, that the Duke promoted me,
step by step, to one of the most honourable posts in the service.
After a long war, of which you all know the issue, I devoted
myself to the court; and the King, on strong testimonials from
the general officers, rewarded me with a considerable pension.
Alive to that sovereign's generosity, I lost no opportunity of
proving my gratitude by my diligence. I was in attendance as
often as etiquette would allow me to offer myself to his notice.
By this conduct I gained insensibly the love of that prince, and
received new favours from his hands.

One day, when I distinguished myself in running at the ring, and
in a bull fight preceding it, all the court extolled my strength
and dexterity. On my return home, with my honours thick upon me,
I found there a note, informing me that a lady, my conquest over
whom ought to flatter me more than all the glory I had gained
that day, wished to have the pleasure of my company; and that I
had only to attend in the evening, at a place marked out in the
letter. This was more than all my public triumphs, and I
concluded the writer to be a woman of the first quality. You may
guess that I did not loiter by the way. An old woman in waiting,
as my guide, conducted me by a little garden-gate into a large
house, and left me in an elegant closet, saying -- Stay here, I
will acquaint my mistress with your arrival. I observed a great
many articles of value in the closet, which was magnificently
illuminated; but this splendour only caught my attention as
confirming me in my previous opinion of the lady's high rank. If
appearances strengthened that conjecture, her noble and majestic
air on her entrance left no doubt on my mind. Yet I was a little
out in my calculation.

Noble sir, said she, after the step I have taken in your favour
it were impertinent to disown my partiality. Your brilliant
actions of to-day, in presence of the court, were not the
inspirers of my sentiments, they only urge forward this avowal. I
have seen you more than once, have inquired into your character,
and the result has determined me to follow the impulse of my
heart. But do not suppose that you are well with a Duchess. I am
but the widow of a captain in the King's Guards; yet there is
something to throw a radiance round your victory . . . . the
preference you have gained over one of the first noblemen in the
kingdom. The Duke d'Almeyda loves me, and presses his suit with
ardour, yet without success. My vanity only induces me to bear
his importunities.

Though I saw plainly, by this address, that I had got in with a
coquet, my presiding star was not a whit out of my good graces
for involving me in this adventure. Donna Hortensia, for that was
the lady's name, was just in the ripeness and luxuriance of youth
and dazzling beauty. Nay, more, she had refused the possession of
her heart to the earnest entreaties of a duke, and offered it
unsolicited to me. What a feather in the cap of a Spanish
cavalier! I prostrated myself at Hortensia's feet, to thank her
for her favours. I talked just as a man of gallantry always does
talk, and she had reason to be satisfied with the extravagance of
my acknowledgments. Thus we parted the best friends in the world,
on the terms of meeting every evening when the Duke d'Almeyda was
prevented from coming; and. she promised to give me due notice of
his absence. The bargain was exactly fulfilled, and I was turned
into the Adonis of this new Venus.

But the pleasures of this life are transitory. With all the
lady's precautions to conceal our private treaty of commerce from
my rival, he found means of gaining a knowledge, of which it
concerned us greatly to keep him ignorant: a disloyal chamber-
maid divulged the state secret. This nobleman, naturally
generous, but proud, self-sufficient, and violent, was
exasperated at my presumption. Anger and jealousy set him beside
himself. Taking counsel only with his rage, he resolved on an
infamous revenge. One night when I was with Hortensia, he waylaid
me at the little garden-gate, with all his servants provided with
cudgels. As soon as I came out, he ordered me to be seized, and
beat to death by these wretches. Lay on, said he, let the rash
intruder give up the ghost under your chastisement; thus shall
his insolence be punished. No sooner had he finished these words,
than his myrmidons assaulted me in a body, and gave me such a
beating, as to stretch me senseless on the ground: after which
they hurried off with their master, to whom this butchery had
been a delicious pastime. I lay the remainder of the night, just
as they had left me. At daybreak some people passed by, who,
finding that life was still in me, had the humanity to carry me
to a surgeon. Fortunately my wounds were not mortal; and, falling
into skilful hands, I was perfectly cured in two months. At the
end of that period I made my appearance again at court, and
resumed my former way of life, except that I steered clear of
Hortensia, who on her part made no further attempt to renew the
acquaintance, because the Duke, on that condition, had pardoned
her infidelity.

As my adventure was the town talk, and I was known to be no
coward, people were astonished to see me as quiet as if I had
received no affront; for I kept my thoughts to myself; and seemed
to have no quarrel with any man living. No one knew what to think
of my counterfeited insensibility. Some imagined that, in spite
of my courage, the rank of the aggressor overawed me, and
occasioned my tacit submission. Others, with more reason,
mistrusted my silence, and considered my inoffensive demeanour as
a cover to my revenge. The King was of opinion with these last,
that I was not a man to put up with an insult, and that I should
not be wanting to myself at a convenient opportunity. To discover
my real intentions, he sent for me one day into his closet, where
he said: Don Pompeyo, I know what accident has befallen you, and
am surprised, I own, at your forbearance. You are certainly
acting a part. Sire, answered I, how can I know whom to
challenge? I was attacked in the night by persons unknown: it is
a misfortune of which I must make the best. No, no, replied the
King, I am not to be duped by these evasive answers. The whole
story has reached my ears. The Duke d'Almeyda has touched your
honour to the quick. You are nobly born, and a Castilian: I know
what that double character requires. You cherish hostile designs.
Admit me a party to your purposes; it must be so. Never fear the
consequences of making me your confidant.

Since your majesty commands it, resumed I, my sentiments shall be
laid open without reserve. Yes, sir, I meditate a severe
retribution. Every man, wearing such a name as mine, must account
for its untarnished lustre with his family. You know the unworthy
treatment I have experienced; and I purpose assassinating the
Duke d'Almeyda, as a mode of revenge correspondent to the injury.
I shall plunge a dagger in his bosom, or shoot him through the
head, and escape, if I can, into Spain. This is my design.

It is violent, said the King: and yet I have little to say
against it, after the provocation which the Duke d'Almeyda has
given you. He is worthy of the punishment you destine for him.
But do not be in a hurry with your project. Leave me to devise a
method of bringing you together again as friends. Oh! sir,
exclaimed I with vexation, why did you extort my secret from me?
What expedient can . . . . If mine is not to your satisfaction,
interrupted he, you may execute your first intention. I do not
mean to abuse your confidence. I shall not implicate your honour;
so rest contented on that head.

I was greatly puzzled to guess by what means the King designed to
terminate this affair amicably: but thus it was. He sent to speak
with the Duke d'Almeyda in private. Duke, said he, you have
insulted Don Pompeyo de Castro. You are not ignorant that he is a
man of noble birth, a soldier who has served with credit, and
stands high in my favour. You owe him reparation. I am not of a
temper to refuse it, answered the Duke. If he complains of my
outrageous behaviour, I am ready to justify it by the law of
arms. Some thing very different must be done, replied the King: a
Spanish gentleman understands the point of honour too well to
fight on equal terms with a cowardly assassin. I can use no
milder term; and you can only atone for the heinousness of your
conduct, by presenting a cane in person to your antagonist, and
offering to submit yourself to its discipline. Oh heaven!
exclaimed the Duke: what! sir, would you have a man of my rank
degrade, debase himself before a simple gentleman, and submit to
be caned! No, replied the monarch, I will oblige Don Pompeyo to
promise not to touch you. Only offer him the cane, and ask his
pardon: that is all I require from you. And that is too much,
sir, interrupted the Duke d'Almeyda warmly; I had rather remain
exposed to all the secret machinations of his resentment. Your
life is dear to me, said the king; and I should wish this affair
to have no bad consequences. To terminate it with less disgust to
yourself, I will be the only witness of the satisfaction which I
order you to offer to the Spaniard.

The King was obliged to stretch his influence over the Duke to
the utmost, before he could induce him to so mortifying a step.
However, the peremptory monarch effected his purpose, and then
sent for me. He related the particulars of his conversation with
my enemy, and inquired if I should be content with the stipulated
reparation. I answered, yes: and gave my word that, far from
striking the offender, I would not even accept the cane, when he
presented it. With this understanding, the Duke and myself at a
certain hour attended the King, who took us into his closet.
Come, said he to the Duke, acknowledge your fault, and deserve to
be forgiven by the humility of your contrition. Then my
antagonist made his apology, and offered me the cane in his hand.
Don Pompeyo, said the monarch unexpectedly, take the cane, and
let not my presence prevent you from doing justice to your
outraged honour. I release you from your promise not to strike
the Duke. No, sir, answered I, it is enough that he has submitted
to the indignity of the offer: an offended Spaniard asks no more.
Well, then! replied the King, since you are content with this
satisfaction, you may both of you at once assume the privilege of
a gentlemanly quarrel. Measure your swords, and discuss the
question honourably. It is what I most ardently desire, exclaimed
the Duke d'Almeyda in a menacing tone; for that only is competent
to make me amends for the disgraceful step I have taken.

With these words, he went away full of rage and shame; and sent
to tell me, two hours after, that he was waiting for me, in a
retired place. I kept the appointment, and found this nobleman
ready to fight lustily. He was not five and forty; deficient
neither in courage nor in skill: so that the match was fair and
equal. Come on, Don Pompeyo, said he, let us terminate our
difference here. Our hostility ought to be reciprocally mortal;
yours, for my aggression, and mine, for having asked your pardon.
These words were no sooner out of his mouth, than he drew upon me
so suddenly, that I had no time to reply. He pressed very closely
upon me at first, but I had the good fortune to put by all his
thrusts. I acted on the offensive in my turn: the encounter was
evidently with a man equally skilled in defence or in attack;
and. there is no knowing what might have been the issue, if he
had not made a false step in retiring, and fallen backwards. I
stood still immediately, and said to the duke, Recover yourself.
Why give me any quarter? he answered. Your forbearance only
aggravates my disgrace. I will not take advantage of an accident,
replied I; it would only tarnish my glory. Once more recover
yourself, and let us fight it out.

Don Pompeyo, said he rising, after this act of generosity, honour
allows me not to renew the attack upon you. What would the world
say of me, were I to wound you mortally? I should be branded as a
coward for having murdered a man, at whose mercy I had just
before lain prostrate. I cannot therefore again lift my arm
against your life, and I feel my resentful passions subsiding
into the sweet emotions of gratitude. Don Pompeyo, let us
mutually lay aside our hatred. Let us go still further; let us be
friends. Ah! my lord, exclaimed I, so flattering a proposal I
joyfully accept. I proffer you my sincere friendship; and, as an
earnest, promise never more to approach Donna Hortensia, though
she herself should invite me. It is my duty, said he, to yield
that lady to you. Justice requires me to give her up, since her
affections are yours already. No, no, interrupted I; you love
her. Her partiality in my favour would give you uneasiness; I
sacrifice my own pleasures to your peace. Ah! too generous
Castilian, replied the Duke, embracing me, your sentiments are
truly noble. With what remorse do they strike me! Grieved and
ashamed, I look back on the outrage you have sustained. The
reparation in the King's chamber seems now too trifling. A better
recompense awaits you. To obliterate all remembrance of your
shame, take one of my nieces whose hand is at my disposal. She is
a rich heiress, not fifteen, with beauty beyond the attractions
of mere youth.

I made my acknowledgments to the Duke in terms such as the high
honour of his alliance might suggest, and married his niece a few
days afterwards. All the court complimented this nobleman on
having made such generous amends to an insulted rival; and my
friends took part in my joy at the happy issue of an adventure
which might have led to the most melancholy consequences. From
this time, gentlemen, I have lived happily at Lisbon. I am the
idol of my wife, and have not sunk the lover in the husband. The
Duke d'Almeyda gives me new proofs of friendship every day; and I
may venture to boast of standing high in the King of Portugal's
good graces. The importance of my errand hither sufficiently
assures me of his confidence.



CH. VIII. -- An accident, in consequence of which Gil Blas was
obliged to look out for another place.


SUCH was Don Pompeyo's story, which Don Alexo's servant and
myself over heard, though we were prudently sent away before he
began his recital. Instead of withdrawing, we skulked behind the
door, which we had left half open, and from that station we did
not miss a word. After this, the company went on drinking; but
they did not prolong their carousals till the morning, because
Don Pompeyo, who was to speak with the prime minister, wished for
a little rest beforehand. The Marquis de Zenette and my master
took a cordial leave of the stranger, and left him with his
kinsman.

We went to bed for once before daybreak; and Don Matthias, when
he awoke, invested me with a new office. Gil Blas, said he, take
pen, ink, and paper, and write two or three letters as I shall
dictate: you shall henceforth be my secretary. Well and good!
said I to myself, a plurality of functions. As footman, I follow
my master's heels; as valet-de-chambre, I help him to dress; and
write for him as his secretary. Heaven be praised for my
apotheosis! Like the triple Hecate of the Pantheon, I am to enact
three different characters at the same time. Can you guess my
intention? continued he. Thus it is: but take care what you are
about; your life may depend on it. As I am continually meeting
with fellows who boast of their success among the women, I mean,
by way of getting the upper hand, to fill my pockets with
fictitious love-letters, and read them in company. It will be
amusing enough. Happier than my competitors, who make conquests
only for the pleasure of the boast, I shall take the credit of
intrigue, and spare myself the labour. But vary your writing, so
that the manufacture may not be detected by the sameness of the
hand.

I then sat down to comply with the commands of Don Matthias, who
first dictated a tender epistle to this tune --  You did not keep
your promise to-night. Ah! Don Matthias, how will you exculpate
yourself? My error was a cruel one! But you punish me deservedly
for my vanity, in fancying that business and amusement were all
to give way before the pleasure of seeing Donna Clara de Mendoza!
After this pretty note, he made me write another, as if from a
lady who sacrificed a prince to him; and then a third, whose fair
writer offered, if she could rely on his discretion, to embark
with him for the shores of Cytherean enchantment. It was not
enough to dictate these love-sick strains; he forced me to
subscribe them with the most high-flying names in Madrid. I could
not forbear hinting at some little hazard in all this, but he
begged me to keep my sage counsels till they were called for. I
was obliged to hold my tongue, and dispatch his orders out of
hand. That done, he got up, and dressed with my assistance. The
letters were put into his pocket, and out he went. I followed him
to dinner with Don Juan de Moncade, who entertained five or six
gentlemen of his acquaintance that day.

There was a grand set-out, and mirth, the best relish, was not
wanting to the banquet. All the guests contributed to enliven the
conversation, some by wit and humour, others by anecdotes of
which the relaters were the heroes. My master would not lose so
fine an opportunity of bringing our joint performances to bear.
He read them audibly, and with so much assurance, that probably
the whole party, with the exception of his secretary, was taken
in by the device. Among the company, before whom this trick was
so impudently played off, there was one person, by name Don Lope
de Velasco. This person, a very grave don, instead of making
himself merry like the rest with the fictitious triumphs of the
reader, asked him coolly if the conquest of Donna Clara had been
achieved with any great difficulty? Less than the least, answered
Don Matthias; the advances were all on her side. She saw me in
public, and took a fancy to my person. A scout was commissioned
to follow me, and thus she got at my name and condition. She
wrote to me, and gave me an appointment at an hour of the night
when the house was sure to be quiet. I was true as the needle to
the pole; her bedchamber was the place  . . . . But prudence and
delicacy forbid my describing what passed there.

At this instance of tender regard for the lady's character,
Signor de Velasco betrayed some very passionate workings in his
countenance. It was easy to see the interest he took in the
subject. All these letters, said he to my master, looking at him
with an eye of indignation and contempt, are infamous forgeries,
and above all that which you boast of having received from Donna
Clara de Mendoza. There is not in all Spain a more modest young
creature than her. self. For these two years, a gentleman, at
least your equal in birth and personal merit, has been trying
every method of insinuating himself into her heart. Scarcely have
his assiduities extorted the slightest encouragement: but yet he
may flatter himself that, if anything beyond common civility had
been granted at all, it would have been to him only. Well! Who
says to the contrary? interrupted Don Matthias in a bantering
way. I agree with you, that the lady is a very pretty behaved
young lady. On my part, I am a very pretty behaved young
gentleman. Ergo, you may rest assured that nothing took place
between us but what was pretty and well behaved. Indeed! This is
too much, interrupted Don Lope in his turn; let us lay aside this
unseasonable jesting. You are an impostor. Donna Clara never gave
you an appointment by night. Her reputation shall not be
blackened by your ribaldry. But prudence and delicacy forbid my
describing what must pass between you and me. With this retort on
his lips, he looked contemptuously round, and withdrew with a
menacing aspect, which anticipated serious consequences to my
judgment. My master, whose courage was better than his cause,
held the threats of Don Lope in derision. A blockhead! exclaimed
he, bursting into a loud fit of laughter. Our knights-errant used
to tilt for the beauty of their mistresses, this fellow would
engage in the lists for the forlorn hope of virtue in his; he is
more ridiculous than his prototypes.

Velasco's retiring, in vain opposed by Moncade, occasioned no
interruption to the merriment. The party, without thinking
further about it, kept the ball up briskly, and did not part till
they had made free with the next day. We went to bed, that is, my
master and myself, about five o'clock in the morning. Sleep sat
heavy on my eyelids, and, as I thought, was taking permanent
possession thereof; but I reckoned without my host, or rather
without our porter, who came and waked me in an hour, to say that
there was a lad inquiring for me at the door. Oh! thou infernal
porter, muttered I indistinctly, through the interstices of a
long yawn, do you consider that I have but now got to bed? Tell
the little rascal that I am just asleep; he must come again by-
and-by. He insists, replied Cerberus, on speaking with you
instantly; his business cannot wait. As that was the case I got
up, put on nothing but my breeches and doublet, and went down-
stairs, swearing and gaping. My friend, said I, be so good as to
let me know what urgent affair procures me the honour of seeing
you so early? I have a letter, answered he, to deliver personally
into the hands of Signor Don Matthias, to be read by him without
loss of time; it is of the last consequence to him --  pray show
me into his room. As I thought the matter looked serious, I took
the liberty of disturbing my master. Excuse me, said I, for
waking you, but the pressing nature . . . . What do you want?
interrupted he, just in my style with the porter. Sir, said the
lad who was at my elbow, here is a letter from Don Lope de
Velasco. Don Matthias looked at the cover, broke it, and after
reading the contents, said to the messenger of Don Lope --  My
good fellow, I never get up before noon, let the party be ever so
agreeable; judge whether I can be expected to be stirring by six
in the morning for a small-sword recreation. You may tell your
master, that if he chooses to kick his heels at the spot till
half-past twelve, we will come and see how he looks there --
carry him that answer. With this flippant speech he plunged down
snugly under the bed clothes and fell fast asleep again as if
nothing had happened.

Between eleven and twelve he got up and dressed himself with the
utmost composure, and went out, telling me that there was no
occasion for my attendance: but I was too much on the tenterhooks
about the result to mind his orders. I sneaked after him to Saint
Jerome's meadow, where I saw Don Lope de Velasco waiting for him.
I took my station to watch them; and was an eye-witness to all
the circumstances of their rencounter. They saluted, and began
their fierce debate without delay. The engagement lasted long.
They exchanged thrusts alternately, with equal skill and mettle.
The victory, how ever, was on the side of Don Lope: he ran my
master through, laid him helpless on the ground, and made his
escape, with apparent satisfaction at the severe reprisal. I ran
up to the unfortunate Don Matthias, and found him in a most
desperate situation. The sight melted me. I could not help
weeping at a catastrophe to which I had been an involuntary
contributor. Nevertheless, with all sympathy, I had still my
little wits about me. Home went I in a hurry, without saying a
word. I made up a bundle of my own goods and chattels,
inadvertently slipping in some odd articles belonging to my
master: and when I had deposited this with the barber, where my
dress as a fine gentleman was still lodged, I published the news
of the fatal accident. Any gaper might have it for the trouble of
listening; and above all, I took care to make Rodriguez
acquainted with it. He would have been extremely afflicted, but
that his own proceedings in this delicate case required all his
attention. He called the servants together, ordered them to
follow him, and we went all together to Saint Jerome's meadow.
Don Matthias was taken up alive, but he died three hours after he
was brought home. Thus ended the life of Signor Don Matthias de
Silva, only for having taken a fancy to reading supposititious
love-letters unseasonably.



CH. IX.  -- A new service, after the death of Don Matthias de
Silva.


Some days after the funeral, the establishment was paid up and
discharged. I fixed my head-quarters with the little barber, in a
very close connection with whom I began to live. It seemed to
promise more pleasure than with Melendez. As I was in no want of
money, it was time enough to think of another place: besides, I
had got to be rather nice on that head. I would not go into
service any more, but in families above the vulgar. In short, I
was determined to inquire very strictly into the character of a
new place. The best would not be too good; such high pretensions
did the late valet of a young nobleman think himself entitled to
assume above the common herd of servants.

Waiting till fortune should throw a situation in my way, worthy
to be honoured by my acceptance, I thought I could not do better
than to devote my leisure to my charming Laura, whom I had not
seen since the pleasant occurrence of our double discovery. I
could not venture on dressing as Don Caesar de Ribera; it would
have been an act of madness to have assumed that style but as a
disguise. Besides that my own suit was not much out of condition,
all smaller articles had propagated miraculously in the aforesaid
bundle. I made myself up, therefore, with the barber's aid, as a
sort of middle man between Don Caesar and Gil Blas. In this demi-
character, I knocked at Arsenia's door. Laura was alone in the
parlour where we had met last. Ah! is it you? cried she, as soon
as she saw me; I thought you were lost. You have had leave to
come and see me for this week: but it seems you are modest, and
do not presume too much on your license.

I made my apology on the score of my master's death, with my own
engagements consequent thereupon; and I added, in the spirit of
gallantry, that in my greatest perplexities, my lovely Laura had
always been foremost in my thoughts. That being so, said she, I
have no more reproaches to make; and I will frankly own that I 
have thought of you. As soon as I was acquainted with the
untimely end of Don Matthias, a plan occurred to me, probably not
quite displeasing to you. I have heard my mistress say some time
ago, that she wanted a sort of man of business; a good
arithmetician, to keep an exact account of our outgoings. I fixed
my affections on your lordship; you seem exactly calculated for
such an office. I feel myself, answered I, a steward by
inspiration. I have read all that Aristotle has written on
finance; and as for reducing it to the modern system of book-
keeping . . . . But, my dear girl, there is one impediment in the
way. What impediment? said Laura. I have sworn, replied I, never
again to live with a commoner: I have sworn by Styx, or something
else as binding. If Jupiter could not burst the links of such an
oath, judge whether a poor servant ought not to be bound by it.
What do you mean by a commoner? re joined the impetuous abigail:
for what do you take us actresses? Do you take us for the ribs of
the limbs of the law? for attorneys' wives? I would have you to
know, my friend, that actresses rank with the first nobility;
being only common to the uncommon, and therefore, though common,
uncommonly illustrious.

On that footing, my uncommon commoner, said I, the post you have
destined for me is mine: I shall not lower my dignity by
accepting it. No, to be sure, said she: backwards and forwards
between a puppy of fashion and a she-wolf of the stage; why, it
is exactly preserving an equilibrium of rank in the creation. We
are sympathetic animals, just on a level with the people of
quality. We have our equipages in the same style; we give our
little suppers on the same scale; and on the broad ground we are
just of as much use in civil society. In fact, to draw a parallel
between a marquis and a player through the space of four and
twenty hours, they are just on a par. The marquis, for three-
fourths of the time, ranks above the player by political courtesy
and sufferance: the player, during his hour on the stage,
overtops the marquis in the part of an emperor or a king, which
he better knows how to enact. Thus there seems to be a balance
between natural and political nobility, which places us at least
on a level with the live lumber of the court. Yes, truly, replied
I, you are a match for one another, there is no gainsaying it.
Bless their dear hearts! the players are not men of straw, as I
foolishly believed, and you have made my mouth water to serve
such a worshipful fraternity. Well, then! resumed she, you have
only to come back again in two days. That time will be sufficient
to incline my mistress in your favour; I will speak up for you.
She is a little under my influence; I do not fear bringing you
under this roof.

I thanked Laura for her good dispositions. My gratitude took the
readiest way to prove itself to her comprehension; and my tender
thrillings expressed more than words. We had a pretty long
conversation together, and it might have lasted till this time,
if a little skipping fellow had not come to tell my nymph of the
side scenes that Arsenia was inquiring for her. We parted. I left
the house, in the sweet hope of soon living there scot-free; and
my face was shown up again at the door in two days. I was looking
out for you, said my accomplished scout, to assure you that you
are a messmate at this house. Come, follow me; I will introduce
you to my mistress. At these words, she led me into a suite of
five or six rooms on a floor, in a regular gradation of costly
furniture and tasteful equipment.

What luxury! What magnificence! I thought myself in presence of a
vicequeen, or, to mend the poverty of the comparison, in a fairy
palace, where all the riches of the earth were collected. In
fact, there were the productions of many people and of many
countries, so that one might describe this residence as the
temple of a goddess, whither every traveller brought some rare
product of his native land, as a votive offering. The divinity
was reclining on a voluptuous satin sofa: she was lovely in my
eyes, and pampered with the fumes of daily sacrifices. She was in
a tempting dishabille, and her polished hands were elegantly busy
about a new head-dress for her appearance that evening. Madam,
said the abigail, here is that said steward; take my word for it,
you will never get one more to your liking. Arsenia looked at me
very inquisitively, and did not find me disagreeable. Why, this
is something, Laura, cried she; a very smart youth truly: I
foresee that we shall do very well together. Then directing her
discourse to me, Young man, added she, you suit me to a hair, and
I have only one observation to make: you will be pleased with me,
if I am so with you. I answered that I should do my utmost to
serve her to her heart's content. As I found that the bargain was
struck, I went immediately to fetch in my own little
accommodations, and returned to take formal possession.



CH. X. -- Much such another as the foregoing.


IT was near the time of the doors opening. My mistress told me to
attend her to the theatre with Laura. We went into her dressing-
room, where she threw off her ordinary attire, and assumed a more
splendid costume for the stage. When the performance began, Laura
shewed me the way, and seated herself by my side where I could
see and hear the actors to advantage. They disgusted me for the
most part, doubtless because Don Pompeyo had prejudiced me
against them. Several of them were loudly applauded, but the
fable of the pig would now and then come across my mind.

Laura told me the names of the actors and actresses as they made
their entrances. Nor did she stop there, for the hussy gave some
highly seasoned anecdotes into the bargain. Her characters were,
crack-brain for this, impertinent fellow for that. That delicate
sample of sin, who depends on her wantonness for her attractions,
goes by the name of Rosarda: a bad speculation for the company!
She ought to be sent with the next cargo to New Spain, she may
answer the purpose of the viceroy. Take particular notice of that
brilliant star now coming forward; that magnificent setting sun,
increasing in bulk as its fires become less vivid. That is
Casilda. If from that distant day when she first laid herself
open to her lovers, she had required from each of them a brick to
build a pyramid, like an ancient Egyptian princess, the edifice
by this time would have mounted to the third heaven. In short,
Laura tore all character to pieces by her scandal. Heaven forgive
her wicked tongue! She blasphemed her own mistress.

And yet I must own my weakness. I was in love with the wench,
though her morals were not strictly pure. She scandalized with so
winning a malignity that one liked her the better for it. Off
went the jill-flirt between the acts, to see if Arsenia wanted
her; but instead of coming straight back to her place, she amused
herself behind the scenes, in laying herself out for the little
flatteries of all the wheedling fellows. I dogged her once, and
found that she had a very large acquaintance. No less than three
players did I reckon up, who stopped to chat with her one after
the other, and they seemed to be on a very improvable footing.
This was not quite so well; and for the first time in my life I
felt what jealousy was. I returned to my seat so absent and out
of spirits, that Laura remarked it as soon as she came back to
me. What is the matter, Gil Blas, said she with astonishment;
what blue devil has perched upon your shoulder in my absence? You
look gloomy and out of temper. My fairy queen, answered I, it is
not without reason, you have an ugly kick in your gallop. I have
observed you with the players . . . . So, so! An admirable
subject for a long face, interrupted she with a laugh. What! That
is your trouble, is it? Why really! You are a very silly swain;
but you will get better notions among us. You will fall by
degrees into our easy manners. No jealousy, my dear creature, you
will be completely laughed out of it in the theatrical world. The
passion is scarcely known there. Fathers, husbands, brothers,
uncles, and cousins, are all upon a liberal plan of community,
and often make a strange jumble of relationships.

After having warned me to take no umbrage, but to look at
everything like a philosophical spectator, she vowed that I was
the happy mortal who had found the way to her heart. She then
declared that she should love me always, and only me. On this
assurance, which a man might have doubted without criminal
scepticism, I promised her not to be alarmed any more, and kept
my word. I saw her, on that very evening, whisper and giggle with
more men than one. At the end of the play we returned home with
our mistress, whither Florimonde came soon after to supper, with
three old noblemen and a player. Besides Laura and myself, the
establishment consisted of a cook-maid, a coachman, and a little
footboy. We all laboured in our respective vocations. The lady of
the frying-pan, no less an adept than Dame Jacintha, was assisted
in her cookery by the coachman. The waiting-woman and the little
footboy laid the cloth, and I set out the sideboard,
magnificently furnished with plate, offered up at the shrine of
our green-room goddess. There was every variety of wines, and I
played the cup-bearer, to show my mistress the versatility of my
talents. I sweated at the impudence of the actresses during
supper; they gave themselves quality airs, and affected the tone
of high life. Far from giving their guests all their style and
titles, they did not even vouchsafe a simple "Your lordship," but
called them familiarly by their proper names. To be sure, the old
fools encouraged their vanity by forgetting their own distance.
The player, for his part, in the habits of the heroic cast, lived
on equal terms with them; he challenged them to drink, and in
every respect took the upper hand. In good truth, said I to
myself, while Laura was demonstrating the equality of the Marquis
and the comedian during the day, she might have drawn a still
stronger inference for the night, since they pass it so merrily
in drinking together.

Arsenia and Florimonde were naturally frolicsome. A thousand
broad hints escaped them, intermingled with small favours, and
then a coquettish revolt at their own freedom, which were all
seasoned exactly to the taste of these old sinners. While my
mistress was entertaining one of them with a little harmless
toying, her friend, between the other elders, had not taken the
cue of Susanna. While I was contemplating this picture, which had
but too many attractions for a knowing youth like me, the dessert
was brought in. Then I set the bottles and glasses on the table,
and made my escape to sup with Laura, who was waiting for me. How
now! Gil Blas, said she, what do you think of those noblemen
above-stairs? Doubtless, answered I, they are deeply smitten with
Arsenia and Florimonde. No, replied she, they are old
sensualists, who hang about our sex without any particular
attachment. All they ask is some little frivolous compliance, and
they are generous enough to pay well for the least trifle of
amorous endearment. Heaven be praised, Florimonde and my mistress
are at present without any serious engagements; I mean that they
have no husband-like lovers, who expect to engross all the
pleasures of a house, because they stand to the expenses. For my
part, I am very glad of it: and maintain that a sensible woman of
the world ought to refuse all such monopolies. Why take a master?
It is better to support an establishment by retail trade, than to
confine one's self to chamber practice on such terms.

When Laura's tongue was wound up, and it was seldom down, words
seemed to cost her nothing. What a glorious volubility! She told
a thousand stories of the actresses belonging to the prince's
company; and I gathered from her whole drift that I could not be
better situated to take a scientific view of the cardinal vices.
Unfortunately I was at an age when they inspire but little
horror; and this abigail had the art of colouring her corruptions
so lusciously as to hide their deformities and heighten their
meretricious lure. She had not time to open the tenth part of her
theatrical budget, for she did not talk more than three hours.
The senators and the player went away with Florimonde, whom they
saw safe home.

When they were gone, my mistress said to me --  Here, Gil Blas,
are ten pistoles to go to market to-morrow. Five or six of our
gentlemen and ladies are to dine here, take care that we are well
served. Madam, answered I, with this sum there shall be a banquet
for the whole troop. My friend, replied Arsenia, correct your
phraseology; you must say company, not troop. A troop of robbers,
a troop of beggars, a troop of authors; but a company of
comedians, especially when you have to mention the actors of
Madrid. I begged my mistress's pardon for having used so
disrespectful a term, and entreated her to excuse my ignorance. I
protested that henceforward, when I spoke collectively of so
august a body, I would always say the company.



CH. XI. -- A theatrical life and an author's life


I TOOK the field the next morning, to open my campaign as
steward. It was a fish day; for which reason I bought some good
fat chickens, rabbits, partridges, and every variety of game. As
the gentlemen of the sock and buskin are not on the best possible
terms with the church, they are not over-scrupulous in their
observance of the rubric. I brought home provisions more than
enough for a dozen portly gentlemen to have fasted on during a
whole Lent. The cook had a good morning's work. While she was
getting dinner ready, Arsenia got up and spent the early part of
the day at her toilet. At noon came two of the players, Signor
Rosimiro and Signor Ricardo. Afterwards two actresses, Constance
and Celinaura; then entered Florimonde, attended by a man who had
all the appearance of a most spruce cavalier. He had his hair
dressed in the most elegant manner, his hat set off with a
fashionable plume, very tight breeches, and a shirt with a laced
frill. His gloves and his handkerchief were in the hilt of his
sword, and he wore his cloak with a grace altogether peculiar to
himself.

With a prepossessing physiognomy and a good person, there was
something extraordinary in the first blush of him. This
gentleman, said I to myself, must be an original. I was not
mistaken; his singularities were striking. On his entrance, he
ran with open arms and embraced the company, male and female, one
after another. His grimaces were more extravagant than any I had
yet seen in this region of foppery. My prediction was not
falsified by his discourse. He dwelt with fondness on every
syllable he uttered, and pronounced his words in an emphatic
tone, with gestures and glances artfully adapted to the subject.
I had the curiosity to ask Laura who this strange figure might
be. I forgive you, said she, this instance of an inquisitive
disposition. It is impossible to see and to hear Signor Carlos
Alonso de la Ventoleria for the first time, without having such a
natural longing. I will paint him to the life. In the first
place, he was originally a player. He left the stage through
caprice, and has since repented in sober sadness of the step. Did
you notice his dark hair? Every thread of it is pencilled, as
well as his eyebrows and his whiskers. He was born in the reign
of Saturn's father, in the age before the golden; but as there
were no parish registers at that time, he avails himself of the
primitive barbarism, and dates at least twenty centuries below
the true epoch. Moreover, his self-sufficiency keeps pace with
his antiquity. He passed the olympiads of his youth in the
grossest ignorance; but taking a fancy to become learned about
the Christian era, he engaged a private tutor, who taught him to
spell in Greek and Latin. Nay, more, he knows by heart an
infinite number of good stories, which he has given so often as
genuine, that he actually begins to believe them himself. They
are eternally pressed into the service, and it may truly be said
that his wit shines at the expense of his memory. He is thought
to be a great actor. I am willing to believe it implicitly, but I
must own he is not to my taste. He declaims here sometimes; and I
have observed, among other defects, an affectation in his
delivery, with a tremulousness of voice bordering on the
antiquated and ridiculous.

Such was the portrait drawn by my abigail of this honorary
spouter; and never was mortal of a more stately carriage. He
prided himself too on being an agreeable companion. He never was
at a loss for a commodity of trite remarks, which he delivered
with an air of authority. On the other hand, the Thespian
fraternity were not much addicted to silence. They began
canvassing their absent colleagues in a manner little consistent
with charity, it must be owned; but this is a failing pardonable
in players as well as in authors. The fire grew brisk and the
satire personal. You have not heard, ladies, said Rosimiro, a new
stroke of our dear brother Cesarino. This very morning he bought
silk stockings, ribbons, and laces, and sent them to rehearsal by
a little page, as a present from a countess. What a knavish
trick! said Signor de la Ventoleria, with a smile made up of
fatuity and conceit. In my time there was more honesty, we never
thought of descending to such impositions. To be sure, women of
fashion were tender of our inventive faculties, nor did they
leave such purchases to be made out of our own pockets; it was
their whim. By the honour of our house, said Ricardo, in the same
strain, that whim of theirs is lasting, and if it were allowable
to kiss and tell . . . . But one must be secret on these
occasions, above all when persons of a certain rank are
concerned.

Gentlemen, interrupted Florimonde, a truce, if you please, with
your conquests and successes, they are known over the whole
earth. Apropos of Ismene. It is said that the nobleman who has
fooled away so much money upon her, has at length recovered his
senses. Yes, indeed, exclaimed Constance; and I can tell you
besides that she has lost, by the same stroke, a snug little hero
of the counting-house, whose ruin would otherwise have been
signed and sealed. I have the thing from the first hand. Her
Mercury made an unfortunate mistake, for he carried a tender
invitation to each, and delivered them wrong. These were great
losses, my darling, quoth Florimonde. Oh! as for that of the
lord, replied Constance, it is a very trifling matter. The man of
blood had almost run through his estate, but the little fellow
with the pen behind his ear was but just coming into play. He had
never been fleeced before, it is a pity he should have escaped so
easily.

Such was the tenor of the conversation before dinner, and it was
not much mended in its morality at table. As I should never have
done with the recital of all their ribaldry and nonsense, the
reader will excuse the omission, and pass on to the entrance of a
poor devil, yclept an author, who called just before the cloth
was taken away.

Our little footboy came and said to my mistress in an audible
voice -- Madam, a man in a dirty shirt, splashed up to his
middle, with very much the look of a poet, saving your presence,
wants to speak to you. Let him walk up, answered Arsenia. Keep
your seats, gentlemen, it is only an author. To be sure so it
was, one whose tragedy had been accepted, and he was bringing my
mistress her part. His name was Pedro de Moya. On coming into the
room he made five or six low bows to the company, who neither
rose nor took the least notice of him. Arsenia just returned his
superabundant civilities with a slight inclination of the head.
He came forward with tremor and embarrassment. He dropped his 
gloves and let his hat fall. He ventured to pick them up again,
then advanced towards my mistress, and presenting to her a paper
with more ceremony than a defendant an affidavit to the judge of
the court --  Madam, said he, have the goodness to receive under
your protection the part I take the liberty of offering you. She
stretched out her hand for it with cold and contemptuous
indifference; nor did she condescend even to notice the
compliment by a look.

But our author was not disheartened. Seizing this opportunity to
distribute the cast, he gave one character to Rosimiro and
another to Florimonde, who treated him just as genteelly as
Arsenia had done. On the contrary, the low comedian, a very
pleasant fellow, as those gentlemen for the most part affect to
be, insulted him with the most cutting sarcasms. Pedro de Moya
was not made of stone. Yet he dared not take up the aggressor,
lest his piece should suffer for it. He withdrew without saying a
word, but stung to the quick, as it seemed to me, by his
reception. He could not fail, in the transports of his anger,
mentally to apostrophize the players as they deserved: and the
players, when he was gone, began to talk of authors in return
with infinite deference and kindness. It should seem, said
Florimonde, as if Signor de Moya did not go away very well
pleased.

Well! madam, cried Rosimiro, and why should you trouble yourself
about that? Are we to study the feelings of authors? If we were
to admit them upon equal terms, it would only be the way to spoil
them. I know that contemptible squad; I know them of old: they
would soon forget their distance. There is no dealing with them
but as slaves; and as for tiring their patience, never fear that.
Though they may take themselves off in a pet sometimes, the itch
of writing brings them back again; and they are raised to the
third heaven, if we will but condescend to support their pieces.
You are right, said Arsenia; we never lose an author till we have
made his fortune. When that is done, as soon as we have provided
for the ungrateful devils, they get to be in good case, and then
they run restive. Luckily the manager does not break his heart
after them, and one is just as good as another to the public.

These liberal and sagacious remarks met with their full share of
approbation. It was carried unanimously that authors, though
treated rather too scurvily be hind the scenes, were on the whole
the obliged persons. These fretters of an hour upon the stage
ranked the inhabitant of Parnassus below themselves; and malice
could not degrade him lower.



CH. XII. --  Gil Blas acquires a relish for the theatre, and
takes a full swing of its pleasures, but soon becomes disgusted.


THE party sat at table till it was time to go to the theatre. I
went after them, and saw the play again that evening. I took such
delight in it, that I was for attending every day. I never
missed, and by degrees got accustomed to the actors. Such is the
force of habit. I was particularly delighted with those who were
most artificial and unnatural; nor was I singular in my taste.

The beauties of composition affected me much on the same
principle as the excellence of representation. There were some
pieces with which I was enraptured. I liked, among others, those
which brought all the cardinals or the twelve peers of France
upon the stage. I got hold of striking passages in these
incomparable performances. I recollect that in two days I learnt
by heart a whole play, called, The Queen of Flowers. The Rose,
who was the queen, had the Violet for her maid of honour, and the
Jessamin for her prime minister. I could conceive nothing more
elegant or refined: such productions seemed to be the triumph of
our Spanish wit and invention.

I was not content to store my memory and discipline my mind with
the choicest selections from these dramatic masterpieces: but I
was bent on polishing my taste to the highest perfection. To
secure this grand object, I listened with greedy ears to every
word which fell from the lips of the players. If they commended a
piece, I was ravished by it: but suppose they pronounced it bad?
why, then I maintained that it was infernal stuff. I conceived
that they must determine the merits of a play, as a jeweller the
water of a diamond. And yet the tragedy by Pedro de Moya was
eminently successful, though they had predicted its entire
miscarriage. This, however, was no disparagement of their
critical skill in my estimation; and I had rather believe the
audience to be divested of common sense, than doubt the
infallibility of the company. But they assured me, on all hands,
that their judgments were usually confirmed by the rule of
contraries. It seemed to be a maxim with them, to set their faces
point blank against the taste of the public; and as a proof of
this, there were a thousand cases in point of unexpected
successes and failures. All these testimonies were scarcely
sufficient to undeceive me.

I shall never forget what happened one day at the first
representation of a new comedy. The performers had pronounced it
uninteresting and tedious; they had even prophesied that it would
not be heard to the end. Under this impression, they got through
the first act, which was loudly applauded. This was very
astonishing! They played the second act; the audience liked it
still better than the first. The actors were confounded. What the
devil, said Rosimiro, this comedy succeeds! At last they went on
in the third act, which rose as a third act ought to rise. I am
quite thrown upon my back, said Ricardo; we thought this piece
would not be relished; and all the world are mad after it.
Gentlemen, said one of the players archly, it is because we
happened accidentally to overlook all the wit.

From this time I held my opinion no longer of the players as
competent judges, and began to appreciate their merit more truly
than they had estimated that of the authors. All the lampoons 
which were current about them were fully justified. The actors
and actresses ran riot on the applauses of the town, and stood so
high in their own conceit, as to think that they conferred a
favour by appearing on the boards. I was shocked at their public
misconduct; but unfortunately reconciled myself too easily to
their private manners, and plunged into debauchery. How could I
do otherwise? Every word they uttered was poison in the ears of
youth, and every scene that was presented, an alluring picture of
corruption. Had I been a stranger to what passed with Casilda,
with Constance, and with the other actresses, Arsenia's house
alone would have been sufficient for my ruin. Besides the old
noblemen of whom I have spoken, there came thither young
debauchees of fashion, who forestalled their inheritances by the
disinterested mediation of money-lenders: and sometimes we had
officers under government, who were so far from receiving fees,
as at their public boards, that they paid most exorbitant ones
for the privilege of mixing with such worshipful society.

Florimonde, who lived at next door, dined and supped with Arsenia
every day. Their long intimacy surprised every one. Coquets were
not thought usually to maintain so good an understanding with
each other. It was concluded that they would quarrel, sooner or
late; about some paramour; but such reasoners could not see into
the hearts of these exemplary friends. They were united in the
bonds of indissoluble love. Instead of harbouring jealousy, like
other women, they had everything in common. They had rather
divide the plunder of mankind, than childishly fall out, and
contend for trumpery, as hearts and affections.

Laura, after the example of these two illustrious partners,
turned the fresh season of youth to the best advantage. She had
told me that I should see strange doings. And yet I did not take
up the jealous part. I had promised to adopt the principles of
the company on that score. For some days I kept my thoughts to
myself. I only just took the liberty of asking her the names of
the men whom she favoured with her private ear. She always told
me that they were uncles or cousins. From what a prolific family
was she sprung! King Priam had no luck in propagation, compared
with her ancestors. Nor did this precious abigail confine herself
to her uncles and cousins: she went now and then to lay a trap
for unwary aliens, and personate the widow of quality under the
auspices of the discreet old dowager above mentioned. In short
Laura, to hit off her character exactly, was just as young, just
as pretty, and just as loose as her mistress, who had no other
advantage over her than that of figuring in a more public
capacity.

I was borne down by the torrent for three weeks, and ran the
career of dissipation in my turn. But I must at the same time say
for myself, that in the midst of pleasure I frequently felt the
still small voice of conscience, arising from the impression of a
serious education, which mixed gall in the Circean cup. Riot
could not altogether get the better of remorse: on the contrary,
the pangs of the last grew keener with the more shameful
indulgence of the first; and, by a happy effect of my
temperament, the disorders of a theatrical life began to make me
shudder. Ah! wretch, said I to myself, is it thus that you make
good the hopes of your family? Is it not enough to have thwarted
their pious intentions, by not following your destined course of
life as an instructor of youth? Need your condition of a servant
hinder you from living decently and soberly? Are such monsters of
iniquity fit companions for you? Envy, hatred, and avarice are
predominant here; intemperance and idleness have purchased the
fee-simple there: the pride of some is aggravated into the most
barefaced impudence, and modesty is turned out of doors, by the
common consent of all. The business is settled: I will not live
any longer with the seven deadly sins.



BOOK THE FOURTH.



CH. I. --  Gil Blas not being able to reconcile himself to the
morals of the actresses, quits Arsenia, and gets into a more
reputable service.


A SURVIVING spark of honour and of religion, in the midst of so
general depravity, made me resolve not only to leave Arsenia, but
even to abjure all commerce with Laura, whom yet I could not
cease to love, though I was well aware of her daily inconstancy.
Happy the man who can thus profit by those appeals, which
occasionally interrupt the headlong course of his pleasures! One
fine morning, I made up my bundle; and, without reckoning with
Arsenia, who indeed owed me next to nothing, without taking leave
of my dear Laura, I burst from that mansion, which smelt of
brimstone and fire reserved for the wicked. I had no sooner taken
so virtuous a step, than providence interfered in my behalf. I
met the steward of my late master, Don Matthias, and greeted him:
he knew me again at once, and stopped to inquire where I lived. I
answered that I had just left my place; that after staying near a
month with Arsenia, whose manners did not at all suit me, I was
come away by a sudden impulse of virtue, to save my innocence.
The steward, just as if he had been himself of a religious cast,
commended my scruples, and offered me a place much to my
advantage, since I was so chaste and honest a youth. He kept his
word, and introduced me on that very day into the family of Don
Vincent de Gusman, with whose agent he was acquainted.

I could not have got into a better service; nor did I repent in
the sequel of having accepted the situation. Don Vincent was a
very rich old nobleman, who had lived many years unincumbered
with lawsuits or with a wife. The physicians had removed the last
plague out of the way, in their attempts to rid her of a cough,
which might have lasted a great while longer, if the remedies had
not been more fatal than the disease. Far from thinking of the
holy state a second time, he gave himself up entirely to the
education of his only daughter Aurora, who was then entering her
twenty-sixth year, and might pass for an accomplished person.
With beauty above the common, she had an excellent and highly
cultivated understanding. Her father was a poor creature as to
intellect; but he possessed the happy talent of looking well
after his affairs. One fault he had, of a kind excusable in old
men: he was an incessant talker, especially about war and
fighting. If that string was unfortunately touched in his
presence, in a moment he blew his heroic trumpet, and his hearers
might think themselves lucky if they compounded for a gazette
extraordinary of two sieges and three battles. As he had spent
two-thirds of his life in the service, his memory was an
inexhaustible depot of various facts; but the patience of the
listeners did not always keep pace with the perseverance of the
relater. The stories, sufficiently prolix in themselves, were
still further spun out by stuttering; so that the manner was
still less happy than the matter. In all other respects, I never
met with a nobleman of a more amiable character: his temper was
even; he was neither obstinate nor capricious; the general
alternative of men in the higher ranks of life. Though a good
economist, he lived like a gentleman. His establishment was
composed of several men servants, and three women in waiting on
Aurora. I soon discovered that the steward of Don Matthias had
procured me a good post, and my only anxiety was to establish
myself firmly in it. I took all possible pains to feel the ground
under my feet, and to study the characters of the whole
household: then regulating my conduct by my discoveries, I was
not long in ingratiating myself with my master and all the
servants.

I had been with Don Vincent above a month, when it struck me that
his daughter was very particular in her notice of me above all
the servants in the family. Whenever her eyes happened
accidentally to meet mine, they seemed to be suffused with a
certain partial complacency, which did not enter into her silent
communications with the vulgar. Had it not been for my haunts
among the coxcombs of the theatrical tribe and their hangers-on,
it would never have entered into my head that Aurora should throw
away a thought on me: but my brain had been a little turned among
those gentry, from whose libertine suspicions ladies of the
noblest birth are not always held sacred. If, said I, those
chronicles of the age are to be believed, fancy and high blood
lead women of quality a dance, in which they sometimes join hands
with unequal partners: how do I know but my young mistress may
caper to a tune of my piping? But no: it cannot be so, neither.
This is not one of your Messalinas, who, derogating from the
loftiness of ancestry, unworthily let down their regards to the
dust, and sully their pure honour without a blush: but rather one
of those virtuously apprehensive, yet tender-hearted girls, who
encircle their softness within the in surmountable pale of
delicacy; yet think it no tampering with chastity, to inspire and
cherish a sentimental flame, interesting to the heart without
being dangerous to the morals.

Such were my ideas of my mistress, without knowing exactly
whether they were right or wrong. And yet when we met, she was
continually caught with a smile of satisfaction on her
countenance. Without passing for a fop, a man might give in to
such flattering appearances; and a philosophical apathy was not
to be expected from me. I conceived Aurora to have been deeply
smitten with my irresistible attractions; and looked on myself
henceforth in the light of a favoured attendant, whose servitude
was to be sweetened by the balmy infusion of love. To appear in
some measure less unworthy of the blessings, which propitious
fortune had kept in store for me, I began to take better care of
my person than I had done heretofore. I laid out my slender stock
of money in linen, pomatums, and essences. The first thing in the
morning was to prank up and perfume myself, so as not to be in an
undress in case of being sent for into the presence of my
mistress. With these attentions to personal elegance and other
dexterous strokes in the art of pleasing, I flattered myself that
the moment of my bliss was not very distant.

Among Aurora's women there was one who went by the name of Ortiz.
This was an old dowager, who had been a fixture in Don Vincent's
family for more than twenty years. She had been about his
daughter from her childhood, and still held the office of duenna;
but she no longer performed the invidious part of the duty. On
the contrary, instead of blazoning, as formerly, Aurora's little
indiscretions, her skill was now employed in throwing them into
shade. One evening, Dame Ortiz, having watched her opportunity of
speaking to me with. out observation, said in a low voice, that
if I was close and trustworthy, I had only to be in the garden at
midnight, when a scene would be laid open in which I should not
be sorry to be an actor. I answered the duenna, pressing her hand
significantly, that I would not fail, and we parted in a hurry
for fear of a surprise. How the hours lagged from this moment
till supper-time, though we supped very early! Then again, from
supper to my master's bed-time! It should seem as if the march of
the whole family was timed to a largo movement. By way of helping
forward the fidgets, when Don Vincent withdrew to his chamber,
the army was put on the war establishment, and we were obliged to
fight the campaigns in Portugal over again, though my ears had
not recovered from the din of the last cannonade. But a favour,
from which I had hitherto made my escape, was reserved for this
eventful evening. He repeated the army list from beginning to
end, with copious digressions on the exploits of those officers
who had distinguished themselves in his time. Oh my poor
tympanum! It was almost cracked before we got to the end. Time,
however, will wear out even an old man's story, and he went to
bed. I immediately went to my own little chamber, whence there
was a way into the garden by a private staircase. I depended on
my purchase of perfumery for overcoming the effluvia of the day's
drudgery, and put on a clean shirt highly scented. When every
invention had been pressed into the service to render my person
worthy of its destiny, and cherish the fondness of my mistress, I
went to the appointment.

Ortiz was not there. I concluded that, tired of waiting for me,
she had gone back to her chamber, and that the happy moment of
philandering was over. I laid all the blame on Don Vincent; but
just as I was singing Te Deum backwards for his campaigns, I
heard the clock strike ten. To be sure it must be wrong! It could
not be less than one o'clock. Yet I was so egregiously out in my
reckoning, that full a quarter of an hour afterwards, I counted
ten upon my fingers by the clock at next door. Vastly well,
thought I to myself; I have only two complete hours to ventilate
my passion here alfresco. At least they shall not complain of me
for want of punctuality. What shall I do with myself till twelve?
Suppose we take a turn about this garden and settle our cues in
the delicious drama just going to be brought on the stage; it is
my first appearance in so principal a character. I am not yet
sufficiently well read in the crotchets of your quality dames. I
know how to tickle a girl in a stuff gown, or an actress: You
swagger up to them with an easy, impudent assurance, and pop the
question without making any bones of it. But one must take a
female of condition on a very different tack. It seems to me,
that in this case the happy swain must be well bred, attentive,
tender, respectful, without degenerating into bashfulness.
Instead of taking his happiness by storm, he must plant his
amorous desires in ambuscade, and wait till the garrison is
asleep, and the outworks defenceless.

Thus it was that I argued, and such were the preconcerted plans
of my campaign with Aurora. After a few tedious minutes,
according to my calculation, I was to experience the ecstasy of
finding myself at the feet of that lovely creature, and pouring
forth a torrent of impassioned nonsense. I scraped together in my
memory all the clap-traps in our stock-plays, which were most
successful with the audience, and might best set off my
pretensions to spirit and gallantry. I trusted to my own
adroitness for the application, and hoped, after the example of
some players in the list of my acquaintance, bringing only a
stock of memory into the trade, to deal upon credit for my wit.
While my imagination was engrossed by these thoughts, which kept
my impatience at bay much more successfully than the commentaries
of my modern Caesar, I heard the clock strike .eleven. This was
some encouragement, and I fell back to my meditations, sometimes
sauntering carelessly about, and sometimes throwing myself at my
length on the turf, in a bower at the bottom of the garden. At
length it struck twelve, the long-expected hour, big with my high
destiny. Some seconds after, Ortiz, as punctual as myself though
less impatient, made her appearance. Signor Gil Blas, said she,
accosting me, how long have you been here? Two hours, answered I.
Indeed! Truly, replied she, laughing, you are very exact; there
is a pleasure in making nocturnal assignations with you.
Yet you may assure yourself; continued she more gravely, that you
cannot pay too dear for such good fortune as that of which I am
the messenger. My mistress wants to have some private talk with
you. I shall not anticipate what may be the subject, that is a
secret which you must learn from no lips but her own. Follow me;
I will show you into her chamber. With these words the duenna
took me by the hand, and led me mysteriously into her lady's
apartment through a little door, of which she had the key.



CH. II. -- Aurora's reception of Gil Blas. Their conversation.


I FOUND Aurora in an undress. I saluted her in the most
respectful manner, and threw as much elegance into my attitude as
I had to throw. She received me with the most winning affability,
made me sit down by her against all my remonstrances, and told
her ambassadress to go into another room. After this opening,
which seemed highly encouraging to my cause, she entered upon the
business. Gil Blas, said she, you must have perceived how
favourably I have regarded and distinguished you from all the
rest of my father's servants; and though my looks had not
betrayed my partial dispositions towards you, my proceeding of
this night would leave you no room to doubt them.

I did not give her time to say a word more. It struck me, that as
a man of feeling, I ought to spare her trembling diffidence the
cruel necessity of explaining her sentiments in more direct
terms. I rose from my chair in a transport, and, throwing myself
at Aurora's feet, like a tragedy hero of the Grecian stage when
he supplicates the heroine "by her knees," exclaimed in a
declamatory tone -- Ah! Madam, could it be possible that Gil
Blas, hitherto the whirligig of fortune and football of embattled
nature, should have called down upon his head the exquisite
felicity of inspiring sentiments       Do not speak so loud,
interrupted my mistress with a laugh of mingled apprehension and
ridicule, you will wake my women who sleep in the adjoining
chamber. Get up, take your seat, and hear me out without putting
in a word. Yes, Gil Blas, pursued she, resuming her gravity, you
have my best wishes; and to shew you how deep you are in my good
graces, I will confide to you a secret on which depends the
repose of my life. I am in love with a young gentleman,
possessing every charm of person and face, and noble by birth.
His name is Don Lewis Pacheco. I have seen him occasionally in
the public walks and at the theatre, but I have never conversed
with him. I do not even know what his private character may be,
or what bad qualities he may have. It is on this subject that I
wish to be informed. I stand in need of a person to inquire
diligently into his morals, and give me a true and particular
account. I make choice of you. Surely I run no risk in entrusting
you with this commission. I hope that you will acquit yourself
with dexterity and prudence, and that I shall never repent of
giving you my confidence.

My mistress concluded thus, and waited for my answer to her
proposal. I had been disconcerted in the first instance at so
disagreeable a mistake; but I soon recovered my scattered senses,
and surmounting the confusion which rashness always occasions
when it is unlucky, I exposed to sale such a cargo of zeal. For
the lady's interests, I devoted myself with so martyr-like an
enthusiasm to her service, that if she did not absolutely forget
my silly vanity in the thought of having pleased her, at least
she had reason to believe that I knew how to make amends for a
piece of folly. I asked only two days to bring her a satisfactory
account of Don Lewis. After which Dame Ortiz, answering the bell,
shewed me the way back into the garden, and said, on taking
leave, Good-night, Gil Blas. I need not caution you to be in time
at the next appointment. I have sufficient experience of your
punctuality on these occasions.

I returned to my chamber, not without some little mortification
at finding my voluptuous anticipations all divested of even their
ideal sweetness. I was nevertheless sufficiently in my senses to
reflect soberly that it was more in my element to be the trusty
scout of my mistress than her lover. I even thought that this
adventure might lead to something further; that the middle men in
the trade of love usually pocket a tolerable percentage; and went
to bed with the resolution of doing whatever Aurora required of
me. For this purpose I went abroad the next morning. The
residence of so distinguished a personage as Don Lewis was not
difficult to find out. I made my enquiries about him in the
neighbourhood, but the people who came in my way could not
satisfy my curiosity to the full, so that it was necessary to
resume my search diligently on the following day. I was in better
luck. I met a lad of my acquaintance by chance in the street, we
stopped for a little gossip. There passed by in the very nick one
of his friends, who came up and told him that he was just turned
away from the family of Don Joseph Pacheco, Don Lewis's father,
about a paltry remnant of wine, which he had been accused of
drinking. I would not lose so fair an occasion of learning all I
wanted to know, and plied my questions so successfully as to go
home with much self-complacency, at my punctual performance of my
engagements with my mistress. It was on the coming night that I
was to see her again at the same hour and in the same manner as
the first time. I was not in such a confounded hurry this
evening. Far from writhing with impatience under the prolixity of
my old commander, I led him on to the charge. I waited for
midnight with the greatest indifference in the world, and it was
not till all the clocks within ear-shot had struck that I crept
down into the garden, without any nonsense of pomatum and
perfumery. That foppery was completely cured.

At the place of meeting I found the very faithful duenna, who
sneeringly reproached me with a defalcation in my zeal. I made
her no answer, but suffered myself to be conducted into Aurora's
chamber. She asked me, as soon as I made my appearance, whether I
had gained any intelligence of Don Lewis. Yes, madam, said I, and
you shall have the sum total in two words. I must first tell you,
that he will soon set out for Salamanca, to finish his studies.
The young gentleman is brim full of honour and probity. As for
valour, he cannot be deficient there, since he is a man of birth
and a Castilian. Besides this, he has an infinite deal of wit,
and is very agreeable in his manners; but there is one thing
which can scarcely be to your liking. He is pretty much in the
fashion of our young nobility here at court -- exemplarily
catholic in his devotions to the fair. Have you not heard that at
his age he has already been tenant at will to two actresses? What
is it you tell me? replied Aurora. What shocking conduct! But do
you know for certain, Gil Blas, that he leads so dissolute a
life? Oh! there is no doubt of it, madam, rejoined I. A servant,
turned off this morning, told me so, and servants are very plain
dealers when the failings of their masters are the topic.
Besides, he keeps company with Don Alexo Segiar, Don Antonio
Centellés, and Don Fernando de Gamboa; that single circumstance
proves his libertinism with all the force of demonstration. It is
enough, Gil Blas, said my mistress with a sigh; on your report I
am determined to struggle with my unworthy passion. Though it has
already struck deep root in my heart, I do not despair of tearing
it forcibly from its bed. Go, added she, putting into my hands a
small purse, none of the lightest, take this for your pains.
Beware of betraying my secret. Consider it as entrusted to your
silence.

I assured my mistress that she might be perfectly easy on that
score, for I was the Harpocrates of confidential servants. After
this compliment to myself, I withdrew with no small eagerness to
investigate the contents of the purse. There were twenty
pistoles. It struck me all at once that Aurora would surely have
given me more had I been the bearer of pleasant tidings, since
she paid so handsomely for a blank in the lottery. I was sorry
not to have adopted the policy of the pleaders in the courts, who
sometimes paint the cheek of truth when her natural complexion is
inclined to be cadaverous. It was a pity to have stifled an amour
in the birth which might in its growth have been so profitable.
Yet I had the comfort of finding myself reimbursed the expense so
unseasonably incurred in perfumery and washes.



CH. III. -- A great change at Don Vincent's. Aurora's strange
resolution.


IT happened soon after this adventure that Signor Don Vincent
fell sick. Independent of his very advanced age, the symptoms of
his disorder appeared in so formidable a shape that a fatal
termination was but too probable. From the beginning of his
illness he was attended by two of the most eminent physicians in
Madrid. One was Doctor Andros, and the other Doctor Oquetos. They
considered the case with due solemnity; and both agreed, after a
strict investigation, that the humours were in a state of mutiny,
but this was the only thing about which they did agree. The
proper practice, said Andros, is to purge the humours, though
raw, with all possible expedition, while they are in a violent
agitation of flux and reflux, for fear of their fixing upon some
noble part. Oquetos maintained, on the contrary, that we must
wait till the humours were ripened before it would be safe to go
upon purgatives. But your method, replied the first speaker, is
directly in the teeth of the rules laid down by the prince of
medicine. Hippocrates recommends purging in the most burning
fever from the very first attack, and says in plain terms that no
time is to be lost in purging when the humours are in ???asµ??
{orgasmos}, that is to say, in a state of fermentation. Ay! there
is your mistake, replied Oquetos. Hippocrates by the word
???asµ?? {orgasmos} does not mean the fermentation, he means
rather the concoction of the humours.

Thereupon our doctors got heated. One quotes the Greek text, and
cites all the authors who have explained it in his sense; the
other, trusting to a Latin translation, takes up the controversy
in a still more positive tone. Which of the two to believe? Don
Vincent was not the man to decide that question. In the mean
time, finding himself obliged to choose, he gave his confidence
to the party who had dispatched the greatest number of patients -
-  I mean the elder of the two. Andros, the younger, immediately
withdrew, not without flinging out a few satirical taunts at his
senior on the ???asµ?? {orgasmos}. Here then was Oquetos
triumphant. As he was a professor of the Sangrado school, he
began by bleeding copiously, waiting till the humours were
ripened before he went upon purgatives. But death, fearing, no
doubt, lest this reserve of purgatives should turn the fortunes
of the day, got the start of the concoction, and secured his
victory over my master by a coup-de-main. Such was the final
close of Signor Don Vincent, who had lost his life because his
physician did not know Greek.

Aurora having buried her father with a pomp suited to the dignity
of his birth, administered to his effects. Having the whole
arrangement of everything in her own breast, she discharged some
of the servants with rewards proportioned to their services, and
soon retired to her castle on the Tagus, between Sacedon and
Buendia. I was among the number of those whom she kept, and who
made part of her country establishment. I had even the good
fortune to become a principal agent in the plot. In spite of my
faithful report on the subject of Don Lewis, she still harboured
a partiality for that bewitching young fellow; or rather, for
want of spirit to combat her passion in the first instance, she
surrendered at discretion. There was no longer any need of taking
precautions to speak with me in private. Gil Blas, said she with
a sigh, I can never forget Don Lewis. Let me make what effort I
will to banish him from my thoughts, he is present to them
without intermission, not as you have described him, plunged in
every variety of licentious riot, but just what my fancy would
paint him -- tender, loving, constant. She betrayed considerable
emotion in uttering these words, and could not help shedding
tears. My fountains were very near playing from mere sympathy.
There was no better way of paying my court than by appearing
sensibly touched at her distress. My friend, continued she, after
having wiped her lovely eyes, your nature is evidently cast in a
benevolent mould; and I am so well satisfied with your zeal that
it shall not go unrewarded. Your assistance, my dear Gil Blas, is
more necessary to me than ever. You must be made acquainted with
a plan which engrosses all my thoughts, though it will appear
strangely eccentric. You are to know that I mean to set out for
Salamanca as soon as possible. There my design is to assume the
disguise of a fashionable young fellow, and to make acquaintance
with Pacheco under the name of Don Felix. I shall endeavour to
gain his confidence and friendship, and lead the conversation
incidentally to the subject of Aurora de Guzman, for whose cousin
I shall pass. He may perhaps express a wish to see her, and there
is the point on which I expect the interest to turn. We will have
two apartments in Salamanca. In one I shall be Don Felix, in the
other, Aurora; and I flatter myself that by presenting my person
before Don Lewis, sometimes under the semblance of a man,
sometimes in all the natural and artificial attractions of my own
sex, I may bring him by little and little to the proposed end of
my stratagem. I am perfectly aware that my project is extravagant
in the highest degree, but my passion drives me headlong; and the
innocence of my intentions renders me insensible to all
compunctious feelings of virgin apprehension respecting so
hazardous a step.

I was exactly in the same mind with Aurora respecting the
extravagance of her scheme. Yet, unseasonable as it might seem to
reflecting persons like myself, there was no occasion for me to
play the schoolmaster. On the contrary, I began to practise all
the arts of a thorough-bred special pleader, and undertook to
magnify this hair-brained pursuit into a piece of incomparable
wit and spirit, without the least tincture of imprudence. This
was highly gratifying to my mistress. Lovers like to have their
rampant fancies tickled. We no longer considered this rash
enterprise in any other light than as a play, of which the
characters were to be properly cast, and the business
dramatically arranged. The actors were chosen out of our own
domestic establishment, and the parts distributed without secret
jealousy or open rupture, but then we were not players by
profession. It was determined that Dame Ortiz should personate
Aurora's aunt, under the name of Donna Kimena de Guzman, with a
valet and waiting-maid by way of attendance; and that Aurora,
with the swashing outside of a gay spark, was to take me for her
valet-de-chambre, with one of her women disguised as a page, to
be more immediately about her person. The drama thus filled up we
returned to Madrid, where we understood Don Lewis still to be,
though it was not likely to be long till his departure for
Salamanca. We got up with all possible haste the dresses and
decorations of our wild comedy. When they were in complete order,
my mistress had them packed up carefully, that they might come
out in all their gloss and newness on the rising of the curtain.
Then, leaving the care of her family to her steward, she began
her journey in a coach drawn by four mules, and travelled towards
the kingdom of Leon, with those of her household who had some
part to play in the piece.

We had already crossed Old Castile, when the axle-tree of the
coach gave way. The accident happened between Avila and
Villaflor, at the distance of three or four hundred yards from a
castle near the foot of a mountain. Night was coming on, and the
measure of our troubles seemed to be heaped up and overflowing.
But there passed accidentally by us a countryman, by whose
assistance we were relieved from our difficulties. He acquainted
us that the castle yonder belonged to Donna Elvira, widow of Don
Pedro de Penarés; at the same time giving us so favourable a
character of that lady, that my mistress sent me to the castle
with a request of a night's lodging. Elvira did not disgrace the
good word of the countryman. She received me with an air of
hospitality, and returned such an answer to my compliment as I
wished to carry back. We all went to the castle, whither the
mules dragged the carriage with considerable difficulty. At the
gate we met the widow of Don Pedro, who came out to meet my
mistress. I shall pass over in silence the reciprocal civilities
which were exchanged on this occasion, in compliance with the
usage of the polite world. I shall only say that Elvira was a
lady rather advanced in years, but remarkably well bred, with an
address superior to that of most women in doing the honours of
her house. She led Aurora into a sumptuous apartment, where,
leaving her to rest herself for a short time, she looked after
everything herself, and left nothing undone which could in the
least contribute to our comfort. Afterwards, when supper was
ready, she ordered it to be served up in Aurora's chamber, where
they sat down to table together. Don Pedro's widow was not of a
description to cast a slur on her own hospitalities, by assuming
an air of abstraction or sullenness. Her temper was gay, and her
conversation lively without levity; for her ideas were dignified,
and her expressions select. Nothing could exceed her wit,
accompanied by a peculiarly fine turn of thought. Aurora appeared
as much to be delighted as myself. They became sworn friends, and
mutually engaged in a regular correspondence. As our carriage
could not be repaired till the following day, and we should have
encountered some perils by setting out late at night, it was
determined that we should take up our abode at the castle till
the damage was made good. All the arrangements were in the first
style of elegance, and our lodgings were correspondent to the
magnificence of the establishment in other respects.

The day after, my mistress discovered new charms in Elvira's
conversation. They dined in a large hall, where there were
several pictures. One among the rest was distinguished for its
admirable execution, but the subject was highly tragic. A
principal figure was a man of superior mien, lying lifeless on
his back, and bathed in his own blood; yet in the very embraces
of death he wore a menacing aspect. At a little distance from him
you might see a young lady in a different posture, though
stretched likewise on the ground. She had a sword plunged in her
bosom, and was giving up her last sighs, at the same time casting
her dying glances at a young man who seemed to suffer a mortal
pang at losing her. The painter had besides charged his picture
with a figure which did not escape my notice. It was an old man
of a venerable physiognomy, sensibly touched with the objects
which struck his sight, and equally alive with the young man to
the impressions of the melancholy scene. It might be said that
these images of blood and desolation affected both the spectators
with the same astonishment and grief, but that the outward
demonstrations of their in ward sentiments were different. The
old man, sunk in a profound melancholy, looked as if he was bowed
down to the ground; while the youth mingled some thing like the
extravagance of despair with the tears of affliction. All these
circumstances were depicted with touches so characteristic and
affecting, that we could not take our eyes off the performance.
My mistress desired to know the subject of the piece. Madam, said
Elvira, it is a faithful delineation of the misfortunes sustained
by my family. This answer excited Aurora's curiosity; and she
testified so strong a desire to learn the particulars, that the
widow of Don Pedro could do no otherwise than promise her the
satisfaction she desired. This promise, made before Ortiz, her
two fellow-servants, and myself, rooted us to the spot on which
we were listening to their former conversation. My mistress would
have sent us away; but Elvira, who saw plainly that we were dying
with eagerness to be present at the explanation of the picture,
had the goodness to desire us to stay, alleging at the same time
that the story she had to relate was not of a nature to enjoin
secrecy. After a moment's recollection, she began her recital to
the following effect: -- 



CH. IV.  --  The Fatal Marriage; a Novel.


ROGER, king of Sicily, had a brother and a sister. His brother,
by name Mainfroi, rebelled against him, and kindled a war in the
kingdom, bloody in its immediate effects, and portentous in its
future consequences. But it was his fate to lose two battles, and
to fall into the king's hands. The punishment of his revolt
extended no further than the loss of liberty. This act of
clemency served only to make Roger pass for a barbarian in the
estimation of the disaffected party among his subjects. They
contended that he had saved his brother's life only to wreak his
vengeance on him by tortures the more merciless because
protracted. People in general, on better grounds, transferred the
blame of Mainfroi's harsh treatment while in prison to his sister
Matilda. That princess had, in fact, cherished a long-rooted
hatred against this prince, and was indefatigable in her
persecutions during his whole life. She died in a very short time
after him, and her premature fate was considered as the
retribution of a just providence for her disregard of those
sentiments implanted by nature for the best purposes.

Mainfroi left behind him two sons. They were yet in their
childhood. Roger had a kind of lurking desire to get rid of them,
under the apprehension lest, when arrived at a more advanced age,
the wish of avenging their father might hurry them to the revival
of a faction which was not so entirely overthrown as to be 
incapable of originating new intrigues in the state. He
communicated his purpose to the senator Leontio Siffredi, his
minister, who diverted him from his bloody thoughts by
undertaking the education of Prince Enriquez, the eldest, and
recommending the care of the younger, by name Don Pedro, to the
constable of Sicily, as a trusty counsellor and loyal servant.
Roger, assured that his nephews would be trained up by these two
men in principles of due submission to the royal authority, gave
up the reins of guardianship to their control, and himself took
charge of his niece Constance. She was of the same age with
Enriquez, and only daughter of the princess Matilda. He allowed
her an establishment of female attendants, and of masters in
every branch of the politer studies, so that nothing was wanting
either to her instruction or her state.

Leontio Siffredi had a castle at the distance of less than two
leagues from Palermo, in a spot named Belmonte. There it was that
this minister exerted all his talents and diligence, to render
Enriquez worthy of one day ascending the throne of Sicily. From
the first, he discovered dispositions so amiable in that prince,
that his attachment became as strong as if he had no child of his
own. He had, however, two daughters -- Blanche, the first-born,
one year younger than the prince, was armed at all points with
the weapons of a most perfect beauty. Her sister Portia was still
in her cradle. The mother had died in child-bed of this youngest.
Blanche and Prince Enriquez conceived a reciprocal affection as
soon as they were alive to the influence of love: but they were
not allowed to improve their acquaintance into familiar
intercourse. The prince nevertheless found the means of
occasionally eluding the prudential vigilance of his guardian. He
knew sufficiently well how to avail himself of those precious
moments, and prevailed so far with Siffredi's daughter, as to
gain her consent to the execution of a project which he
meditated. It happened precisely at this time that Leontio was
obliged by the king's order to take a journey into one of the
most remote provinces in the island. During his absence Enriquez
got an opening made in the wall of his apartment, which led into
Blanche's chamber. This opening was concealed by a sliding
shutter, so exactly corresponding with the wainscot, and so
closely fitting in with the ceiling and the floor, that the most
suspicious eye could not have detected the contrivance. A skilful
workman, whom the prince had gained over to his interests, helped
him to this private communication with equal speed and secrecy.

The enamoured Enriquez having obtained this inlet into his
mistress's chamber, sometimes availed himself of his privilege;
but he never took advantage of her partiality. Imprudent as it
may well be thought, to admit of a secret entrance into her
apartment, it was only on the express and reiterated assurance
that none but the most innocent favours should be requested at
her hands. One night he found her in a state of unusual
perturbation. She had been informed that Roger was drawing near
his end, and had sent for Siffredi as lord high chancellor of the
kingdom, and the legal depository of his last will and testament.
Already did she figure to herself her dear Enriquez elevated to
royal honours. She was afraid of losing her lover in her
sovereign, and that fear had strangely affected her spirits. The
tears were standing in her eyes, when the unconscious cause of
them appeared before her. You weep, madam, said he, what am I to
think of this overwhelming grief? My lord, answered Blanche, it
were vain for me to hide my apprehensions. The king your uncle is
at the point of death, and you will soon be called to supply his
place. When I measure the distance placed between us by your
approaching greatness, I will own to you that my mind misgives
me. The monarch and the lover estimate objects through a far
different medium. What constituted the fondest wish of the
individual, while his aspiring thoughts were checked by the
control of a superior, fades into insignificance before the
tumultuous cares or brilliant destinies of royalty. Be it the
misgiving of an anxious heart, or the whisper of a well-founded
opinion, I feel distracting emotions succeed one another in my
breast, which not all my just confidence in your goodness can
allay. The source of my mistrust is not in the suspected
steadiness of your attachment, but in a diffidence of my own
happy fate. Lovely and beloved Blanche, replied the prince, your
fears but bind me the more firmly in your fetters, and warrant my
devotion to your charms. Yet this excessive indulgence of a fond
jealousy borders on disloyalty to love, and, if I may venture to
say so, trenches on the esteem to which my constancy has hitherto
entitled me. No, no, never entertain a doubt that my destiny can
ever be sundered from yours, but rather indulge the pleasing
anticipation, that you, and you alone, will be the arbitress of
my fate, and the source of all my bliss. Away, then, with these
vain alarms. Why must they disturb an intercourse so charming?
Ah! my lord, rejoined the daughter of Leontio, your subjects,
when they place the crown upon your head, may ask of you a
princess-queen, descended from a long line of kings, whose
glittering alliance shall join new realms to your hereditary
estates. Perhaps, alas! you will meet their ambitious aims, even
at the expense of your softest vows. Nay, why, resumed Enriquez,
with rising passion, why too ready a self-tormentor, do you raise
so afflicting a phantom of futurity? Should heaven take the king
my uncle to itself, and place Sicily under my dominion, I swear
to unite myself with you at Palermo, in presence of my whole
court. To this I call to witness all which is held sacred and
inviolable among men.

The protestations of Enriquez removed the fears of Siffredi's
daughter. The rest of their discourse turned on the king's
illness. Enriquez displayed the goodness of his natural
disposition, for he pitied his uncle's lot, though he had no
reason to be greatly affected by it; but the force of blood
extorted from him sentiments of regret for a prince whose death
held out an immediate prospect of the crown. Blanche did not yet
know all the misfortunes which hung over her. The constable of
Sicily, who had met her coming out of her father's apartment, one
day when he was at the castle of Belmonte on some business of
importance, was struck with admiration. The very next day, he
made proposals to Siffredi, who entertained his offer favourably;
but the illness of Roger taking place unexpectedly about that
time, the marriage was put off for the present, and the subject
had not been hinted at in the most distant manner to Blanche.

One morning, as Enriquez had just finished dressing, he was
surprised to see Leontio enter his apartment, followed by
Blanche. Sir, said this minister, the news I have to announce
will in some degree afflict your excellent heart, but it is
counteracted by consoling circumstances which ought to moderate
your grief. The king your uncle has departed this life; and by
his death left you the heir of his sceptre. Sicily is at your
feet. The nobility of the kingdom wait your orders at Palermo.
They have commissioned me to receive them in person, and I come,
my liege, with my daughter to pay you the earliest and sincerest
homage of your new subjects. The prince, who was well aware that
Roger had been for two months sinking under a complaint gradual
in its progress but fatal in its nature, was not astonished at
this news. And yet, struck with his sudden exaltation, he felt a
thousand confused motions rising up by turns in his heart. He
mused for some time, then breaking silence, addressed these words
to Leontio --  Wise Siffredi, I have always considered you as my
father. I shall make it my glory to be governed by your counsels,
and you shall reign in Sicily with a sway paramount to my own.
With these words, advancing to the standish and taking a blank
sheet of paper, he wrote his name at the bottom. What are you
doing, sir? said Siffredi. Proving my gratitude and my esteem,
answered Enriquez. Then the prince presented the paper to
Blanche, and said -- Accept, madam, this pledge of my faith, and
of the empire with which I invest you over my thoughts and
actions. Blanche received it with a blush, and made this answer
to the prince -- I acknowledge with all humility the
condescensions of my sovereign, but my destiny is in the hands of
a father, and you must not consider me as ungrateful if I deposit
this flattering token in his custody, to be used according to the
dictates of his sage discretion.

In compliance with these sentiments of filial duty, she gave the
sign manual of Enriquez to her father. Then Siffredi saw at once
what till that moment had eluded his penetration. He entered
dearly into the prince's sentiments, and said: Your majesty shall
have no reproaches to make me. I shall not act unworthily of the
confidence . . . . My dear Leontio, interrupted Enriquez, you and
unworthiness never can be allied. Make what use you please of my
signature. I shall confirm your determination. But go, return to
Palermo, prescribe the ceremonies for my coronation there, and
tell my subjects that I shall follow you in person immediately,
to receive their oaths of allegiance, and assure them of my
protection in return. The minister obeyed the commands of his new
master, and set out for Palermo with his daughter.

Some hours after their departure, the prince also left Belmonte,
with his thoughts more intent on his passion than on the high
rank to which he was called. Immediately on his arrival in the
city, the air was rent with a thousand cries of joy. He made his
entry into the palace amid the acclamations of the people, and
everything was ready for the august formalities. The Princess
Constance was waiting to receive him, in a magnificent mourning
dress. She appeared deeply affected by Roger's death. The customs
of society required from them a reciprocal compliment of
condolence on the late event; and they each of them acquitted
themselves with good breeding and propriety. But there was
somewhat more coldness on the part of Enriquez than on that of
Constance, who could not enter into family quarrels, and resolved
on hating the young prince. He placed himself on the throne, and
the princess sate beside him, in a chair of state a little less
elevated. The great officers of the realm fell into their places,
each according to his rank. The ceremony began; and Leontio, as
lord high chancellor of the kingdom, holding in his possession
the will of the late king, opened it, and read the contents
aloud. This instrument contained in substance that Roger, in
default of issue, nominated the eldest son of Mainfroi his
successor, on condition of his marrying the Princess Constance;
and in the event of his refusing her hand, the crown of Sicily
was to devolve, to his exclusion, on the head of the infant Don
Pedro, his brother, on the like condition.

These words were a thunderstroke to Enriquez. His senses were all
bewildered even to distraction; and his agonies became still more
acute, when Leontio, having finished the reading of the will,
addressed the assembly at large to the following effect: My
lords, the last injunctions of the late king having been made
known to our new monarch, that pious and excellent prince
consents to honour his cousin the Princess Constance with his
hand. At these words Enriquez interrupted the chancellor.
Leontio, said he, remember the writing; Blanche. . . . Sire,
interrupted Siffredi in his turn with precipitation, lest the
prince should find an opportunity of making himself understood,
here it is. The nobility of the kingdom, added he, exhibiting the
blank paper to the assembly, will see by your majesty's august
subscription, the esteem in which you hold the princess, and your
implicit deference to the last will of the late king your uncle.

Having finished these words, he forthwith began reading the
instrument in such terms as he had himself inserted. According to
the contents, the new king gave a promise to his people, with
formalities the most binding and authentic, that he would marry
Constance, in conformity with the intention of Roger. The hall
re-echoed with pealing shouts of satisfaction. Long live our high
and mighty King Enriquez! exclaimed all those who were present.
As the marked aversion of the prince for the princess had never
been any secret, it was apprehended, not without reason, that he
might revolt against the condition of the will, and light up the 
flame of civil discord in the kingdom; but the public enunciation
of this solemn act, quieting the fears of the nobility and the
people on that head, excited these universal applauses, which
went to the monarch's heart like the stab of an assassin.
Constance, who had a nearer interest than any human being in the
result, from the double motive of glory and personal affection,
laid hold of this opportunity for expressing her gratitude. The
prince had much ado to keep his feelings within bounds. He
received the compliment of the princess with so constrained an
air, and evinced so unusual a disorder in his behaviour, as
scarcely to reply in a manner suited to the common forms of good
breeding. At last, no longer master of his violent passions, he
went up to Siffredi, whom the formalities of his office detained
near the royal person, and said to him in a low tone of voice -- 
What is the meaning of all this, Leontio? The signature which I
deposited in your daughter's hands was not meant for such a use
as this. You are guilty of . . . .

My liege, interrupted Siffredi again with a tone of firmness,
look to your own glory. If you refuse to comply with the
injunctions of the king, your uncle, you lose the crown of
Sicily. No sooner had he thrown in this salutary hint, than he
got away from the king, to prevent all possibility of a reply.
Enriquez was left in a most embarrassing situation. A thousand
opposite emotions agitated him at once. He was exasperated
against Siffredi: to give up Blanche was more than he could
endure: so that, balancing between his private feelings and the
calls of public honour, he was doubtful to which side he should
incline. At length his doubts were resolved, under the idea of
having found the means to secure Siffredi's daughter, without
giving up his claim to the throne. He affected therefore an
entire submission to the will of Roger, in the hope, while a
dispensation from his marriage with his cousin was soliciting at
Rome, of gaining the leading nobility by his largesses, and thus
establishing his power so firmly, as not to be under the
necessity of fulfilling the conditions of the obnoxious
instrument.

After forming this design, he got to be more composed; and
turning towards Constance, confirmed to her what the lord high
chancellor had read in presence of the whole assembly. But, at
the very moment when he had so far betrayed himself as to pledge
his faith, Blanche arrived in the hall of council. She came
thither, by her father's command, to pay her duty to the
princess; and her ears, on entering, were startled at the
expressions of Enriquez. In addition to this shock, Leontio,
determined not to leave her in doubt of her misfortune,
accompanied her presentation to Constance with these words:
Daughter, make your homage acceptable to your queen; call down
upon her the blessings of a prosperous reign and a happy
marriage. This terrible blow overwhelmed the unfortunate Blanche.
Vain were all her attempts to suppress her anguish; her
countenance changed successively from the deepest blush to a
deadly paleness, and she trembled from head to foot. And yet the
princess had no suspicion how the matter really stood; but
attributed the confused style of her compliment to the
awkwardness of a young person brought up in a state of
rustication, and totally unacquainted with the manners of a
court. But the young king was more in the secret. The sight of
Blanche put him out of countenance: and the despair, too legible
in her eyes, was enough to drive him out of his senses. Her
feelings were not to be misunderstood; and they pointed at him as
the most faithless of men. Could he have spoken to her, it might
have tranquillized his agitation: but how to lay hold of the
happy moment, when all Sicily, at least the illustrious part of
it, was fixed in anxious expectation on his proceedings? Besides,
the stern and inflexible Siffredi extinguished at once every ray
of hope. This minister, who was at no loss to decipher the hearts
of the two lovers, and was firmly resolved, if possible, to
prevent the evil consequences impending over the state from the
violence of this imprudent attachment, got his daughter out of
the assembly with the dexterity of a practised courtier, and
regained the road to Belmonte with her in his possession,
determined, for more reasons than one, to marry her as soon as
possible.

When they reached home, he gave her to understand all the horror
of her destiny, by announcing his promise to the constable. Just
heaven! exclaimed she, transported into a paroxysm of despair,
which her father's presence could not restrain, what unparalleled
sufferings have you the cruelty to lay up in store for the ill-
fated Blanche? Her agony went to such a degree of violence as to
suspend every power of her soul. Her limbs seemed as if stiffened
under the icy grasp of death. Cold and pale, she fell senseless
into her father's arms. Neither was he insensible to her
melancholy condition. Yet, feeling as he did all the alarm and
anxiety of a parent, the stern inflexibility of the statesman
remained unshaken. Blanche, after a time, was recalled to life
and feeling, rather by the keenness of her mental pangs than by
the means which Siffredi used for her recovery. Languishingly did
she raise her scarcely conscious eyes: when glancing on the
author of her misery, as he was anxiously employed about her
person; . . . . My lord, said she, with inarticulate and
convulsive accents, I am ashamed to let you see my weakness: but
death, which cannot be long in finishing my torments, will soon
rid you of a wretched daughter, who has ventured to dispose of
her heart without consulting you. No, my dear Blanche, answered
Leontio, your death would be too dear a sacrifice: Virtue will
resume her empire over your actions. The constable's proposals do
you honour; it is one of the most considerable alliances in the
state . . . . I esteem his person and am sensible of his merit,
interrupted Blanche; but, my lord, the king had given me
encouragement to indulge . . . . Daughter, vociferated Siffredi,
breaking in upon her discourse, I anticipate all you have to say
on that subject. Your partiality for the prince is no secret to
me, nor would it meet my disapprobation under other
circumstances. You should even see me active and ardent to secure
for you the hand of Enriquez, if the cause of glory and the
welfare of the realm demanded it not indispensably for Constance.
It is on the sole condition of marrying that princess, that the
late king has nominated him his successor. Would you have him
prefer you to the crown of Sicily? Believe me, my heart bleeds at
the mortal blow which impends over you. Yet, since we cannot
contend with the fates, make a magnanimous effort. Your fame is
concerned, not to let the whole nation see that you have nursed
up a delusive hope. Your sensibility towards the person of the
king might even give birth to ignominious rumours. The only
method of  preserving yourself from their poison, is to marry the
constable. In short, Blanche, there is no time left for
irresolution. The king has decided between a throne and the
possession of your charms. He has fixed his choice on Constance.
The constable holds my words in pledge; enable me to redeem it, I
beseech you. Or if nothing but a paramount necessity can fix your
wavering resolution, I must make an unwilling use of my parental
authority; know then, I command you.

Ending with this threat, he left her to make her own reflections
on what had passed. He was in hopes that after having weighed the
reasons he had urged to support her virtue against the bias of
her feelings, she would determine of herself to admit the
constable's addresses. He was not mistaken in his conjecture: but
at what an expense did the wretched Blanche rise to this height
of virtuous resolution! Her condition was that in the whole world
the most deserving of pity. The affliction of finding her fears
realized respecting the in fidelity of Enriquez, and of being
compelled, besides losing the man of her choice, to sacrifice
herself to another whom she could never love, occasioned her such
storms of passion and alternate tossings of frantic desperation,
as to bring with each successive moment a variety of vindictive
torture. If my sad fate is fixed, exclaimed she, how can I
triumph over it but by death? Merciless powers, who preside over
our wayward fortunes, why feed and tantalize me with the most
flattering hopes, only to plunge me headlong into a gulf of
miseries? And thou too, perfidious lover! to rush into the arms
of another, when all those vows of eternal fidelity were mine. So
soon then is that plighted faith void and forgotten? To punish
thee for so cruel a deception, may it please heaven, in its
retribution, to make the conscious couch of conjugal endearment,
polluted as it must be by perjury, less the scene of pleasure
than the dungeon of remorse! May the fond caresses of Constance
distil poison through thy faithless heart! Let us rival one
another in the horrors of our nuptials! Yes, traitor, I mean to
wed the constable, though shrinking from his ardent touch, to
avenge me on myself! to be my own scourge and tormentor, for
having selected so fatally the object of my frantic passion.
Since deep-rooted obedience to the will of God forbids to
entertain the thought of a premature death, whatever days may be
allotted me to drag on shall be but a lengthened chain of
heaviness and torment. If a sentiment of love still lurks about
your heart, it will be revenge enough for me to cast myself into
your presence, the devoted bride or victim of another: but if you
have thrown off my remembrance with your own vows, Sicily at
least shall glory in the distinction of reckoning among its
natives a woman who knew how to punish herself for having
disposed of her heart too lightly.

In such a state of mind did this wretched martyr to love and duty
pass the night preceding her marriage with the constable.
Siffredi, finding her the next morning ready to comply with his
wishes, hastened to avail himself of this favourable disposition.
He sent for the constable to Belmonte on that very day, and the
marriage ceremony was performed privately in the chapel of the
castle. What a crisis for Blanche! It was not enough to renounce
a crown, to lose a lover endeared to her by every tie, and to
yield herself up to the object of her hatred. In addition to all
this, she must put a constraint on her sentiments before a
husband, naturally jealous, and long occupied with the most
ardent admiration of her charms. The bridegroom, delighted in the
possession of her, was all day long in her presence. He did not
leave her to the miserable consolation of pouring out her sorrows
in secret. When night arrived, Leontio's daughter felt all her
disgust and terror redoubled. But what seemed likely to become of
her when her women, after having undressed her, left her alone
with the constable? He enquired respectfully into the cause of
her apparent faintness and discomposure. The question was
sufficiently embarrassing to Blanche, who affected to be ill. Her
husband was at first deceived by her pretences; but he did not
long remain in such an error. Being, as he was, sincerely
concerned at the condition in which he saw her, but still
pressing her to go to bed, his urgent solicitations, falsely
construed by her, offered to her wounded mind an image so cruel
and indelicate, that she could no longer dissemble what was
passing within, but gave a free course to her sighs and tears.
What a discovery for a man who thought himself at the summit of
his wishes! He no longer doubted but the distressed state of his
wife was fraught with some sinister omen to his love. And yet,
though this knowledge reduced him to a situation almost as
deplorable as that of Blanche, he had sufficient command over
himself to keep his suspicions within his own breast. He
redoubled his assiduities, and went on pressing his bride to lay
herself down, assuring her that the repose of which she stood in
need should be undisturbed by his interruption. He offered of his
own accord even to call her women, if she was of opinion that
their attendance could afford any relief to her indisposition.
Blanche, reviving at that proposal, told him that sleep was the
best remedy for the debility under which she laboured. He
affected to think so too. They accordingly partook of the same
bed, but with a conduct altogether different from what the laws
of love, sanctioned by the rites of marriage, might authorize in
a pair mutually delighted and delighting.

While Siffredi's daughter was giving way to her grief, the
constable was hunting in his own mind for the causes which might
render the nuptial office so contemptible a sinecure in his
hands. He could not be long in conjecturing that he had a rival,
but when he attempted to discover him he was lost in the
labyrinth of his own ideas. All he knew with certainty, was the
peculiar severity of his own fate. He had already passed two
thirds of the night in this perplexity of thought, when an
undistinguishable noise grew gradually on his sense of hearing.
Great was his surprise when a footstep seemed audibly to pace
about the room. He fancied himself mistaken; for he recollected
shutting the door himself after Blanche's women had retired. He
drew back the curtain to satisfy his senses on the occasion of
this extraordinary noise. But the light in the chimney corner had
gone out, and he soon heard a feeble and melancholy voice calling
Blanche with anxious and importunate repetitions. Then did the
suggestions of his jealousy transport him into rage. His insulted
honour obliging him to rush from the bed to which he had so long
aspired, and either to prevent a meditated injury, or take
vengeance for its perpetration, he caught up his sword and flew
forward in the direction whence the voice seemed to proceed. He
felt a naked blade opposed to his own. As he advanced, his
antagonist retired. The pursuit became more eager, the retreat
more precipitate. His search was vigilant, and every corner of
the room seemed to contain its object, but that which he
momentarily occupied. The darkness, however, favoured the unknown
invader, and he was nowhere to be found. The pursuer halted. He
listened, but heard no sound. It seemed like enchantment! He made
for the door, under the idea that this was the outlet to the
secret assassin of his honour; yet the bolt was shot as fast as
before. Unable to comprehend this strange occurrence, he called
those of his retinue who were most within reach of his voice. As
he opened the door for this purpose, he placed himself so as to
prevent all egress, and stood upon his guard, lest the devoted
victim of his search should escape.

At his redoubled cries, some servants ran with lights. He laid
hold of a taper, and renewed his search in the chamber with his
sword still drawn. Yet he found no one there, nor any apparent
sign of any person having been in the room. He was not aware of
any private door, nor could he discover any practicable mode of
escape: yet for all this, he could not shut his eyes against the
nature and circumstances of his misfortune. His thoughts were all
thrown into inextricable confusion. To ask any questions of
Blanche was in vain: for she had too deep an interest in
perplexing the truth, to furnish any clue whatever to its
discovery. He therefore adopted the measure of unbosoming his
griefs to Leontio; but previously sent away his attendants with
the excuse that he thought he had heard some noise in the room,
but was mistaken. His father-in-law having left his chamber in
consequence of this strange disturbance, met him, and heard from
his lips the particulars of this unaccountable adventure. The
narrative was accompanied with every indication of extreme agony,
produced by deep and tender feeling, as well as by a sense of
insulted honour.

Siffredi was surprised at the occurrence. Though it did not
appear to him at all probable, that was no reason for being easy
about its reality. The king's passion might accomplish anything;
and that idea alone justified the most cruel apprehensions. But
it could do no good to foster either the natural jealousy of his
son-in-law, or his particular suspicions arising out of
circumstances. He therefore endeavoured to persuade him, with an
air of confidence, that this imaginary voice, and airy sword
opposed to his substantial one, were, and could possibly be, but
the gratuitous creations of a fancy, under the influence of
amorous distrust. It was morally impossible that any person
should have made his way into his daughter's chamber. With regard
to the melancholy, so visible in his wile's deportment, it might
very naturally be attributed to precarious health and delicacy of
constitution. The honour of a husband need not be so tremblingly
alive to all the qualms of maiden fear and inexperience. Change
of condition, in the case of a girl habituated to live almost
without human society, and abruptly consigned to the embraces of
a man in whom love and previous acquaintance had not inspired
confidence, might innocently be the cause of these tears, of
these sighs, and of this lively affliction so irksome to his
feelings. But it was to be considered that tenderness, especially
in the hearts of young ladies, fortified by the pride of blood
against the excesses of love-sick abandonment, was only to be
cherished into a flame by time and assiduity. He therefore
exhorted him to tranquillize his disturbed mind; to be ardently
officious in redoubling every instance of affection; to create a
soft and seducing interest in the sensibility of Blanche. In
short, he besought him earnestly to return to her apartment, and
laboured to persuade him that his distrust and confusion would
only set her on an unconjugal and litigious defence of her
insulted virtue.

The constable returned no answer to the arguments of his father-
in-law, whether because he began to think in good earnest that
his senses were imposed on by the disorder of his mind, or
because he thought it more to the purpose to dissemble, than to
undertake ineffectually to convince the old man of an event so
devoid of all likelihood. He returned to his wife's chamber, laid
himself down by her side, and endeavoured to obtain from sleep
some relief from his extreme uneasiness. Blanche, on her part,
the unhappy Blanche, was not a whit more at her ease. Her ears
had been but too open to the same alarming sounds, which had
assailed her husband's peace; nor could she construe into
illusion an adventure of which she well knew the secret and the
motives. She was surprised that Enriquez should attempt to find
his way into her apartment, after having pledged his faith so
solemnly to the Princess Constance. Instead of feeding her soul
with vanity, or deriving any flattering omens from a proceeding
fraught with personal tenderness, but destructive to self-
approbation, she considered it as a new insult, and her heart was
only so much the more exasperated with resentment against the
author.

While Siffredi's daughter, with all her prejudices excited
against the young king, believed him the most guilty of men, that
unhappy prince, more than ever ensnared by Blanche, was anxious
for an interview, to satisfy her mind on a subject which seemed
to make so much against him. For that purpose he would have
visited Belmonte sooner, but for a press of business too urgent
to be neglected; nor could he withdraw himself from the court
before that night. He was perfectly at home in all the turnings
of a place where he had been brought up, and therefore was at no
loss to slip into the castle of Siffredi. Nay, he was still in
possession of the key to a secret door communicating with the
gardens. By this inlet did he gain his former apartment, and
thence found his way into Blanche's chamber. Only conceive what
must have been the astonishment of that prince to find a man in
possession, and to feel a sword opposed to his guard. He was just
on the point of betraying all, and of punishing the rebel on the
very spot, whose sacrilegious hand had dared to lift itself
against the person of its lawful sovereign. But then the delicacy
due to the daughter of Leontio held his indignation in check. He
retreated in the same direction as he had advanced, and regained
the Palermo road, in more distress and perplexity than ever.
Getting home some little time before daybreak, his apartment
afforded him the most quiet retreat. But his thoughts were all on
the road back to Belmonte. The resting-place of his affections, a
sense of honour, in a word, love with all its pretensions and
surmises, would never allow him to delay an explanation,
involving all the circumstances of so strange and melancholy an
adventure.

As soon as it was daylight he gave out that he was going on a
hunting expedition. Under cover of sporting, his huntsmen and a
chosen party of his courtiers penetrated into the forest of
Belmonte under his direction. The chase was followed for some
time, as a blind to his real design. When he saw the whole party
eagerly driving on, and wholly engrossed by the sport, he
galloped off in a different direction, and struck, without any
attendants, into the road towards Leontio's castle. The various
tracks of the forest were too well known to him to admit of his
losing his way. His impatience, too, would not allow him to take
any thought of his horse; so that the moments scarcely flitted
faster, than his expedition in leaving behind him the distance
which separated him from the object of his love. His very soul
was on the rack for some plausible excuse to plead for a private
interview with Siffredi's daughter, when, crossing a narrow path
just at the park gate, he observed two women sitting close by
him, in earnest conversation under the shelter of a tree. It
might well be supposed that these females belonged to the castle;
and even that probability was sufficient to rouse an interest in
him. But his emotion was heightened into a feeling beyond his
reason to control, for these ladies happened to look round on
hearing the trot of a horse advancing in that direction; when at
once he recognized his dear Blanche. The fact was, she had made
her escape from the castle with Nisa, the person of all others
among her women most in her confidence, that she might at least
have the satisfaction of weeping over her misfortunes without
intrusion or restraint.

He flew, and seemed rather to throw himself headlong than to fall
at her feet. But when he beheld in the expression of her
countenance every mark of the deepest affliction, his heart was
softened. Lovely Blanche, said he, do not, let me entreat you,
give way to the emotions of your grief. Appearances, I own, must
represent me as guilty in your eyes: but when you shall be made
acquainted with my project in your behalf, what you consider as a
crime will be transformed in your thoughts into a proof of my
innocence, and an evidence of my unparalleled affection. These
words, calculated, according to the views of Enriquez, to allay
the grief of Blanche, served only to redouble her affliction.
Fain would she have answered, but her sobs stifled her utterance.
The prince, thunderstruck at the death-like agitation of her
flame, addressed her thus. What, madam, is there no possibility
of tranquilizing your agitation? By what sad mischance have I
lost your confidence, at the very moment when my crown and even
my life are at stake, in consequence of my resolution to hold
myself engaged to you? At this suggestion the daughter of
Leontio, doing violence to her own feelings, but thinking it
necessary to explain herself, said to him --  My liege, your
assurances are no longer admissible. My destiny and yours are
henceforward as far asunder as the poles. Ah! Blanche,
interrupted Enriquez with impatience, what cutting words are
these, too painful for my sense of hearing? Who dares step in
between our loves? Who would venture to stand forward against the 
headlong rage of a king who would kindle all Sicily into a
conflagration, rather than suffer you to be ravished from his
long-cherished hopes? All your power, my liege, great as it is,
replied the daughter of Siffredi in a tone of melancholy, becomes
inefficient against the obstacles in the way of our union. I know
not how to tell it you, but . . . . I am married to the
constable.

Married to the constable! exclaimed the prince, starting back to
some distance from her. He could proceed no further in his
discourse, so completely was he thunderstruck at the
intelligence. Overwhelmed by this unexpected blow, he felt his
strength forsake him. His unconscious limbs laid themselves
without his guidance against the trunk of a tree just behind him.
His countenance was pallid, his whole frame in a tremor, his mind
bewildered and his spirits depressed. With no sense or faculty at
liberty but that of gazing, and there every power of his soul was
suspended on Blanche, he made her feel most poignantly how he
himself was agonized by the fatal event she had announced. The
expression of countenance on her part was such as to show him
that her emotions were not uncongenial with his own. Thus did
these two distressed lovers for a time preserve a silence towards
each other, which portended something of terror in its calmness.
At length the prince, recovering a little from his disorder by an
effort of courage, resumed the discourse, and said to Blanche
with a sigh -- Madam, what have you done? You have destroyed me,
and involved yourself in the same ruin by your credulity.

Blanche was offended at the seeming reproaches of the king, when
the strongest grounds of complaint were apparently on her side.
What! my lord, answered she, do you add dissimulation to
infidelity? Would you have me reject the evidence of my own eyes
and ears, so as to believe you innocent in spite of their report?
No, my lord, I will own to you such an effort of abstraction is
not in my power. And yet, madam, replied the king, these
witnesses by whose testimony you have been so fully convinced,
are but impostors. They have been in a conspiracy to betray you.
It is no less the fact that I am innocent and faithful, than it
is true that you are married to the constable. What is it you
say, my lord? replied she. Did I not overhear you confirming the
pledge of your hand and heart to Constance? Have you not bound
yourself to the nobility of the realm, and undertaken to comply
with the will of the late king? Has not the princess received the
homage of your new subjects as their queen, and in quality of
bride to Prince Enriquez? Were my eyes then fascinated? Tell me,
tell me rather, traitor, that Blanche was weighed as dust in the
balance of your heart, when compared with the attractions of a
throne. Without lowering yourself so far as to assume what you no
longer feel, and what perhaps you never felt, own at once that
the crown of Sicily appeared a more tenable possession with
Constance than with the daughter of Leontio. You are in the
right, my lord. My title to an illustrious throne, and to the
heart of a prince like you, stands on an equally precarious
footing. It was vanity in the extreme to prefer a claim to
either: but you ought not to have drawn me on into error. You
well recollect what alarms were my portion at the very thought of
losing you, of which I had almost a supernatural foreboding. Why
did you lull my apprehensions to sleep? To what purpose was that
delusive mockery? I might else have accused fate rather than
yourself, and you would at least have retained an interest in my
heart, though unaccompanied by a hand which no other suitor could
ever have obtained. As we are now circumstanced, your 
justification is out of season. I am married to the constable. To
relieve me from the continuance of an interview, which casts a
shade over my purity hitherto unsullied, permit me, my lord,
without failing in due respect, to with draw from the presence of
a prince to whose addresses I am no longer at liberty to listen.

With these words, she darted away from Enriquez in as hurried a
step as the agitation of her spirits would allow. Stop, madam,
exclaimed he, drive not to despair a prince, inclined to overturn
a throne, which you reproach him for having preferred to
yourself, rather than yield to the importunities of his new
subjects. That sacrifice is under present circumstances
superfluous, rejoined Blanche. The bond must be broken between
the constable and me, before any effect can be produced by these
generous transports. Since I am not my own mistress, little would
it avail that Sicily should be embroiled, nor does it concern me
to whom you give your hand. If I have betrayed my own weakness,
and suffered my heart to be surprised, at least shall I muster
fortitude enough to suppress every soft emotion, and prove to the
new king of Sicily, that the wife of the constable is no longer
the mistress of Prince Enriquez. While this conversation was
passing, they reached the park gate. With a sudden spring she and
Nisa got within the walls. As they took care to fasten the wicket
after them, the prince was left in a state of melancholy and
stupefaction. He could not recover from the stunning sensation,
occasioned by the intelligence of Blanche's marriage. Unjust may
I well call you, exclaimed he. You have buried all remembrance of
our solemn engagement! Spite of my protestations and your own,
our fates are rent asunder? The long-cherished hope of possessing
those charms was an empty phantom! Ah! cruel as you are, how
dearly have I purchased the distinction, of compelling you to
acknowledge the constancy of my love!

At that moment his rival's happiness, heightened by the colouring
of jealousy, presented itself to his mind in all the horrors of
that frantic passion. So arbitrary was its sway over him for some
moments, that he was on the point of sacrificing the constable,
and even Siffredi, to his blind vengeance. Reason, however,
calmed by little and little the violence of his transports. And
yet the obvious impossibility of effacing from the mind of
Blanche her natural conviction of his infidelity, reduced him to
despair. He flattered himself with weaning her from her
prejudices, could he but converse with her secure from
interruption. To attain this end, it seemed the most feasible
plan to get rid of the constable. He therefore determined to have
him arrested, as a person suspected of treasonable designs, in
the then unsettled state of public affairs. This commission was
given to the captain of his guard, who went immediately to
Belmonte, secured the person of his prisoner just as the evening
was closing in, and carried him to the castle of Palermo.

This occurrence spread an alarm at Belmonte. Siffredi took his
departure forthwith, to offer his own responsibility to the king
for the innocence of his son-in-law, and to represent in their
true colours the unpleasant consequences attending such arbitrary
exertions of power. The prince, who had anticipated such a
proceeding on the part of his minister, and was determined at
least to secure himself a free interview with Blanche before the
release of the constable, had expressly forbidden any one to
address him till the next day. But Leontio, setting this
prohibition at defiance, contrived so well as to make his way
into the king's chamber. My liege, said he, with an air of
humility tempered with firmness, if it is allowable for a subject
full of respect and loyalty to complain of his master, I have to
arraign you before the tribunal of your own conscience. What
crime has my son-in-law committed? Has your majesty sufficiently
reflected what an everlasting reproach is entailed on my family?
Are the consequences of an imprisonment calculated to disgust all
the most important officers of the state with the service, a
matter of indifference? I have undoubted information, answered
the king, that the constable holds a criminal correspondence with
the Infant Don Pedro. A criminal correspondence! interrupted
Leontio, with surprise. Ah! my liege, give no ear to the surmise.
Your majesty is played upon. Treason never gained a footing in
the family of Siffredi. It is sufficient security for the
constable that he is my son-in-law, to place him above all
suspicion. The constable is innocent: but private motives have
been the occasion of your arresting him.

Since you speak to me so openly, replied the king, I will adopt
the same sincerity with you. You complain of the constable's
imprisonment! Be it so. And have I no reason to complain of your
cruelty? it is you, barbarous Siffredi, who have wrested my
tranquillity from me, and reduced your sovereign, by your
officious cares, to envy the lowliest of the human race. For do
not so far deceive yourself as to believe that I shall ever enter
into your views. My marriage with Constance is quite out of the
question . . . . What, my liege, interrupted Leontio, with an
expression of horror, is there any doubt about your marrying the
princess, after having flattered her with that hope in the face
of your whole people? If their wishes are disappointed, replied
the king, take the credit to yourself: Wherefore did you reduce
me to the necessity of giving them a promise my heart would not
allow me to make good? Where was the occasion to fill up with the
name of Constance an instrument designed for the elevation of
your own daughter? You could not be a stranger to my design; need
you have completed your tyranny by devoting Blanche to the arms
of a man to whom she could not give her heart? And what authority
have you over mine to dispose of it in favour of a princess whom
I detest? Have you forgotten that she is the daughter of that
cruel Matilda, who, trampling the rights of consanguinity and
human nature under foot, caused my father to breathe his last
under all the rigours of a hard captivity? And should I marry
her! No, Siffredi, throw away that hope. Before the lurid torch
of such an hymeneal shall be kindled in your presence, you shall
behold all Sicily in flames, and the expiring embers quenched in
blood.

Do not my ears deceive me? exclaimed Leontio. Ah! sovereign, what
a scene do you present me with! Who can hear such menaces without
shuddering? But I am too forward to take the alarm, continued he
in an altered voice. You are in too close a union with your
subjects to be the instrument of a catastrophe so melancholy. You
will not suffer passion to triumph over your reason. Virtues like
yours shall never lose their lustre by the tarnish of human and
ordinary weakness. If I have given my daughter into the arms of
the constable, it was with the design, my liege, of securing to
your majesty a powerful subject, able by his own valour, and the
army under his command, to maintain your party against that of
the Prince Don Pedro. It appeared to me that by connecting him
with my family in so close a bond . . . . Yes, yes! This bond,
exclaimed Prince Enriquez, this fatal bond has been my ruin.
Unfeeling friend, to aim a wound at my vital part! What
commission had you to take care of my interests at the expense of
my affections? Why did you not leave me to support my pretensions
by my own arm? Was there any question about my courage that I
should be thought incompetent to reduce my rebellious subjects to
their obedience? Means might have been found to punish the
constable had he dared to have fallen off from his allegiance! I
am well aware of the difference between a lawful king and an
arbitrary tyrant. The happiness of our people is our first duty.
But are we, on the other hand, to be the slaves of our subjects?
From the moment when we are selected by heaven for our high
office, do we lose the common privilege of nature, the birthright
of the human race, to dispose of our affections in whatsoever
current they may flow? Well then! if we are less our own masters
than the lowest of the human race, take back, Siffredi, that
sovereign authority you affect to have secured to me by the wreck
of my personal happiness.

You cannot but be acquainted, my liege, replied the minister,
that it was on your marriage with the princess, the late king,
your uncle, made the succession of the crown to depend. And by
what right, rejoined Enriquez, did even he assume to himself so
arbitrary a disposition? Was it on such unworthy terms that he
succeeded his brother, King Charles? How came you yourself to be
so besotted as to allow of a stipulation so unjust? For a high
chancellor, you are not too well versed in our laws and
constitutions. To cut the matter short, though I have promised my
hand to Constance, the engagement was not voluntary. I do not
therefore think myself bound to keep my word; and if Don Pedro
founds on my refusal any hope of succeeding to the throne without
involving the nation in a bloody and destructive contest, his
error will be too soon visible. The sword shall decide between us
to whom the prize of empire may more worthily fall.  Leontio
could not venture to press him further, and confined himself to
supplicating on his knees for the liberty of his son-in-law. That
boon he obtained. Go, said the king to him, return to Belmonte,
the constable shall follow you thither without delay. The
minister departed, and made the best of his way to Belmonte,
under the persuasion that his son-in-law would overtake him on
the road. In this he was mistaken. Enriquez was determined to
visit Blanche that night, and with such views he deferred the
enlargement of her husband till the next morning.

During this time the feelings of the constable were of the most
agonizing nature. His imprisonment had opened his eyes to the
real cause of his misfortune. He gave himself up to jealousy
without restraint or remorse, and belying the good faith which
had hitherto rendered his character so valuable, his thoughts
were all bent on his revenge. As he conjectured rightly that the
king would not fail to reconnoitre Blanche's apartment during the
night, it was his object to surprise them together. He therefore
besought the governor of the castle at Palermo to allow of his
absence from the prison, on the assurance of his return before
daybreak. The governor, who was devoted to his interest, gave his
permission so much the more easily, as being already advertised
that Siffredi had procured his liberty. Indeed, he even went so
far as to supply him with a horse for his journey to Belmonte.
The constable on his arrival there fastened his horse to a tree.
He then got into the park by a little gate of which he had the
key, and was lucky enough to slip into the castle without being
recognized by any one. On reaching his wife's apartment he
concealed himself in the ante-chamber, behind a screen placed as
if expressly for his use. His intention was to observe narrowly
what was going forward, and to present himself on a sudden in
Blanche's chamber at the sound of any footstep he should hear.
The first object he beheld was Nisa, taking leave of her mistress
for the night, and withdrawing to a closet where she slept.

Siffredi's daughter, who had been at no loss to fathom the
meaning of her husband's imprisonment, was fully convinced that
he would not return to Belmonte that night, although she had
heard from her father of the king's assurance that the constable
should set out immediately after him. As little could she doubt
but Enriquez would avail himself of the interval to see and
converse with her at his pleasure. With this expectation she
awaited the prince's arrival, to reproach him for a line of
conduct so pregnant with fatal consequences to herself. As she
had anticipated, a very short time after Nisa had retired the
sliding panel opened, and the king threw himself at the feet of
his beloved. Madam, said he, condemn me not without a hearing. It
is true I have occasioned the constable's imprisonment, but then
consider that it was the only method left me for my
justification. Attribute therefore that desperate stratagem to
yourself alone. Why did you refuse to listen to my explanation
this morning? Alas! To-morrow your husband will be liberated, and
I shall no longer have an opportunity of addressing you. Hearken
to me then for the last time. If the loss of you has embittered
the remainder of my days, vouchsafe me at least the melancholy
satisfaction of convincing you that I have not called down this
misfortune on myself by my own inconstancy. I did indeed confirm
the pledge of my hand to Constance, but then it was unavoidable
in the situation to which your father's policy had reduced us. It
was necessary to put this imposition on the princess for your
interest and for my own; to secure to you your crown, and with it
the hand and heart of your devoted lover. I had flattered myself
with the prospect of success. Measures were already taken to
supersede that engagement, but you have destroyed the bright
illusions of my fancy; and, by disposing of yourself too
precipitately, have antedated an eternity of torment for two
hearts, whom a mutual and perfect love might have conducted to
perpetual bliss.

He concluded this explanation with such evident marks of
unfeigned agony, that Blanche was affected by his words. She had
no longer any hesitation about his innocence. At first her joy
was unbounded at the conviction; but then again a sense of their
cruel circumstances gained the ascendant over her mind. Ah! my
honoured lord, said she to the prince, after such a determination
of our destinies, you only inflict a new pang by informing me
that you were not to blame. What have I done, wretched as I am?
My keen resentment has betrayed me into error. I fancied myself
cast off; and in the moment of my anger, accepted the hand of the
constable, whose addresses my father promoted. But the crime is
all my own, though the woes are mutual. Alas! In the very
conjuncture when I accused you of deceiving me, it was by my own
act, too credulously impassioned as I was, that the ties were
broken, which I had sworn for ever to make indissoluble. Take
your revenge, my lord, in your turn. Indulge your hatred against
the ungrateful Blanche. . . . Forget . . . . What! and is it in
my power then, madam? interrupted Enriquez with a dejected air:
how is it possible to tear a passion from my heart, which even
your injustice had not the power of extinguishing? Yet it becomes
necessary for you to make that effort, my liege, replied the
daughter of Siffredi, with a deep sigh . . . . And shall you be
equal to that effort yourself? replied the king. I am not
confident with myself for my success, answered she: but I shall
spare no pains in the attainment of my object. Ah! unfeeling fair
one, said the prince, you will easily banish Enriquez from your
remembrance, since you can contemplate such a purpose so
steadfastly. Whither then does your imagination lead? said
Blanche, in a more decisive tone. Do you flatter yourself that I
can permit the continuance of your tender assiduities? No, my
lord, banish that hope for ever from your thoughts. If I was not
born for royalty, neither has heaven formed me to be degraded by
illicit addresses. My husband, like yourself, my liege, is allied
to the noble house of Anjou. Though the call of duty were less
peremptory, in opposing an insurmountable obstacle to your
insidious proposals, a sense of pride would hinder me from
admitting them. I conjure you to withdraw: we must meet no more.
What a barbarous sentence! exclaimed the king. Ah! Blanche, is it
possible that you should treat me with so much severity? Is it
not enough then to weigh me down, that the constable should be in
possession of your charms? And yet you would cut me off from the
bare sight of you, the only comfort which remains to me! For that
very reason avoid my presence, answered Siffredi's daughter, not
without some tears of tenderness. The contemplation of what we
have dearly loved is no longer a blessing, when we have lost all
hope of the possession. Adieu, my lord! Shun my very image. You
owe that exertion to your own honour and to my good name. I claim
it also for my own peace of mind: for to deal sincerely, though
my virtue should be steady enough to combat with the suggestions
of my heart, the very remembrance of your affection stirs up so
cruel a conflict, that it is almost too much for my frail nature
to support the shock.

Her utterance of these words was attended with so energetic an
action, as to overset the light placed on a table behind her, and
its fall left the room in darkness. Blanche picked it up. She
then opened the door of the ante-chamber, and went to Nisa's
closet, who was not yet gone to bed, for the purpose of lighting
it again. She was now returning, after having accomplished her
errand. The king, who was waiting for her impatiently, no sooner
saw her approach, than he resumed his ardent plea with her, to
allow of his attentions. At the prince's voice, the constable
rushed impetuously, sword in hand, into the room, almost at the
same moment with his bride. Advancing up to Enriquez with all the
indignation which his fury kindled within him: This is too much,
tyrant, cried he; flatter not yourself that I am cowardly enough
to bear with this affront, which you have offered to my honour.
Ay! traitor, answered the king, standing on his guard, lay aside
the vain imagination of being able to compass your purpose with
impunity. With these mutual taunts, they entered on a conflict,
too violent to be long undecided. The constable, fearing lest
Siffredi and his attendants should be roused too soon by the
piercing shrieks of Blanche, and should interpose between him and
his revenge, took no care of himself. His frenzy robbed him of
all skill. He fenced so heedlessly, as to run headlong on his
adversary's sword. The weapon entered his body up to the hilt. He
fell; and the king instantaneously checked his hand.

The daughter of Leontio, touched at her husband's condition, and
rising superior to her natural repugnance, threw herself on the
ground, and was anxious to afford him every assistance. But that
ill-fated bridegroom was too deeply prejudiced against her, to
allow himself to be softened by the evidences she gave of her
sorrow and her pity. Death, whose hand he felt upon him, could
not stifle the transports of his jealousy. In these his last
moments, no image presented itself to his mind but his rival's
success. So insufferable was that idea to him, that, collecting
together the little strength he had left, he raised his sword,
which he still grasped convulsively, and plunged it deep in
Blanche's bosom. Die, said he, as he inflicted the fatal wound;
die, faithless bride, since the ties of wedlock were not strong
enough to preserve to me the vow which you had sworn upon the
altar. And as for you, Enriquez, pursued he, triumph not too
loudly on your destinies. You are prevented from taking advantage
of my froward fortune; and I die content. Scarcely did these
words quiver on his lips, when he breathed his last. His
countenance, overcast as it was with the shades of death, had
still something in it of fierceness and of terror. That of
Blanche presented a quite different aspect. The wound she had
received was mortal. She fell on the scarcely breathing body of
her husband: and the blood of the innocent victim flowed in the
same stream with that of her murderer, who had executed his cruel
purpose so suddenly, that the king could not prevent it from
taking effect.

This ill-fated prince uttered a cry at the sight of Blanche as
she fell. Pierced deeper than herself by the stab which deprived
her of life, he did his utmost to afford the same relief to her
as she had offered, though at so fatal an expense, to one who
might have rewarded her better. But she addressed him in these
words, while the last breath quivered on her lips: My lord, your
assiduities are fruitless, I am the victim. Merciless fate
demands me, and I resign myself to death. May the anger of heaven
be appeased by the sacrifice, and the prosperity of your reign be
confirmed. As she was with difficulty uttering these last words,
Leontio, drawn thither by the reverberation of her shrieks, came
into the room; and, thunderstruck at the dreadful scene before
him, remained fixed to the spot where he stood. Blanche, without
noticing his presence, went on addressing herself to the king.
Farewell, prince, said she; cherish my memory with the tenderness
it deserves. My affection and my misfortunes entitle me at least
to that. Harbour no aversion to my father; he is innocent. Be a
comfort to his remaining days; assuage his grief; acknowledge his
fidelity. Above all, convince him of my spotless virtue. With
this I charge you, before every other consideration. Farewell, my
dear Enriquez . . . . I am dying.     Receive my last sigh.

Here her words were intercepted by the approach of death. For
some time the king maintained a sullen silence. At length he said
to Siffredi, whose senses seemed to be locked up in a mortal
trance: Behold, Leontio; feed on the contemplation of your own 
work. In this tragical event, you may ruminate on the issue of
your officious cares, and your overweening zeal for my service.
The old man returned no answer, so deeply was he penetrated by
his affliction. But wherefore dwell on the description of 
circumstances, when the powers of language must sink under the
weight of such a catastrophe? Suffice it to say, that they
mutually poured forth their sorrows in the most affecting terms,
as soon as their grief allowed them to give vent to its effusions
in speech.

Through the whole course of his life, the king cherished a tender
recollection of his mistress. He could not bring himself to marry
Constance. The infant Don Pedro combined with that princess, and
by their joint efforts, an obstinate attempt was made to carry
the will of Roger into execution; but they were compelled in the
end to give way to Prince Enriquez, who gained the ascendancy
over all his enemies. As for Siffredi, the melancholy he
contracted from having been the cause of destruction to his
dearest friends, gave him a disgust to the world, and made a
longer abode in his native country insupportable. He turned his
back on Sicily for ever; and, coming over into Spain with Portia,
his surviving daughter, purchased this mansion. He lived here
nearly fifteen years after the death of Blanche, and had the
consolation, before his own death, of establishing Portia in the
world. She married Don Jerome de Silva, and I am the only issue
of that marriage. Such, pursued the widow of Don Pedro de
Penares, is the story of my family; a faithful recital of the
melancholy events represented in that picture, which was painted
by order of my grandfather Leontio, as a record to his posterity
of the fatal adventure I have related.



CH. V. -- The behaviour of Aurora de Guzman on her arrival at
Salamanca.


ORTIZ, her companions, and myself, after having heard this tale,
withdrew together from the hall, where we left Aurora with
Elvira. There they lengthened out the remainder of the day in a
mutual intercourse of confidence. They were not likely to be
weary of each other: and on the following morning, when we took
our leave, there was as much to do to part them, as if they had
been two friends brought up in the closest habits of confidence
and affection.

In due time we reached Salamanca without any impediment. There we
immediately engaged a ready-furnished house, and Dame Ortiz, as
it had been before agreed, assumed the name of Donna Kimena de
Guzman. She had played the part of a duenna too long not to be
able to shift her character according to circumstances. One
morning she went out with Aurora, a waiting-maid and a man-
servant, and betook herself to a lodging-house, where we had been
informed that Pacheco most commonly took up his abode. She asked
if there was any lodging to be let there. The answer was in the
affirmative; and they showed her into a room in very neat
condition, which she hired. She paid down earnest to the 
landlady, telling her that it was for one of her nephews who .was
coming from Toledo to finish his studies at Salamanca, and might
be expected on that very day.

The duenna and my mistress, after having made sure of this
apartment, went back the way they came, and the lovely Aurora,
without loss of time, metamorphosed herself into a spruce young
spark. She concealed her black ringlets under a braid of light-
coloured hair, the better to disguise herself; . . . .
manufactured her eyebrows to correspond, and dressed herself up
in such a costume, as to look for all the world as if her sex
were of a piece with her appearance. Her deportment was free and
easy; so that, with the exception of her face, which was somewhat
more delicate than became the manly character, there was nothing
to lead to a discovery of her masquerading. The waiting-woman who
was to officiate as page, got into her paraphernalia at the same
time, and we had no apprehension respecting her competency to
perform her part. There was no danger of her beauty telling any
tales; and besides, she could put on as brazen-faced a swagger as
the most impudent dog in town. After dinner, our two actresses,
finding themselves in cue to make their first appearance on the
stage, where the scene was laid in the ready-furnished lodging,
took me along with them. We all three placed ourselves in the
coach, and carried with us all the baggage we were likely to have
occasion for.

The landlady, Bernarda Ramirez by name, welcomed us with a glut
of civility, and led the way to our room, where we began to make
arrangements with her. We concluded a bargain for our board by
the month, which she undertook should be suitable to our
condition. Then we asked if she had her complement of boarders. I
have none at all at present, answered she. Not that there would
be any want of enough, if I was of the mind to take in all sorts
of people: but young men of fashion are the thing for me. I
expect one of that description this morning: he is coming hither
from Madrid to complete his education. Don Lewis Pacheco! But you
must have heard of him before now. No, said Aurora, I have no
acquaintance whatever with the gentleman; and since we are to be
inmates together, you will do me a kindness by letting me a
little into his character. Please your honour, replied the
landlady, leering at this outside of a man, his figure is as
taking as your own; just the same sort of make, and about the
same size. Oh! how well you will do together! By St James, though
I say it who should not say it, I shall have about me two of the
prettiest young fellows in all Spain. Well, but about Don Lewis!
for my mistress was in a fidget to ask the grand question. Of
course; . . . . he is well with the ladies in your parts! Enough
of  . . . . of love affairs . . . . on his hands! Oh! do not you
be afraid of that, rejoined the old lady; it is a forward sprig
of gallantry, take my word for it. He has but to shew himself
before the works, and the citadel sends to capitulate. Among the
number of his conquests, he has got into the good graces of a
lady, with as much youth and beauty as he will know what to do
with. Her name is Isabella. Her father is an old doctor of laws.
She is over head and ears in love with him; absolutely out of her
wits! Well, but do tell me now, my dear little woman, interrupted
Aurora, as if she was ready to burst, is he out of his wits too?
He used to be very fond of her, answered Bernarda Ramirez, before
he went last to Madrid: but whether he holds in the same mind
still, I will not venture to say; because on these points he is
not altogether to be trusted. He is apt to flirt, first with one
woman, and then with another, just as all you young deceivers
take pleasure in doing. You are all alike!

The bonny widow had scarcely got to the end of her harangue,
before we heard a noise in the court. On looking out at the
window, behold! there appeared two young men dismounting from
their steeds. Who should it be, but the identical Don Lewis
Pacheco, just arrived from Madrid with a servant behind him. The
old lady brushed off to go and usher him in; while my mistress
was putting herself in order, not without some palpitation of
heart, to enact Don Felix to the best of her conceptions. Without
waiting for any formalities, in marched Don Lewis to our
apartment in his travelling dress. I have just been informed,
said he, paying his respects to Aurora, that a young nobleman of
Toledo takes up his abode in this house. May I take the liberty
of expressing my joy in the circumstance, and hoping that we may
be better acquainted? During my mistress's reply to this
compliment, it seemed to me as if Pacheco did not know what to
make of so smock-faced a young spark. Indeed he could not refrain
from declaring a more than ordinary admiration of an air and
figure so attractive. After abundance of discourse, with every
demonstration of reciprocal good breeding, Don Lewis withdrew to
the apartment provided for him.

While he was getting his boots off and changing his dress and
linen, a sort of a page, on the look-out after him to deliver a
letter, met Aurora by chance on the staircase. Her he mistook for
Don Lewis. Thinking he had found the right owner for this tender
message, of which he was the Mercury --  Softly! my honoured lord
and master, said he, though I have not the honour of knowing
Signor Pacheco, there can be no occasion for asking whether you
are the man. It is impossible to be mistaken in the guess. No, my
friend, answered my mistress with a most happy presence of mind,
assuredly you are not mistaken. You acquit yourself of your
embassies to a marvel. I am Don Lewis Pacheco. You may retire! I
will find an opportunity of sending an answer. The page vanished,
and Aurora shutting herself up with her waiting-maid and me,
opened the letter, and read to us as follows: --  "I have just
heard of your being at Salamanca. With what joy did I receive the
news! I thought I should have gone out of my senses. But do you
love Isabella as well as ever? Lose no time in assuring her that
you are still the same. In good truth, she will almost expire
with pleasure when once she is assured of your constancy."

This is a mighty passionate epistle, said Aurora. The heart that
indited it has been caught in a trap. This lady is a rival of no
mean capacity. No pains must be spared to wean Don Lewis from
her, and even to prevent any future interview. The undertaking is
difficult, I acknowledge, and yet there seems no reason to
despair of the result. My mistress, taking her own hint, fell
into a fit of musing; from which having recovered as soon as she
fell into it, she added --  I will lay a wager they are at
daggers drawn in less than twenty-four hours. It so happened that
Pacheco, after a short repose in his apartment, came to look
after us in ours, and entered once more into conversation with
Aurora before supper. My dapper little knight, said he with a
rakish air, I fancy the poor devils of husbands and lovers will
have no reason to hug themselves on your arrival at Salamanca.
You will make their hearts ache for them. As for myself, I
tremble for all my snug arrangements. I tell you what! answered
my mistress with congenial spirit, your fears are not without
their foundation. Don Felix de Mendoza is rather formidable, so
take care what you are about. This is not my first visit in this
country, the ladies hereabouts, to my knowledge, are made of
penetrable materials. About a month ago my way happened to lie
through this city. I halted for eight days, and you are to know .
. . . but you must not mention it . . . . that I set fire to the
daughter of an old doctor of laws.

It was evident enough that Don Lewis was disturbed by this
declaration. Might one without impropriety, replied he, just ask
the lady's name? What do you mean by impropriety? exclaimed the
pretended Don Felix. Why make any secret about such a matter as
that? Do you think me more of a Joseph than other young noblemen
of my standing? Have a better opinion of my spirit. Besides, the
object, between ourselves, is unworthy of any great reserve, she
is but a little mushroom of the lower ranks. A man of fashion
never quarrels with his conscience about such obscure
gallantries, and even thinks it an honour conferred on a
tradesman's wife or daughter when he leaves her without any. I
shall therefore acquaint you in plain terms, that the name of the
doctor's daughter is Isabella. And the doctor himself,
interrupted Pacheco impatiently. he possibly may be Signor Marcia
de la Liana? Precisely so, replied my mistress. Here is a letter
sent me just now. Read it, and then you will see how deeply your
humble servant has dipped into her good graces. Don Lewis just
cast his eye upon the note, and recognizing the handwriting, was
struck dumb with astonishment and vexation. What is the matter?
cried Aurora, with an air of surprise, keeping up the spirit of
her assumed character. You change colour! God forgive me, but you
are a party concerned in this young lady. Ah! Plague take my
officious tongue for having opened my affairs to you with so much
frankness.

I am very much obliged to you for it for my own part, said Don
Lewis in a transport made up of spite and rage. Traitress! Jilt!
My dear Don Felix, how shall I ever requite you! You have
restored me to my senses when they were just on the wing for an
eternal flight. I was tickling myself into a fool's paradise of
credulous love. But love is too cold a term to express my
extravagancies. I fancied myself adored by Isabella. The creature
had wormed her self into my heart by feigning to give me her own.
But now I know her clearly for a coquette, and as such despise
her as she deserves. Your feelings on the occasion do you
infinite credit, said Aurora, testifying a friendly sympathy in
his resentment. A plodding pettifogger's worthless brood might
have gorged to surfeit on the love of a young nobleman so
captivating as yourself. Her fickleness is inexcusable. So far
from taking her sacrifice of you in good part, it is my
determination to punish her by the keenest contempt. As for me,
rejoined Pacheco, I shall never set eyes on her again; and if
that is not revenge, the devil is in it. You are in the right,
exclaimed our masquerading Mendoza. At the same time, that she
may fully understand how ineffably we both disdain her, I vote
for sitting down, each of us, and writing her a sarcastic
farewell. They shall be enclosed in one cover, and serve as an
answer to her own letter. But do not let us proceed to this
extremity till you have examined your heart; it may be you will
repent hereafter of having broken off with Isabella. No, no,
interrupted Don Lewis, I am not such a fool as that comes to; let
it be a bargain, and we will mortify the ungrateful wretch as you
propose.

I immediately sent for pen, ink, and paper, when they sat
themselves down at opposite corners of the table, and drew up a
most tender bill of indictment against Doctor Murcia de la
Llana's daughter. Pacheco, in particular, was at a loss for
language forcible enough to convey his sentiments in all their
acrimony; away went exordium after exordium, to the tearing and
maiming of five or six fair sheets, before the words looked
crooked enough to please his jealous eyes. At length, however, he
produced an epistle which came up with his most tragical
conceptions. It ran thus --  "Self-knowledge is a leading branch
of wisdom, my little philosopher. As a candidate for a
professor's chair, lay aside the vanity of fancying yourself
amiable. It requires merit of a far different compass to fix my
affections. You have not enough of the woman about you to afford
me even a temporary amusement. Yet do not despair, you have a
sphere of your own, the beggarly servitors in our university have
a keen appetite, but no very distinguishing palate." So much for
this elegant epistle! When Aurora had finished hers, which rang
the changes on similar topics, she sealed them, wrapped them up
together, and giving me the packet --  There, Gil Blas, said she,
take care that comes to Isabella's hands this very evening. You
comprehend me! added she, with a glance from the corner of her
eye, which admitted of no doubtful construction. Yes, my lord,
answered I, your commands shall be executed to a tittle.

I lost no time in taking my departure; no sooner in the street
than I said to myself -- So ho! Master Gil Blas, your part then
is that of the intriguing footman in this comedy. Well! so be it,
my friend! shew that you have wit and sense enough to top it over
the favourite actor of the day. Signor Don Felix thinks a wink as
good as a nod. A high compliment to the quickness of your
apprehension! Is he then in an error? No. His hint is as clear as
daylight. Don Lewis's letter is to drop its companion by the way.
A lucid exposition of a dark hieroglyphic, enough to shame the
dulness of the commentators. The sacredness of a seal could never
stand against this bright discovery. Out came the single letter
of Pacheco, and away went I to hunt after Doctor Murcia's abode.
At the very threshold, whom should I meet but the little page who
had been at our lodging. Comrade, said I, do not you happen to
live with the great lawyer's daughter? His answer was in the
affirmative. I see by your countenance, resumed I, that you know
the ways of the world. May I beg the favour of you to slip this
little memorandum into your mistress's hand?

The little page asked me on whose behalf I was a messenger. The
name of Don Lewis Pacheco had no sooner escaped my lips, than he
told me -- Since that is the case, follow me. I have orders to
shew you up. Isabella wants to confer with you. I was introduced
at once into a private apartment, where it was not long before
the lady herself made her appearance. The beauty of her face was
inexpressibly striking; I do not recollect to have seen more
lovely features. Her manner was somewhat mincing and infantine,
yet for all that it had been thirty good years at least since she
had mewled and puked in her nurse's arms. My friend, said she
with an encouraging smile, are you on Don Lewis Pacheco's
establishment? I told her I had been in office for these three
weeks. With this I fired off my paper popgun against her peace.
She read it over two or three times, but if she had rubbed her
eyes till doomsday she would have seen no clearer. In point of
fact, nothing could be more unexpected than so cavalier an
answer. Up went her eyes towards the heavens, appealing to their
rival luminaries. The ivory fences* of her pretty mouth committed
alternate trespass on her soft and suffering lips; and her whole
physiognomy bore witness to the pangs of her distressed and
disappointed heart. Then coming to herself a little, and
recovering her speech --  My friend, said she, has Don Lewis
taken leave of his senses? Tell me, if you can, his motive for so
heroic an epistle. If he is tired of me, well and good, but he
might have taken his leave like a gentleman.

Madam, said I, my master most assuredly has not acted as I should
have acted in his place. But he has in some sort been compelled
to do as he has done. If you would give me your word to keep the
secret, I could unravel the whole mystery. You have it at once,
interrupted she with eagerness; depend on it you shall be brought
into no scrape by me, therefore explain yourself without reserve.
Well, then! replied I, the fact is, without paraphrase,
circumlocution, loss of time, or perplexity of understanding, as
I shall distinctly state in two short words -- Not half a minute
after the receipt of your letter, there came into our house a
lady, under a veil as impenetrable as her purpose was dark. She
inquired for Signor Pacheco, and talked with him in private for
some time. At the close of the conversation, I overheard her
saying -- You swear to me never to see her more; but we must not
stop there, to set my heart completely at rest you must instantly
write her a farewell letter of my dictating. You know my terms.
Don Lewis did as she desired, then giving the result into my
custody -- Acquaint yourself; said he, where Doctor Murcia de la
Liana lives, and contrive to administer this love potion to his
daughter Isabella.

You see plainly, madam, pursued I, that this uncivil epistle is a
rival's handiwork, and that consequently my master is not so much
to blame as he appears. Oh, heaven! exclaimed she, he is more so
than I was aware of. His words might have been the error of his
hand, but his infidelity is the offence of his heart. Faithless
man! Now he is held by other ties . . . . But, added she,
assuming an air of disdain, let him devote himself unconstrained
to his new passion; I shall never cross him. Tell him, however,
that he need not have insulted me. I should have left the course
open to my rival, without his warning me from the field: for so
fickle a lover has not soul enough about him to pay for the
degradation of soliciting his return. With this sentiment she
gave me my dismissal, and retired in a whirlwind of passion
against Don Lewis.

My exit was conducted entirely to my own satisfaction, for I
conceived that with due cultivation of my talent I might in time
become a consummate hypocrite and most successful cheat. I
returned home on the strength of it, where I found my worthy
masters, Mendoza and Pacheco, supping together, and rattling away
as if they had been playfellows from their cradles. Aurora saw at
once, by myself-sufficient air, that her commission had not been
neglected in my hands. Here you are again then, Gil Blas, said
she, give us an account of your embassy. Wit and invention was
all I had to trust to, so I told them I had delivered the packet
into Isabella's own hands; who, after having glanced over the
contents of the two letters, so far from seeming disconcerted,
burst into a fit of laughter, as if she had been mad, and said --
Upon my word, our young men of fashion write in a pretty style.
It must be owned they are much more entertaining than scribes of
plebeian rank. It was a very good way of getting out of the
scrape, exclaimed my mistress, she must be an arrant coquette.
For my part, said Don Lewis, I cannot trace a feature of Isabella
in this conduct. Her character must have been completely
metamorphosed in my absence. She struck me too in a very
different light, replied Aurora. It must be allowed some women
can assume all modes and fashions at will. I was once in love
with one of that description, and a fine dance she led me. Gil
Blas can tell you the whole story! She had an air of propriety
about her which might have imposed upon a whole synod of old
maids. It is true, said I, putting in my oar; it was a face to
play the devil with a sworn bachelor, I could scarcely have been
proof against it myself.

The personated Mendoza and Pacheco shouted with laughter at my
manner of expressing myself; the one for the false witness I bore
against a culprit of my own creation; the other laughed simply at
the phrase in which my anathema was couched. We wait on talking
about the versatility of women, and the verdict, after hearing
the evidence, all on one side, was given against Isabella. A
convicted coquette! and sentence passed on her accordingly. Don
Lewis made a fresh vow never to see her more and Don Felix, after
his example, swore to hold her in eternal abhorrence. By dint of
these mutual protestations a sort of friendship was established
on the spur of the occasion, and they promised on both sides to
keep  --  no secrets from each other. The time after supper
passed in ingratiating intercourse, and the time seemed short
till they retired to their separate apartments. I followed Aurora
to hers, where I gave her a faithful account of my conversation
with the Doctor's daughter, not forgetting the most trivial
circumstance. She had much ado to help kissing me for joy. My
dear Gil Blas, said she, I am delighted with your spirit. When
one has the misfortune to be engaged in a passion not to be
gratified but by stratagems, what an advantage is it to secure on
the right side a lad of so enterprising a genius as yourself.
Courage, my friend, we have thrown a rival into the background,
whose presence in the scene might have marred our comedy. So far,
all is well. But as lovers are subject to strange vagaries, it
seems to me that we must make short work of it, and bring Aurora
de Guzman on the stage to-morrow. The idea met with my entire
approbation; so leaving Signor Don Felix with his page, I
withdrew to bed in an adjoining closet.

*Note: "Ivory fences": Should this phrase appear far-fetched in
the person of Gil Blas, it may be recollected, that though not
much of a student himself, he had waited on students; and might
have sucked in, while standing behind their chairs, along with
"fates and destinies, and such old sayings, the sisters three,
and such branches of learning," that exquisitely characteristic
Greek metaphor  -- "a hedge of teeth." -- TRANSLATOR.

CH. VI.  -- Aurora's devices to secure Don Lewis Pacheco's
affections.
THE two new friends met as soon as they came down in the morning.
The ceremonies of the day began with reciprocal embraces, about
which it was impossible for Aurora to be squeamish, for then Don
Felix must have dropped the mask altogether. They went out and
walked about town arm in arm, attended by Chilindron, Don Lewis's
footman, and myself. We loitered about the gates of the
university, looking at some posting bills and advertisements of
new publications. There were a good many people amusing
themselves, like us, with reading over the contents of these
placards. Among the rest my eye was caught by a little fellow,
who was giving his opinion very learnedly on the works exposed to
sale. I observed him to be heard with profound attention, and
could not help remarking how amply he deserved it in his own
opinion. He was evidently a complete coxcomb, of an arrogant and
dictatorial stamp, the common curse of your gentry under size.
This new translation of Horace, said he, announced here to the
public in letters of a yard long, is a prose work, executed by an
old college author. The students have taken a great fancy to the
book; so as to carry off four editions. But not a copy has been
bought by any man of taste! His criticisms were scarcely more
candid on any of the other books; he mauled them every one
without mercy. It was easy enough to see he was an author! I
should not have been sorry to have staid out his harangue, but
Don Lewis and Don Felix were not to be left in the lurch. Now
they took as little pleasure in this gentleman's remarks as they
felt interest in the books which he was Scaligerising, so that
they took a quiet leave of him and the university.

We returned home at dinner-time. My mistress sat down at table
with Pacheco, and dexterously turned the conversation on her
private concerns. My father, said she, is a younger branch of the
Mendoza family, settled at Toledo, and my mother is own sister to
Donna Kimena de Guzman, who came to Salamanca some days ago on an
affair of business, with her niece Aurora, only daughter of Don
Vincent de Guzman, whom possibly you might be acquainted with.
No, answered Don Lewis, but I have often heard of him, as well as
of your cousin Aurora. Is it true what they say of her? Her wit
and beauty are reported to be unrivalled. As for wit, replied Don
Felix, she certainly is not wanting, for she has taken great
pains to cultivate her mind. But her beauty is by no means to be
boasted of; indeed, we are thought to be very much alike. If that
is the case, exclaimed Pacheco, she cannot be behindhand with her
reputation. Your features are regular, your complexion almost too
fine for a man; your cousin must be an absolute enchantress. I
should like to see and converse with her. That you shall, if I
have any interest in the family, and this very day too, replied
the little Proteus of a Mendoza. We will go and see my aunt after
dinner.

My mistress took the first opportunity of changing the topic, and
conversing on indifferent subjects. In the afternoon, while the
two friends were getting ready to go and call on Donna Kimena, I
played the scout, and ran before to prepare the duenna for her
visitors. But there was no time to be lost on my return, for Don
Felix was waiting for me to attend Don Lewis and him on their way
to his aunt's. No sooner had they stepped over the threshold than
they were encountered by the adroit old lady, making signs to
them to walk as softly as possible. Hush! hush! said she, in a
low voice, you will waken my niece. Ever since yesterday she has
had a dreadful headache, but is just now a little better; and the
poor girl has been taking a little sleep for the last quarter of
an hour. I am sorry for this unlucky accident, said Mendoza, I
was in hopes we should have seen my cousin. Besides, I meant to
have introduced my friend Pacheco. There is no such great hurry
on that account, answered Ortiz with a significant smile, and if
that is all, you may defer it till to-morrow. The gentlemen did
not trouble the old lady with a long visit, but took their leave
as soon as they decently could.

Don Lewis took us to see a young gentleman of his acquaintance,
by name Don Gabriel de Pedros. There we stayed the remainder of
the day, and took our suppers. About two o'clock in the morning
we sallied forth on our return home. We had got about half-way,
when we stumbled against something on the ground, and discovered
two men stretched at their length in the street. We concluded
they had fallen under the knife of the assassin, and stopped to
assist them, if yet within reach of assistance. As we were
looking about to inform ourselves of their condition, as nearly
as the darkness of the night would allow, the patrole came up.
The officer took us at first for the murderers, and ordered his
people to surround us; but he mended his opinion of us on the
sound of our voices, and by favour of a dark lantern held up to
the faces of Mendoza and Pacheco. His myrmidons, by his
direction, examined the two men, whom our fancies had painted as
in the agonies of death, but it turned out to be a fat licentiate
with his servant, both of them overtaken in their cups, and not
dead, but dead drunk. Gentlemen, exclaimed one of the posse, this
jolly fellow is an acquaintance of mine. What! do you not know
Signor Guyomer the licentiate, head of our university? With all
his imperfections he is a great character, a man of superior
genius. He is as staunch as a hound at a philosophical dispute,
and his words flow like a gutter after a hail-storm. He has but
three foibles in which he indulges; intoxication, litigation, and
fornication. He is now returning from supper at his Isabella's,
whence, the more is the pity, the drunk was leading the drunk,
and they both fell into the kennel. Before the good licentiate
came to the headship this happened continually. Though manners
make the man, honours, you perceive, do not always mend the
manners. We left these drunkards in custody of the patrole, who
carried them safe home, and betook ourselves to our lodging and
our beds.

Don Felix and Don Lewis were stirring about mid-day. Aurora de
Guzman was the first topic of their conversation. Gil Blas, said
my mistress to me, run to my aunt, Donna Kimena, and ask if there
is any admission for Signor Pacheco and me to-day, we want to see
my cousin. Off I went to acquit myself of this commission, or
rather to concert the plan of the campaign with the duenna. We
had no sooner laid our heads together to the purpose intended,
than I was once more at the elbow of the false Mendoza. Sir,
quoth I, your cousin Aurora has got about wonderfully. She
enjoined me from her own lips to acquaint you, that your visit
could not be otherwise than highly acceptable, and Donna Kimena
desired me to assure Signor Pacheco, that any friend of yours
would always meet with an hospitable reception.

These last words evidently tickled Don Lewis's fancy. My mistress
saw that the bait was swallowed, and prepared herself to haul the
prey to shore. Just before dinner, a servant made his appearance
from Signora Kimena, and said to Don Felix -- My lord, a man from
Toledo has been inquiring after you, and has left this note at
your aunt's house. The pretended Mendoza opened it, and read the
contents aloud to the following effect --  "If your father and
family still live in your remembrance, and you wish to hear of
their concerns, do not fail, on the receipt of this, to call at
the Black Horse, near the university." I am too much interested,
said he, in these proffered communications, not to satisfy my
curiosity at once. Without ceremony, Pacheco, you must excuse me
for the present; if I am not back again here within two hours,
you may find your way by yourself to my aunt's; I will join the
party in the evening. You recollect Gil Blas' message from Donna
Kimena, the visit is no more than what will be expected from you.
After having thrown out this hint, he left the room, and ordered
me to follow him.

It can scarcely be necessary to apprize the reader, that instead
of marching down to the Black Horse, we filed off to our other
quarters. The moment that we got within doors, Aurora tore off
her artificial hair, washed the charcoal from her eyebrows,
resumed her female attire, and shone in all her natural charms, a
lovely dark-complexioned girl. So complete indeed had been her
disguise that Aurora and Don Felix could never have been
suspected of identity. The lady seemed to have the advantage of
the gentleman even in stature, thanks to a good high pair of
heels, to which she was not a little indebted. It was her first
business to heighten her personal graces with all the
embellishments of art; after which she looked out for Don Lewis,
in a state of agitation, compounded of fear and of hope. One
instant she felt confident in her wit and beauty; the next she
anticipated the failure of her attempt. Ortiz, on her part, set
her best foot foremost, and was determined to play up to my
mistress. As for me, Pacheco was not to see my knave's face till
the last act of the farce, for which the great actors are always
reserved, to unravel the intricacy of the plot; so I went out
immediately after dinner.

In short, the puppet-show was all adjusted against Don Lewis's
arrival. He experienced a very gracious reception from the old
lady, in amends for whose tediousness he was blessed with two or
three hours of Aurora's delightful conversation. When they had
been together long enough, in popped I, with a message to the
enamoured spark. My lord, my master Don Felix begs you ten
thousand pardons, but he cannot have the pleasure of waiting on
you here this evening. He is with three men of Toledo, from whom
he cannot possibly get away. Oh! the wicked little rogue,
exclaimed Donna Kimena; as sure as a gun then he is going to make
a night of it. No, madam, replied I, they are deeply engaged in
very serious business. He is really distressed that he cannot pay
his respects, and commissioned me to say everything proper to
your ladyship and Donna Aurora. Oh! I will have none of his
excuses, pouted out my mistress, he knows very well that I have
been indisposed, and might shew some slight degree of feeling for
so near a relation. As a punishment, he shall not come near me
for this fortnight. Nay, madam, interposed Don Lewis, such a
sentence is too severe. Don Felix's fate is but too pitiable, in
having been deprived of your society this evening.

They bandied about their fine speeches on these little topics of
gallantry for some time, and then Pacheco withdrew. The lovely
Aurora metamorphosed herself in a twinkling, and resumed her
swashing outside. The grass did not grow under her feet while she
was running to the other lodging. I have a million of apologies
to make, my dear friend, said she to Don Lewis, for not giving
you the meeting at my aunt's; but there was no getting rid of the
tiresome people I was with. However, there is one comfort, you
have had so much the more leisure to look about you, and
criticise my cousin's beauty. Well! and how do you like her! She
is a most lovely creature, answered Pacheco. You were in the
right to claim a resemblance to her. I never saw more
correspondent features; the very same cast of countenance, the
eyes exactly alike, the mouth evidently a family feature, and the
tone of voice scarcely to be distinguished. The likeness,
however, goes no further, for Aurora is taller than you, she is
brown and you are fair, you are a jolly fellow, she has a little
touch of the demure; so that you are not altogether the male and
female Sosias. As for good sense, continued he, if an angel from
heaven were to whisper wisdom in one ear, and your cousin her
mortal chit-chat in the other, I am afraid the angel might
whistle for an audience. In a word, Aurora is all-accomplished.

Signor Pacheco uttered these last words with so earnest an
expression, that Don Felix said with a smile -- My friend, I
advise you to stay away from Donna Kimena's, it will be more for
your peace of mind. Aurora de Guzman may set your wits a
wandering, and inspire a passion . . . .

I have no need of seeing her again, interrupted he, to become
distractedly enamoured of her. I am sorry for you, replied the
pretended Mendoza, for you are not a man to be seriously caught,
and my cousin is not to be made a fool of; take my word for it.
She would never encourage a lover whose designs were otherwise
than honourable. Otherwise than honourable! retorted Don Lewis;
who could have the audacity to form such on a lady of her rank
and character? As for me, I should esteem myself the happiest of
mankind, could she be prevailed on to favour my addresses, and
link her fate with mine.

Since those are your sentiments, rejoined Don Felix, you may
command my services. Yes, I will go heart and hand with you in
the business. All my interest in Aurora shall be yours; and by
to-morrow morning I will commence an attack on my aunt, whose
good word has more influence than you may think. Pacheco returned
his thanks with the best air possible to this young go-between,
and we were all agog at the promising appearance of our
stratagem. On the following day we found the means of heightening
the dramatic effect by entangling the plot a little more. My
mistress, after having waited on Donna Kimena, as if to speak a
good word in favour of the suitor, came back with the result of
the interview. I have spoken to my aunt, said she, but it was as
much as I could do to make her hear your proposal with patience.
She was primed and loaded against you. Some good-natured friend
in the dark has painted you out for a reprobate; but I took your
part with some little quickness, and at length succeeded in
vindicating your moral character from the attack it had
sustained.

This is not all, continued Aurora. You had better enter on the
subject with my aunt in my presence, we shall be able to make
something of her between us. Pacheco was all impatience to
insinuate himself into the good graces of Donna Kimena; nor was
the opportunity deferred beyond the next morning. Our amphibious
Mendoza escorted him into the presence of Dame Ortiz, where such
a conversation passed between the trio as put fire and tow to the
combustible heart of Don Lewis. Kimena, a veteran performer, took
the cue of sympathy at every expression of tenderness, and
promised the enamoured youth that it should not be her fault if
his plea with her niece was urged in vain. Pacheco threw himself
at the feet of so good an aunt, and thanked her for all her
favours. In this stage of the business Don Felix asked if his
cousin was up. No, replied the Duenna, she is still in bed, and
is not likely to be down-stairs while you stay; but call again
after dinner, and you shall have a tête-à-tête with her to your
heart's content. It is easy to imagine that so coming on a
proposal from the dragon which was to guard this inaccessible
treasure, produced its full complement of joy in the heart of Don
Lewis. The remainder of the long morning had nothing to do but to
be sworn at! He went back to his own lodging with Mendoza, who
was not a little enraptured to observe, with the scrutinizing eye
of a mistress under the disguise of a friend, all the symptoms of
an incurable amorous infirmity.

Their tongues ran on no earthly subject but Aurora. When they had
done dinner, Don Felix said to Pacheco -- A thought has just
struck me. It would not be amiss for me to go to my aunt's a few
minutes before you; I will get to speak to my cousin in private,
and pry, if it be possible, into every fold and winding of her
heart, as far as your interests are concerned. Don Lewis just
chimed in with this idea, so that he suffered his friend to set
out first, and did not follow him till an hour afterwards. My
mistress availed herself so diligently of the interval, that she
was tricked out as a lady from heel to point before the arrival
of her lover. I beg pardon . . . . said the poor abused
inamorato, after having paid his compliments to Aurora and the
Duenna . . . . I took it for granted Don Felix would be here. You
will see him in a few seconds, answered Donna Kimena, he is
writing in my closet. Pacheco was easily put off with the excuse,
and found his time pass cheerfully in conversation with the
ladies. And yet, notwithstanding the presence of all his soul
held dear, it seemed very strange that hour after hour glided
away but no Mendoza stepped forth from the closet! He could not
help remarking, that the gentleman's correspondence must be
unusually voluminous, when Aurora's features all at once assumed
the broader contour of a laugh, with a delightfully provoking
question to Don Lewis --  Is it possible that love can be so
blind as not to detect the glaring imposition by which it has
been deluded? Has my real self made so faint an impression on
your senses, that a flaxen peruke and a pencilled eyebrow could
carry the farce to such a height as this? But the masquerade is
over now. Pacheco, continued she, resuming an air of gravity; you
are to learn that Don Felix de Mendoza and Aurora de Guzman are
but one and the same person.

It was not enough to discover to him all the springs and
contrivances by which he had been duped; she confessed the
motives of tender partiality that led her to the attempt, and 
detailed the progress of the plot to the winding up of the
catastrophe. Don Lewis scarcely knew whether to be most
astonished or delighted at the recital; at my mistress's feet he
thus uttered the transports of his fond applause -- Ah! lovely
Aurora, can I believe myself indeed the happy mortal on whom your
favours have been so lavished? What can I do to make you amends
for them? My affection, were this life eternal, could scarcely
pay the price. These pretty speeches were followed by a thousand
others of the same quality and texture; after which the lovers
descended a little nearer to common sense, and began planning the
rational and human means of arriving at the accomplishment of
their wishes. It was resolved that we should set out without loss
of time for Madrid, where marriage was to drop the curtain on the
last act of our comedy. This purpose was executed in the spirit
of impatience which conceived it; so that Don Lewis was united to
my mistress in a fortnight, and the nuptial ceremonies were
graced with the usual accompaniments of music, feasting, balls,
and rejoicings, without either end or respite.



CH. VII -- Gil Blas leaves his place and goes into the service of
Don Gonzales Pacheco.


THREE weeks after marriage, my mistress bethought herself of
rewarding the services I had rendered her. She made me a present
of a hundred pistoles, telling me at the same time --  Gil Blas,
my good fellow, it is not that I mean to turn you away, for you
have my free leave to stay here as long as you please; but my
husband has an uncle, Don Gonzales Pacheco, who wants you very
much for a valet-de-chambre. I have given you so excellent a
character, that he would let me have no peace till I consented to
part with you. He is a very worthy old nobleman, so that you will
be quite in your element in his family.

I thanked Aurora for all her kindness; and, as my occupation was
over about her, I so much the more readily accepted the post that
offered, as it was  merely a transfer from one branch of the
Pachecos to another. One morning, therefore, I called on the
illustrious Don Gonzales with a message from the bride. He ought
at least to have over-slept himself; for he was in bed at near
noon. When I went into his chamber, a page had just brought him a
basin of soup which he was taking. The dotard cherished his
whiskers, or rather tortured them with curling-papers; though his
eyes were sunk in their sockets, his complexion pale, and his
visage emaciated. This was one of those old codgers who have been
a little whimsical or so in their youth, and have made poor
amends for their freedoms by the discretion of their riper age.
His reception of me was affable enough, with an assurance that if
my attachment to him kept pace with my fidelity to his niece, my
condition should not be worse than that of my fellows. I promised
to place him in my late mistress's shoes, and became the working
partner in a new firm.

A new firm it undoubtedly was, and heaven knows we had a strange
head of the house. The resurrection of Lazarus was an ordinary
event compared to his getting up. Imagine to yourself a long bag
of dry bones, a mere skeleton, a dissection, an anatomy of a man;
a study in osteology! As for the legs, three or four pair of
stockings one over the other, had no room to make any figure upon
them. In addition to the foregoing, this mummy before death was
asthmatic, and therefore obliged to divide the little breath he
had between his cough and his loquacity. He breakfasted on
chocolate. On the strength of that refreshment, he ventured to
call for pen, ink, and paper, and to write a short note, which he
sealed and sent to its address by the page who had administered
the broth. But this henceforth will be your office, my good lad,
said he, as he turned his haggard eyes upon me; all my little
concerns will be in your hands, and especially those in which
Donna Euphrasia takes an interest. That lady is an enchanting
young creature, with whom I am distractedly in love, and by whom,
though I say it who should not say it, I am met with all the
mutual ardour of inextinguishable and unutterable passion.

Heaven defend us! thought I within myself: good now! if this old
antidote to rapture can fancy himself an object on which the fair
should waste their sweets, is it any wonder that among our young
folks each fancies himself the Adonis, for whom every Venus
pines? Gil Blas, pursued he with a chuckle, this very day will I
take you to this abode of pleasure; it is my house of call almost
every evening for a bit of supper. You will be quite petrified at
her modest appearance, and the rigid propriety of her behaviour.
Far from taking after those little wanton vagrants, who are hey-
go-mad after striplings, and give themselves up to the
fascinations of exterior appearance, she has a proper insight
into things, staid, ripe, and judicious: what she wants is the
bonâ fide spirit and discretion of a man; a lover who has served
an apprenticeship to his trade, in preference to all the flashy
fellows of the modern school. This is but an epitome of the
panegyric, which the noble dupe Don Gonzales pronounced upon his
mistress. He burdened himself with the task of proving her a
compendium of all human perfection; but the lecture was little
calculated for the conviction of the hearer. I had attended an
experimental course among the actresses; and had always found
that the elderly candidates had been plucked in their amours.
Yet, as a matter of courtesy, it was impossible not to put on the
semblance of giving implicit credit to my master's veracity; I
even added chivalry to courtesy, and threw down my glove on
Euphrasia's penetration and the correctness of her taste. My
impudence went the length of asserting, that it was impossible
for her to have selected a better-provided crony. The grown-up
simpleton was not aware that I was fumigating his nostrils at the
expense of his addled brain; on the contrary, he bristled at my
praises; so true is it, that a flatterer may play what game he
likes against the pigeons of high life! They let you look over
their hand, and then wonder that you beat them.

The old crawler, having scribbled through his billet-doux,
restrained the luxuriance of a straggling hair or two with his
tweezers; then bathed his eyes in the nostrum of some perfumer to
give them a brilliancy which their natural gum would have
eclipsed. His ears were to be picked and washed, and his hands to
be cleansed from the effects of his other ablutions; and the
labours of the toilette were to be closed, by pencilling every
remaining hair in the disforested domain of his whiskers,
pericranium, and eyebrows. No old dowager, with a purse to buy a
second husband, ever took more pains to assure herself by the
cultivation of her charms, that the person and not the fortune
should be the object of attraction. The assassin stab of time was
parried by the quart and tierce of art. Just as he had done
making himself up, in came another old fogram of his
acquaintance, by name the Count of Asumar. This genius made no
secret of his grey locks; leant upon a stick, and seemed to plume
himself on his venerable age instead of wishing to appear in the
hey-day of his prime. Signor Pacheco, said he as he came in, I am
come to take pot-luck with you to-day. You are always welcome,
count, rejoined my master. No sooner said than done! they
embraced with a thousand grimaces, took their seats opposite to
one another, and began chatting till dinner was served.

Their conversation turned at first upon a bull-feast which had
taken place a few days before. They talked about the cavaliers,
and who among them had displayed most dexterity and vigour;
whereupon the old count, like another Nestor, whom present events
furnish with a topic of expatiating on the past, said with a
deep-drawn sigh: Alas! where will you meet with men now-a-days,
fit to hold a candle to my contemporaries? The public diversions
are a mere bauble, to what they were when I was a young man. I
could not help chuckling in my sleeve at my good lord of Asumar's
whim; for he did not stop at the handywork of human invention.
Would you believe it? At table, when the fruit was brought in, at
the sight of some very fine peaches, this ungrateful consumer of
the earth's produce exclaimed: In my time, the peaches were of a
much larger size than they are now; but nature sinks lower and
lower from day to day. If that is the case, said Don Gonzales
with a sneer, Adam's hot house fruit must have been of a most
unwieldy circumference.

The Count of Asumar staid till quite evening with my master, who
had no sooner got rid of him, than he sallied forth with me in
his train. We went to Euphrasia's, who lived within a stone's
throw of our house, and found her lodged in a style of the first
elegance. She was tastefully dressed, and for the youthfulness of
her air might have been taken to be in her teens, though thirty
bonny summers at least had poured their harvests in her lap. She
had often been reckoned pretty, and her wit was exquisite.
Neither was she one of your brazen-faced jilts, with nothing but
flimsy balderdash in their talk, and a libertine forwardness in
their manners: here was modesty of carriage as well as propriety
of discourse; and she threw out her little sallies in the most
exquisite manner, without seeming to aspire beyond natural good
sense. Oh heaven! said I, is it possible that a creature of so
virtuous a stamp by nature should have abandoned herself to
vicious courses for a livelihood? I had taken it for granted,
that all women of light character carried the mark of the beast
upon their foreheads. It was a surprise therefore to see such
apparent rectitude of conduct; neither did it occur to me that
these hacks for all customers could go at any pace, and assume
the polish of well-bred society, to impose upon their cullies of
the higher ranks. What if a lively petulance should be the order
of the day? they are lively and petulant. Should modesty take its
turn in the round of fashion, nothing can exceed their outward
show of prudent and delicate reserve. They play the comedy of
love in many masks; and are the prude, the coquette, or the
virago, as they fall in with the quiz, the coxcomb, or the bully.

Don Gonzales was a gentleman and a man of taste; he could not
stomach those beauties who call a spade a spade. Such were not
for his market; the rites of Venus must be consummated in the
temple of Vesta. Euphrasia had got up her part accordingly, and
proved by her performance that there is no comedy like that of
real life. I left my master, like another Numa with his Egeria,
and went down into a hall, where whom should fortune throw in my
way but an old abigail, whom I had formerly known as maid-of-all-
work to an actress? The recognition was mutual. So! well met once
more, Signor Gil Blas, said she. Then you have turned off
Arsenia, just as I have parted with Constance. Yes, truly,
answered I, it is a long while ago since I went away, and
exchanged her service for that of a very different lady. Neither
the theatre nor the people about it are to my taste. I gave
myself my own discharge, without condescending to the slightest
explanation with Arsenia. You were perfectly in the right,
replied the new-found abigail, called Beatrice. That was pretty
much my method of proceeding with Constance. One morning early, I
gave in my accounts with a very sulky air; she took them from me
in moody silence, and we parted in a sort of well-bred dudgeon.

I am quite delighted, said I, that we have met again, where we
need not be ashamed of our employers. Donna Euphrasia looks for
all the world like a woman of fashion, and I am much deceived if
she has not reputation too. You are too clear-sighted to be
deceived, answered the old appendage to sin. She is of a good
family; and as for her temper, I can assure you it is 
unparalleled for evenness and sweetness. None of your termagant
mistresses, never to be pleased, but always grumbling and
scolding about everything, making the house ring with their
clack, and fretting poor servants to a thread, whose places, in
short, are a hell upon earth! I have not in all this time heard
her raise her voice on any occasion whatever. When things happen
not to be done exactly in her way, she sets them to rights
without any anger, nor does any of that bad language escape her
lips, of which some high-spirited ladies are so liberal. My
master, too, rejoined I, is very mild in his disposition; the
very milk of human kindness; and in this respect we are, between
ourselves, much better off than when we lived among the
actresses. A thousand times better, replied Beatrice; my life
used to be all bustle and distraction; but this place is an
actual hermitage. Not a creature darkens our doors but this
excellent Don Gonzales. You will be my only helpmate in my
solitude, and my lot is but too greatly blessed. For this long
time have I cherished an affection for you: and many a time and
oft have I begrudged that Laura the felicity of engrossing you
for her sweetheart; but in the end I hope to be even with her. If
I cannot boast of youth and beauty like hers, to balance the
account, I detest coquetry, and have all the constancy as well as
affection of a turtle-dove.

As honest Beatrice was one of those ladies who are obliged to
hawk their wares, and cheapen themselves for want of cheapeners
in the market, I was happily shielded from any temptation to
break the commandments. Nevertheless, it might not have been
prudent to let her see in what contempt her charms were held; for
which reason I forced my natural politeness so far, as to talk to
her in a style not to cut off all hope of my more serious
advances. I flattered myself then, that I had found favour in the
eyes of an old dresser to the stage: but pride was destined to
have a fall, even on so humble an occasion. The domestic
trickster did not sharpen her allurements, from any longing for
my pretty person; her design in subduing me to the little soft
god was to enlist me for the purposes of her mistress, to whom
she had sworn so passive an obedience, that she would have sold
her eternal self to the old chapman, who first set up the trade
of sin, rather than have disappointed her slightest wishes. My
vain conceit was sufficiently evident on the very next morning,
when I carried an Ovidian letter from my master to Euphrasia. The
lady gave me an affable
reception, and made a thousand pretty speeches, echoed from the
practised lips of her chambermaid. The expression of my
countenance was peculiarly interesting to the one: but that
within which passeth shew was the flattering theme of the other.
According to their account, the fortunate Don Gonzales had picked
up a treasure. In short, my praises ran so high, that I began to
think worse of myself than I had ever done in the whole course of
my life. Their motive was sufficiently obvious; but I was
determined to play at diamond cut diamond. The simper of a
simpleton is no bad countermine to the attack of a sharper. These
ladies under favour were of the latter description, and they soon
began to open their batteries.

Hark you, Gil Blas, said Euphrasia, fortune declares in your
favour if you do not balk her. Let us put our heads together, my
good friend. Don Gonzales is old, and a good deal shaken in
constitution; so that a very little fever, in the hands of a very
great doctor, would carry him to a better place. Let us take time
by the forelock, and ply our arts so busily as to secure to me
the largest slice of his effects. If I prosper, you shall not 
starve, I promise you; and my bare word is a better security than
all the deeds and conveyances of all the lawyers in Madrid.
Madam, answered I, you have but to command me. Give me my
commission on your muster-roll, and you shall have no reason to 
complain either of my cowardice or contumacy. So be it, then,
replied she. You must watch your master, and bring me an account
of all his comings and goings. When you are chatting together in
his more familiar moments, never fail to lead the conversation on
the subject of our sex; and then by an artful, but seemingly
natural transition, take occasion to say all the good you can
invent of me. Ring Euphrasia in his ears till all the house re-
echoes. I would counsel you besides to keep a wary eye on all
that passes in the Pacheco family. If you catch any relation of
Don Gonzales sneaking about him, with a design on the
inheritance, bring me word instantly: that is all you have to do,
and trust me for sinking, burning, and destroying him in less
than no time. I have ferreted out the weak side of all your
master's relations long ago; they are each of them to be made
ridiculous in some shape or other; so that the nephews and
cousins, after sitting to me for their portraits, are already
turned with their faces to the wall.

It was evident by these instructions, with many more to the same
time and tune, that Euphrasia was one of those ladies whose
partialities all lean to the side of elderly inamoratos, with
more money than wit. Not long before, Don Gonzales, who could
refuse nothing to the tender passion, had sold an estate; and she
pocketed the cash. Not a day passed, but she got some little
personal remembrance out of him; and besides all this, a corner
of his will was the ultimate object of her speculation. I
affected to engage hand over head in their infamous plot; and if
I must confess all without mental reservation, it was almost a
moot point, on my return home, on which side of the cause I
should take a brief. There was on either a profitable
alternative; whether to join in fleecing my master, or to merit
his gratitude by rescuing him from the plunderers. Con science,
however, seemed to have some little concern in the determination;
it was quite ridiculous to choose the by-path of villany when
there was a better toll to be taken on the highway of honesty.
Besides, Euphrasia had dealt too much in generals; an
arithmetical definition of so much for so much has more meaning
in it than "all the wealth of the Indies;" and to this shrewd
reflection, perhaps, was owing my uncorrupted probity. Thus did I
resolve to signalize my zeal in the service of Don Gonzales, in
the persuasion that if I was lucky enough to disgust the
worshipper by befouling his idol, it would turn to very good
account. On a statement of debtor and creditor between the right
and the wrong side of the action, the money balance was visibly
in favour of virtue, not to mention the delights of a fair and
irreproachable character.

If vice so often assumes the semblance of its contrary, why
should not hypocrisy now and then change sides for variety? I
held myself up to Euphrasia for a thorough swindler. She was dupe
enough to believe that I was incessantly talking of her to my
master; and thereupon I wove a tissue of frippery and falsehood,
which imposed on her for sterling truth. She had so completely
given herself up to my insinuations, as to believe me her
convert, her disciple, her confederate. The better still to carry
on this fraud upon fraud, I affected to languish for Beatrice;
and she, in ecstacy at her age to see a young fellow at her
skirts, did not much trouble herself about my sincerity, if I did
but play my part with vigour and address. When we were in the
presence of our princesses, my master in the parlour and myself
in the kitchen, the effect was that of two different pictures,
but of the same school. Don Gonzales, dry as touchwood, with all
its inflammability, and nothing but its smother, seemed a fitter
subject for extreme unction than for amorous parley; while my
little pet, in proportion to the violence of my flame, niggled,
nudged, toyed, and romped, like a school-girl in vacation; and no
wonder she knew her lesson so pat, for the old coquette had been
upwards of forty years in the form. She had finished her studies
under certain professors of gallantry, whose art of pleasing
becomes the more critical by practice; till they die under the
accumulated experience of two or three generations.

It was not enough for me to go every evening with my master to
Euphrasia's: it was sometimes my lounge even in day-time. But let
me pop my head in at what hour I would, that forbidden creature
man was never there, nor even a woman of any description, that
might not be just as easily expressed as understood. There was
not the least loop-hole for a paramour! a circumstance not a
little perplexing to one who could not readily believe, that so
pretty a bale of goods could submit to a strict monopoly, by such
a dealer as Don Gonzales. This opinion undoubtedly was formed on
a near acquaintance with female nature, as will be apparent in
the sequel; for the fair Euphrasia, while waiting for my master's
translation, fortified herself with patience in the arms of a
lover, with some little fellow-feeling for the frailties of her
age.

One morning I was carrying, according to custom, a note to this
peerless pattern of perfection. There certainly were, or I was
not standing in the room, the feet of a man ensconced behind the
tapestry. Out slunk I, just as if I had no eyes in my head; yet,
though such a discovery was nothing but what might have been
expected, neither was the piper to be paid out of my pocket, my
feelings were a good deal staggered at the breach of faith. Ah!
traitress, exclaimed I with virtuous indignation, abandoned
Euphrasia! Not satisfied to humbug a silly old gentleman with a
tale of love, you share his property in your person with another,
and add profligacy to dissimulation! But to be sure, on after-
thoughts, I was but a greenhorn, when I took on so for such a
trivial occurrence! It was rather a subject for mirth than for
moral reflection, and perfectly justified by the way of the
world; the languid, embargoed commerce of my master's amorous
moments had need be flipped by a trade in some more merchantable
wares. At all events it would have been better to have held my
tongue, than to have laid hold on such an opportunity of playing
the faithful servant. But instead of tempering my zeal with
discretion, nothing would serve the turn but taking up the wrongs
of Don Gonzales in the spirit of chivalry. On this high
principle, I made a circumstantial report of what I had seen,
with the addition of the attempt made by Euphrasia to seduce me
from my good faith. I gave it in her own words without the least
reserve, and put him in the way of knowing all that was to be
known of his mistress. He was struck all in a heap by my
intelligence, and a faint flash of indignation on his faded cheek
seemed to give security, that the lady's infidelity would not go
unpunished. Enough, Gil Blas, said he, I am infinitely obliged by
your attachment to my service, and your probity is very
acceptable to me. I will go to Euphrasia this very moment. I will
overwhelm her with reproaches, and break at once with the
ungrateful creature. With these words, he actually bent his way
to the subject of his anger; and dispensed with my attendance,
from the kind motive of sparing me the awkwardness which my
presence during their explanation would have occasioned to my
feelings.

I longed for my master's return with all the impatience of an
interested person. There could not be a doubt but that with his
strong grounds of complaint, he would return completely
disentangled from the snares of his nymph. In this thought I
extolled and magnified myself for my good deed. What could be
more flattering than the thanks of the kindred who were naturally
to inherit after Don Gonzales, when they should be informed that
their relative was no longer the puppet of a figure-dance so
hostile to their interests? It was not to be supposed but that
such a friend would be remembered, and that my merits would at
last be distinguished from those of other serving-men, who are
usually more disposed to encourage their masters in
licentiousness, than to draw them off to habits of decency. I was
always of an aspiring temper, and thought to have passed for the
Joseph or the Scipio of the servants' hall; but so fascinating an
idea was only to be indulged for an hour or two. The founder of
my fortunes came home. My friend, said he, I have had a very
sharp brush with Euphrasia. She insists on it that you have
trumped up a cock-and-bull story. If their word is to be taken,
you are no better than an impostor, a hireling in the pay of my
nephews, for whose sake you have set all your wits at work to
bring about a quarrel between her and me. I have seen the real
tears, made of water, run down in floods from her poor dear eyes.
She has vowed to me as solemnly as if I had been her confessor,
that she never made any overtures to you in her life, and that
she does not know what man is. Beatrice, who seems a simple,
innocent sort of girl, is exactly in the same story, so that I
could not but believe them and be pacified, whether I would or
no.

How then, sir? interrupted I, in accents of undissembled sorrow,
do you question my sincerity? Do you distrust . . . . No, my good
lad, interrupted he again in his turn, I will do you ample
justice. I do not suspect you of being in league with my nephews.
I am satisfied that all you have done has been for my good, and
own myself much obliged to you for it; but appearances are apt to
mislead, so that perhaps you did not see in reality what you took
it into your head that you saw; and in that case, only consider
yourself how offensive your charge must be to Euphrasia. Yet let
that be as it will, she is a creature whom I cannot help loving
in spite of my senses; so that the sacrifice she demands must be
made, and that sacrifice is no less than your dismission. I
lament it very much, my poor dear Gil Blas, and if that will be
any satisfaction to you, my consent was wrung from me most
unwillingly; but there was no saying nay. With one thing,
however, you may comfort yourself, you shall not be sent away
with empty pockets. Nay, more, I mean to turn you over to a lady
of my acquaintance, where you will live to your liking.

I was not a little mortified to find all my noble acts and
motives end in my own confusion. I gave a left-handed blessing to
Euphrasia, and wept over the weakness of Don Gonzales, to be so
foolishly infatuated by her. The kind hearted old gentleman felt
within himself that in turning me adrift at the peremptory demand
of his mistress, he was not performing the most manly action of
his life. For this reason, as a set-off against his hen-pecked
cowardice, and that I might the more easily swallow this bitter
dose, he gave me fifty ducats, and took me with him next morning
to the Marchioness of Chaves, telling that lady before my face,
that I was a young man of unexceptionably good character, and
very high in his good graces, but that as certain family reasons
prevented him from continuing me on his own establishment, he
should esteem it as a favour if she would take me on hers. After
such an introduction, I was retained at once as her appendage,
and found myself, I scarcely knew how, established in another
household.



CH. VIII. -- The Marchioness of Chaves: her character, and that
of her company.


THE Marchioness of Chaves was a widow of five-and-thirty, tall,
handsome, and well-proportioned. She enjoyed an income of ten
thousand ducats, without the incumbrance of a nursery. I never
met with a lady of fewer words, nor one of a more solemn aspect.
Yet this exterior did not prevent her from being set up as the
cleverest woman in all Madrid. Her great assemblies, attended by
people of the first quality, and by men of letters who made a
coffee house of her apartments, contributed perhaps more than
anything she said to give her the reputation she had acquired.
But this is a point on which it is not my province to decide. I
have only to relate, as her historian, that her name carried with
it the idea of superior genius, and that her house was called, to
distinguish it from the ordinary societies in town, The
Fashionable Institution for Literature, Taste, and Science.

In point of fact, not a day passed, but there were readings
there, sometimes of dramatic pieces, and sometimes in other
branches of poetry. But the subjects were always selected from
the graver muses; wit and humour were held in the most sovereign
contempt. Comedy, however spirited; a novel, however pointed in
its satire or ingenious in its fable, such light productions as
these were treated as weak efforts of the brain without the
slightest claim to patronage; whereas on the contrary the most
microscopical work in the serious style, whether ode, pastoral,
or sonnet, was trumpeted to the skies as the most illustrious
effort of a learned and poetical age. It not unfrequently fell
out, that the public reversed the decrees of this chancery for
genius: nay, they had sometimes the gross ill-breeding to hiss
the very pieces which had been sanctioned by this court of
criticism.

I was chief manager of the establishment, and my office consisted
in getting the drawing-room ready to receive the company, in
setting the chairs in order for the gentlemen, and the sofas for
the ladies: after which I took my station on the landing-place to
bawl out the names of the visitors as they came up stairs, and
usher them into the circle. The first day, an old piece of family
furniture, who was stationed by my side in the ante-chamber, gave
me their description with some humour, after I had shown them
into the room. His name was Andrew Molina. He had a good deal of
mother's wit, with a flowing vein of satire, much gravity of
sarcasm, and a happy knack at hitting off characters. The first
corner was a bishop. I roared out his lordship's name, and as
soon as he was gone in, my nomenclator told me --  That prelate
is a very curious gentleman. He has some little influence at
court; but wants to persuade the world that he has a great deal.
He presses his service on every soul he comes near, and then
leaves them completely in the lurch. One day he met with a
gentleman in the presence-chamber who bowed to him. He laid hold
of him, and squeezing his hand, assured him, with an inundation
of civilities, that he was altogether devoted to his lordship.
For goodness' sake, do not spare me; I shall not die in my bed
without having first found an opportunity of making you my
debtor. The gentleman returned his thanks with all becoming
expressions of gratitude, and when they were at some distance
from one another, the obsequious churchman said to one of his
attendants in waiting -- I ought to know that man; I have some
floating, indistinct idea of having seen him somewhere.

Next after the bishop, came the son of a grandee. When I had
introduced him into my lady's room -- This nobleman, said Molina,
is also an original in his way. You are to take notice that he
often pays a visit, for the express purpose of talking over some
urgent business with the friend on whom he calls, and goes away
again without once thinking on the topic he came solely to
discuss. But, added my showman on the sight of two ladies, here
are Donna Angela de Penafiel and Donna Margaretta de Montalvan.
This pair have not a feature of resemblance to each other. Donna
Margaretta prides herself on her philosophical acquirements; she
will hold her head as high as the most learned head among the
doctors of Salamanca, nor will the wisdom of her conceit ever
give up the point to the best reasons they can render. As for
Donna Angela, she does not affect the learned lady, though she
has taken no unsuccessful pains in the improvement of her mind.
Her manner of talking is rational and proper, her ideas are novel
and ingenious, expressed in polite, significant, and natural
terms. This latter portrait is delightful, said I to Molina; but
the other, in my opinion, is scarcely to be tolerated in the
softer sex. Not over bearable indeed! replied he with a sneer:
even in men it does but expose them to the lash of satire. The
good marchioness herself, our honoured lady, continued he, she
too has a sort of a philosophical looseness. There will be fine
chopping of logic there to-day! God grant the mysteries of
religion may not be invaded by these disputants.

As he was finishing this last sentence, in came a withered bit of
mortality, with a grave and crabbed look. My companion shewed him
no mercy. This fellow, said he, is one of those pompous,
unbending spirits who think to pass for men of profound genius,
under favour of a few common-places extracted out of Seneca; yet
they are but shallow coxcombs when one comes to examine them
narrowly. Then followed in the train a spruce figure, with
tolerable person and address, to say nothing of a troubled air
and manner, which always supposes a plentiful stock of self-
sufficiency. I inquired who this was. A dramatic poet! said
Molina. He has manufactured an hundred thousand verses in his
time, which never brought him in the value of a groat; but as a
set-off against his metrical failure, he has feathered his nest
very warmly by six lines of humble prose: you will wonder by what
magic touch a fortune could be made    

And so I did; but a confounded noise upon the staircase put verse
and prose completely out of my head. Good again! exclaimed my
informer: here is the licentiate Campanario. He is his own
harbinger before ever he makes his appearance. He sets out from
the very street door in a continued volley of conversation, and
you hear how the alarm is kept up till he makes his retreat. In
good sooth, the vaulted roof re-echoed with the organ of the
thundering licentiate, who at length exhibited the case in which
the pipes were contained. He brought a bachelor of his
acquaintance by way of accompaniment, and there was not a sotto
voce passage during the whole visit. Signor Campanario, said I to
Molina, is to all appearance a man of very fine conversation.
Yes, replied my sage instructor, the gentleman has his lucky
hits, and a sort of quaintness that might pass for humour; he
does very well in a mixed company. But the worst of it is, that
incessant talking is one of his most pardonable errors. He is a
little too apt to borrow from himself; and as those who are
behind the scenes are not to be dazzled by the tinsel of the
property-man, so we know how to separate a certain volubility and
buffoonery of manner from sterling wit and sense. The greater
part of his good things would be thought very bad ones, if
submitted, without their concomitant grimaces, to the ordeal of a
jest book.

Other groups passed before us, and Molina touched them with his
wand. The marchioness too came in for a magic rap over the
knuckles. Our lady patroness, said he, is better than might be
expected for a female philosopher. She is not dainty in her
likings; and bating a whim or two, it is no hard matter to give
her satisfaction, Wits and women of quality seldom approach so
near the atmosphere of good sense; and for passion, she scarcely
knows what it is. Play and gallantry are equally in her black
books: dear conversation is her first and sole delight. To lead
such a life would be little better than penance to the common run
of ladies. Molina's character of my mistress established her at
once in my good graces. And yet, in the course of a few days, I
could not help suspecting that, though not dainty in her likings,
she knew what passion was, and that a foul copy of gallantry
delighted her more than the fairest conversation.

One morning, during the mysteries of the toilette, there
presented himself to my notice a little fellow of forty,
forbidding in his aspect, more filthy if possible than Pedro de
Moya the bookworm, and verging in no marketable measure towards
deformity. He told me he wanted to speak with my lady
marchioness. On whose business? quoth I. On my own, quoth he,
somewhat snappishly. Tell her I am the gentleman; . . . . she
will understand you; . . . . about whom she was talking yesterday
with Donna Anna de Velasco. I went before him into my lady's
apartment, and gave in his name. The marchioness all at once
shrieked out her satisfaction, and ordered me to show him in. It
was not courtesy enough to point to a chair, and bid him sit
down: but the attendants, forsooth, her own maids about her
person were to withdraw, so that the little hunchback, with
better luck than falls to the lot of many a taller man, had the
field entirely to himself, as lord paramount. As for the girls
and myself, we could not help tittering a little at this
uncouthly concerted duet, which lasted nearly an hour: when my
patroness dismissed his little lordship, with such a profusion of
farewells and God-be-with-you's, as sufficiently evinced her
thankfulness for the entertainment she had received.

The conversation had, in fact, been so edifying, that in the
afternoon she seized a private opportunity of whispering in my
ear -- Gil Blas, when the short gentleman comes again, you may
shew him up the back stairs; there is no need of parading him
along a line of staring servants. I did as I was ordered. When
this epitome of humanity knocked at the door, and that hour was
no further off than the next morning, we threaded all the bye
passages to the place of assignation. I played the same modest
part two or three times in the very innocence of my soul, without
the most distant guess that the material system could form any
part of their philosophy. But that hound-like snuff at an ill
construction, with which the devil has armed the noses of the
most charitable, put me on the scent of a very whimsical game,
and I concluded either that the marchioness had an odd taste, or
that crookback courted her as proxy to a better man.

Faith and troth, thought I, with all the impertinence of a hasty
opinion, if my mistress really likes a handsome fellow behind the
curtain, all is well; I forgive her her sins: but if she is stark
mad for such a monkey as this, to say the truth, there will be
little mercy for her on male or female tongues. But how foully
did I defame my honoured patroness! The genius of magic had
perched herself upon the little conjurer's protuberant shoulder;
and his skill having been puffed off to the marchioness, who was
just the right food for such jugglers and their tricks, she held
private conferences with him. Under his tuition she was to
command wealth and treasure, to build castles in the air, to
remove from place to place in an instant, to reveal future
events, to tell what is done in far countries, to call the dead
out of their graves, and terrify the world with many miracles.
Seriously, and to give him his deserts, the scoundrel lived on
the folly of the public; and it has been confidently asserted,
that ladies of fashion have not in all ages and countries been
exempt from the credulity of their inferiors.



CH. IX. -- An incident that parted Gil Blas and the Marchioness
of Chaves. The subsequent destination of the former.


FOR six months I lived with the Marchioness of Chaves, and, as it
must be admitted, on the fat of the land. But fate, who thrusts
footmen as well as heroes into the world, with herself tied about
their necks, gave me a jog to be gone, and swore that I should
stay no longer in that family or in Madrid. The adfsventure by
which this decree was announced shall be the subject of the
ensuing narrative.

In my mistress's female squad there was a nymph named Portia. To
say nothing of her youth and beauty, it was her meek demeanour
and good repute that captivated me, who had yet to learn that
none but the brave deserves the fair. The marchioness's
secretary, as proud as a prime minister, and as jealous as the
Grand Turk, was caught in the same trap as myself. No sooner did
he cast an unlucky squint at my advances, than, without waiting
to see how Portia might chance to fancy them, he determined pell-
mell to have a tilt with me. To forward this ghostly enterprise,
he gave me an appointment one morning in a place sadly impervious
to all seasonable interruption. Yet as he was a little go-by-the-
ground, scarcely up to my shoulders, and apparently of feeble
frame, he did not look like a very dangerous antagonist; so away
I went with some little courage to the appointed spot. Thinking
to come off with flying colours, I anticipated the effect of my
bravery on the heart of Portia; but as it turned out, I was
gathering my laurels before they had budded. The little
secretary, who had been practising for two or three years at the
fencing-school, disarmed me like a very baby, and holding the
point of his sword up to my throat, Prepare thyself, said he, to
balance thine accounts with this world, and open a correspondence
with the next, or give me thy rascally word to leave the
Marchioness of Chaves this very day, and never more to think of
my Portia. I gave him my rascally word, and was honest enough not
to think of breaking it. There was an awkwardness in shewing my
face before the servants of the family, after having been
worsted; and especially before the high and mighty princess who
had been the theme of our tournament. I only returned home to get
together my baggage and wages, and on that very day set off
towards Toledo, with a purse pretty well lined, and a knapsack at
my back with my wardrobe and moveables. Though my rascally word
was not given to abandon the purlieus of Madrid, I considered it
as a matter of delicacy to disappear, at least for a few seasons,
My resolution was to make the tour of Spain, and to halt first at
one town and then at another. My ready money, thought I, will
carry me a good way; I shall not call about me very prodigally.
When my stock is exhausted, I can but go into service again. A
lad of my versatility will find places in plenty, whenever it may
be convenient to look out for them.

It was particularly my wish to see Toledo: and I got thither
after three days' journey. My quarters were at a respectable
house of entertainment, where I was taken for a gentleman of some
figure, under favour of my best clothes, in which I did not fail
to bedizen myself. With the pick-tooth carelessness of a lounger,
the affectation of a puppy, and the pertness of a wit, it
remained with me to dictate the terms of an arrangement with some
very pretty women who infested that neighbourhood; but, as a hint
had been given me that the pocket was the high road to their good
graces, my amorous enthusiasm was a little flattered, and, as it
was no part of my plan to domesticate myself in any one place,
after having seen all the lions at Toledo, I started one morning
with the dawn, and took the road to Cuença, intending to go to
Arragon. On the second day I went into an inn which std open to
receive me by the road side. Just as I was beginning to recruit
the carnal department of my nature, in came a party belonging to
the Holy Brotherhood. These gentlemen called for wine, and set in
for a drinking bout. Over their cups they were conning the
description of a young man, whom they had orders to arrest. The
spark, said one of them, is not above three-and-twenty: be has
long black hair, is well grown, with an aquiline nose, and rides
a bay horse.

I heard their talk without seeming to be a listener; and, in
fact, did not trouble my head much about it. They remained in
their quarters, and I pursued my journey. Scarcely had I gone a
quarter of a mile, before I met a young gentleman on horseback,
as personable as need be, and mounted as described by the
officers. Faith and truth, thought I within myself, this is the
very identical man. Black hair and an aquiline nose! One cannot
help doing a good office when it comes in one's way. Sir, said I,
give me leave to ask you whether you have not some disagreeable
business on your hands? The young man, without returning any
answer, looked at me from head to foot, and seemed startled at my
question. I assured him it was not wanton curiosity that induced
me to address him. He was satisfied of that when I related all I
had heard at the inn. My unknown benefactor, said he, I will not
deny to you that I have reason to believe myself actually the
person of whom the officers are in quest: therefore I shall take
another road to avoid them. In my opinion, answered I, it would
be better to look out for a spot where you may be in safety, and
under shelter from a storm which is brewing, and will soon pour
down upon our heads. Without loss of time we discovered and made
for a row of trees, forming a natural avenue, which led us to the
foot of a mountain, where we found an hermitage.

There was a large and deep grotto which time had worn away into
the heart of the rock; and the hand of man had added a rude front
built of pebbles and shell-work, covered all over with turf: The
adjacent grounds were strewed with a thousand sorts of flowers,
which scattered their perfume; and one was pleased to see hard by
the grotto, a small fissure in the mountain, whence a spring
rippled with a tinkling noise, and poured its pellucid stream
along the meadow. At the entrance of this solitary abode stood a
venerable hermit, seemingly weighed down with years. He supported
himself with one hand upon a staff, and held a rosary of large
beads with the other, composed of at least twenty rows. His head
was almost lost in a brown woollen cap with long ears; and his
beard, whiter than snow, swept down in aged majesty to his waist.
We advanced towards him. Father, said I, is it your pleasure to
allow us shelter from the threatening storm? Come in, my sons,
replied the hermit, after examining me attentively; this
hermitage is at your service, to occupy it during pleasure. As
for your horse, added he, pointing to the court-yard of his
mansion, he will be very well off there. My companion disposed of
the animal accordingly, and we followed the old man into the
grotto.

No sooner had we got in than a heavy rain fell, with a terrific
storm of thunder and lightning. The hermit threw himself upon his
knees before a consecrated image, fastened to the wall, and we
followed the example of our host. Our devotions ceased with the
subsiding of the storm; but as the rain continued, though with
diminished violence, and night was not far distant, the old man
said to us -- My sons, you had better not pursue your journey in
such weather, unless your affairs are pressing. We answered with
one consent, that we had nothing to hinder us from staying there,
but the fear of incommoding him; but that if there was room for
us in the hermitage, we would thank him for a night's lodging.
You may have it without inconvenience, answered the hermit, at
least the inconvenience will be all your own. Your accommodation
will be rough, and your meal such as a recluse has to offer.

With this cordial welcome to a homely board, the holy personage
seated us at a little table, and set before us a few vegetables,
a crust of bread, and a pitcher of water. My sons, resumed he,
you behold my ordinary fare, but to day I will make a feast in
hospitality towards you. So saying, he fetched a little cheese
and some nuts, which he threw down upon the table. The young man,
whose appetite was not keen, felt but little tempted by his
entertainment. I perceive, said the hermit to him, that you are
accustomed to better tables than mine, or rather that sensuality
has vitiated your natural relish. I have been in the world like
you. The utmost ingenuity of the culinary art, whether to
stimulate or soothe the palate, was exerted by turns for my
gratification, But since I have lived in solitude, my taste has
recovered its simplicity. Now, vegetables, fruit, and milk, are
my greatest dainties; in a word, I keep an antediluvian table.

While he was haranguing after this fashion, the young man fell
into a deep musing. The hermit was aware of his inattention. My
son, said he, some thing weighs upon your spirits. May we not be
informed what disturbs you? Open your heart to me. Curiosity is
not my motive for questioning you, but charity, and a desire to
be of service. I am at a time of life to give advice, and you
perhaps are under circumstances to stand in need of it. Yes,
father, replied the gentleman with a sigh, I doubtless do stand
in need of it, and will follow yours, since you are so good as to
offer it; I cannot suppose there is any risk in unbosoming myself
to a man like you. No, my son, said the old man, you have nothing
to fear, it is under more stately roofs that confidences are
betrayed. On this assurance the cavalier began his story.



CH. X. -- The history of Don Alphonso and the fair Seraphina.


I WILL attempt no disguise from you, my venerable friend, nor
from this gentleman who completes my audience. After the
generosity of his conduct towards me, I should be in the wrong to
distrust him. You shall know my misfortunes from their beginning.
I am a native of Madrid, and came into the world mysteriously. An
officer of the German guard, Baron Steinbach by name, returning
home one evening, espied a bundle of fair linen at the foot of
his staircase. He took it up and carried it to his wife's
apartment, where it turned out to be a new-born infant, wrapped
up in very handsome swaddling-clothes, with a note containing an
assurance that it belonged to persons of condition, who would
come forward and own it at some future period; and the further
information that it had been baptized by the name of Alphonso. I
was that unfortunate stranger in the world, and this is all that
I know about myself. Whether honour or profligacy was the motive
of the exposure, the helpless child was equally the victim;
whether my unhappy mother wanted to get rid of me, to conceal an
habitual course of scandalous amours, or whether she had made a
single deviation from the path of virtue with a faithless lover,
and had been obliged to protect her fame at the expense of nature
and the maternal feelings.

However this might be, the Baron and his wife were touched by my
destitute condition, and resolved, as they had no children of
their own, to bring me up under the name of Don Alphonso. As I
grew in years and stature their attachment to me strengthened. My
manners, genteel before strangers and affectionate towards them,
were the theme of their fondest panegyric. In short, they loved
me as if I had been their own. Masters of every description were
provided for me. My education became their leading object; and
far from waiting impatiently till my parents should come forward,
they seemed, on the contrary, to wish that my birth might always
remain a mystery. As soon as the Baron thought me old enough to
bear arms, he sent me into the service. With my ensign's
commission, a genteel and suitable equipment was provided for me;
and, the more effectually to animate me in the career of glory,
my patron pointed out that the path of honour was open to every
adventurer, and that the renown of a warrior would be so much the
more creditable to me, as I should owe it to none but myself. At
the same time he laid open to me the circumstances of my birth,
which he had hitherto concealed. As I had passed for his son in
Madrid, and had actually thought myself so, it must be owned that
this communication gave me some uneasiness. I could not then, nor
can I even now, think of it without a sense of shame. In
proportion as the innate feelings of a gentleman bear testimony
to the birth of one, am I mortified at being rejected and
renounced by the unnatural authors of my being.

I went to serve in the Low Countries, but peace was concluded in
a short time; and Spain finding herself without assailants,
though not without assassins, I returned to Madrid, where I
received fresh marks of affection from the Baron and his wife.
Rather more than two months after my return, a little page came
into my room one morning, and presented me with a note couched 
nearly in the following terms --  " I am neither ugly nor
crooked, and yet you often see me at my window without the
tribute of a glance. This conduct is little in unison with the
spirit of your physiognomy, and so far stings me to revenge that
I will make you love me if possible."

On the perusal of this epistle, there could be no doubt but it
came from a widow, by name Leonora, who lived opposite our house,
and had the character of a very great coquette. Hereupon I
examined my little messenger, who had a mind to be on the reserve
at first, but a ducat in hand opened the floodgates of his
intelligence. He even took charge of an answer to his mistress,
confessing my guilt, and intimating that its punishment was far
advanced.

I was not insensible to a conquest even of this kind. For the
rest of the day home and my window-seat were the grand
attraction; and the lady seemed to have fallen in love with her
window-seat too. I madesignals. She returned them; and on the
very next day sent me word by her little Mercury, that if I would
be in the street on the following night between eleven and
twelve, I might converse with her at a window on the ground-
floor. Though I did not feel myself very much captivated by so
coming on a kind of widow, it was impossible not to send such an
answer as if I was; and a sort of amorous curiosity made me as
impatient as if I had really been in love. In the dusk of the
evening, I went sauntering up and down the Prado till the hour of
assignation. Before I could get to my appointment, a man mounted
on. a fine horse alighted near me, and coming up with a
peremptory air -- Sir, said he, are not you the son of Baron
Steinbach? I answered in the affirmative. You are the person
then, resumed he, who were to meet Leonora at her window to-
night? I have seen her letters and your answers, her page has put
them into my hands, and I have followed you this evening from
your own house hither, to let you know you have a rival whose
pride is not a little wounded at a competition with yourself in
an affair of the heart. It would be unnecessary to say more. We
are in a retired place, let us therefore draw, unless, to avoid
the chastisement in store for you, you will give me your word to
break off all connection with Leonora. Sacrifice in my favour all
your hopes and interest, or your life must be the forfeit. It had
been better, said I, to have ensured my generosity by good
manners, than to extort my compliance by menaces. I might have
granted to your request what I must refuse to this insolent
demand.

Well, then, resumed he, tying up his horse and preparing for the
encounter, let us settle our dispute like men. Little could a
person of my condition have stomached the debasement of a
request, to a man of your quality. Nine out of ten in my rank
would, under such circumstances, have taken their revenge on
terms of less honour but more safety. I felt myself exasperated
at this last insinuation, so that, seeing he had already drawn
his sword, mine did not linger in the scabbard. We fell on one
another with so much fury, that the engagement did not last long.
Whether his attack was made with too much heat, or my skill in
fencing was superior, he soon received a mortal wound. He
staggered, and dropped dead upon the spot. In such a situation,
having no alternative but an immediate escape, I mounted the
horse of my antagonist, and went off in the direction of Toledo.
There was no venturing to return to Baron Steinbach's, since,
besides the danger of the attempt, the narrative of my adventure
from my own mouth would only afflict him the more, so that
nothing was so eligible as an immediate decampment from Madrid.

Chewing the cud of my own melancholy reflection, I travelled
onwards the remainder of the night and all the next morning. But
about noon it became necessary to stop, both for the sake of my
horse and to avoid the insupportable fierceness of the mid-day
heat. I staid in a village till sun-set, and then, intending to
reach Toledo without drawing bit, went on my way. I had already
got two leagues beyond Ilescas, when, about midnight, a storm
like that of to day overtook me as I was jogging along the road.
There was a garden wall at some little distance, and I rode up to
it. For want of any more commodious shelter, my horse's station
and. my own were arranged, as comfortably as circumstances would
admit, near the door of a summer-house at the end of the wall,
with a balcony over it. Leaning against the door, I discovered it
to be open, owing, as I thought, to the negligence of the
servants. Having dismounted, less from curiosity than for the
sake of a better standing, as the rain had been very troublesome
under the balcony, I went into the lower part of the summer-
house, leading my horse by the bridle.

My amusement during the storm was in reconnoitring my quarters;
and though I had nothing to form an opinion by, but the lurid
gleams of the lightning, it was very evident that such a house
must belong to some family above the common. I was waiting
anxiously till the rain abated, to set forward again on my
journey; but a great light at a distance made me change my
purpose. Leaving my horse in the summer-house, with the
precaution of fastening the door, I made for the light, in the
assurance that they were not all gone to bed in the house, and
with the intention of requesting a lodging for the night. After
crossing several walks, I came to a saloon, and here too the door
was left open. On my entrance, from the magnificence so
handsomely displayed by the light of a fine crystal lustre, it
was easy to conclude that this must be the residence of some
illustrious nobleman. The pavement was of marble, the wainscot
richly carved and gilt, the proportions of architecture
tastefully preserved, and the ceiling evidently adorned by the
masterpieces of the first artists in fresco. But what
particularly engaged my attention was a great number of busts,
and those of Spanish heroes, supported on jasper pedestals, and
ranged round the saloon. There was opportunity enough for
examining all this splendour, since there was not even a foot-
fall, nor the shadow of any one gliding along the passage, though
my ears and eyes were incessantly on the watch for some
inhabitant of this fairy desert.

On one side of the saloon there was a door a-jar; by pushing it a
little wider open, I discovered a range of apartments, with a
light only in the furthest. What is to be done now? thought I
within myself. Shall I go back, or take the liberty of marching
forward, even to that chamber? To be sure, it was obvious that
the most prudent step would be to make good my retreat; but
curiosity was not to be repelled, or rather, to speak more truly,
my star was in its ascendant. Advancing boldly from room to room,
at length I reached that where the light was. It was a wax taper
on a marble slab, in a magnificent candlestick. The first object
that caught my eye was the gay furniture of this summer abode;
but soon afterwards, casting a look towards a bed, of which the
curtains were half undrawn on account of the heat, an object
arrested my attention, which engrossed it with the deepest
interest. A young lady, in spite of the thunderclaps which had
been pealing round her, was sleeping there, motionless and
undisturbed. I approached her very gently, and by the light of
the taper I had seized, a complexion and features the most
dazzling were submitted to my gaze. My spirits were all afloat at
the discovery. A sensation of transport and delight came over me;
but however my feelings might harass my own heart, my conviction
of her high birth checked every presumptuous hope, and awe
obtained a complete victory over desire. While I was drinking in
floods of adoration at the shrine of her beauty, the goddess of
my homage awoke.

You may well suppose her consternation, at seeing a man, an utter
stranger, in her bedchamber, and at midnight. She was terrified
at this strange appearance, and uttered a loud shriek. I did my
best to restore her composure, and throwing myself on my knees in
the humblest posture, Madam, said I, fear nothing. My business
here is not to hurt you. I was going on, but her alarm was so
great that she was incapable of hearing my excuses. She called
her woman with a most vehement importunity, and as she could get
no answer, she threw over her a thin night-gown at the foot of
the bed, rushed rapidly out of the room, and darted into the
apartments I had crossed, still calling her female establishment
about her, as well as a younger sister whom she had under her
care. I looked for nothing less than a posse of strapping footmen
who were likely, without hearing my defence, to execute summary
justice on so audacious a culprit; but by good luck, at least for
me, her cries were to no purpose; they only roused an old
domestic, who would have been but a sorry knight had any ravisher
or magician invaded her repose. Nevertheless, assuming somewhat
of courage from his presence, she asked me haughtily who I was,
by what inlet and to what purpose I had presumptuously gained
admission into her house. I began then to enter on my
exculpation, and had no sooner declared that the open door of the
summer-house in the garden had invited my entrance, than she
exclaimed as if thunderstruck -- Just heaven! what an idea darts
across my mind!

As she uttered these words, she caught at the wax light on the
table; then ran through all the apartments one after another,
without finding either her attendants or her sister. She
remarked, too, that all their personals and wardrobe were carried
off. With such a comment on her hasty suspicions, she came up to
me and said, in the hurried accent of suspense and perturbation:
Traitor! add not hypocrisy to your other crimes. Chance has not
brought you hither. You are in the train of Don Ferdinand de
Leyva, and are an accomplice in his guilt. But hope not to
escape, there are still people enough about me to secure you.
Madam, said I, do not confound me with your enemies. Don
Ferdinand de Leyva is a stranger to me; I do not even know who
you are. You see before you an outcast, whom an affair of honour
has compelled to fly from Madrid; and I swear by whatever is most
sacred among men, that had not a storm overtaken me, I should
never have set my foot over your threshold. Entertain, then, a
more favourable opinion of me. So far from suspecting me for an
accomplice in any plot against you, believe me ready to enlist in
your defence, and to revenge your wrongs. These last words, and
still more the sincere tone in which they were delivered,
convinced the lady of my innocence, and she seemed no longer to
look on me as her enemy; but if her anger abated it was only that
her grief might sway more absolutely. She began weeping most
bitterly. Her tears called forth my sympathy, and my affliction
was scarcely less poignant than her own, though the cause of this
contagious sorrow was still to be ascertained. Yet it was not
enough to mingle my tears with hers; in my impatience to become
her defender and avenger, an impulse of terrific fury came over
me. Madam, exclaimed I, what outrage have you sustained? Let me
know it, and your injuries are mine. Would you have me hunt out
Don Ferdinand, and stab him to the heart? Only tell me on whom
your justice would fall, and they shall suffer. You have only to
give the word. Whatever dangers, whatever certain evils may be
attendant on the execution of your orders, the unknown, whom you
thought to be in league with your enemies, will brave them all in
your cause.

This enraptured devotion surprised the lady, and stopped the
flowing of her tears, Ah! sir, said she, forgive this suspicion,
and attribute it to the blindness of my cruel fate. A nobility of
sentiment like this speaks at once to the heart of Seraphina: and
while it undeceives, makes me the less repine at a stranger being
witness of an affront offered to my family. Yes, I own my error,
and revolt not, unknown as you are, from your proffered aid. But
the death of Don Ferdinand is not what I require. Well, then,
madam, resumed I, of what nature are the services you would
enjoin me? Sir, replied Seraphina, the ground of my complaint is
this: Don Ferdinand de Leyva is enamoured of my sister Julia,
whom he met with by accident at Toledo, where we for the most
part reside. Three months since, he asked her in marriage of the
Count de Polan, my father, who refused his consent on account of
an old grudge subsisting between the families. My sister is not
yet fifteen, she must have been indiscreet enough to follow the
evil counsels of my woman, whom Don Ferdinand has doubtless
bribed; and this daring ruffian, advertised of our being alone at
our country-house, has taken the opportunity of carrying off
Julia. At least I should like to know what hiding-place he has
chosen to deposit her in, that my father and my brother, who have
been these two months at Madrid, may take their measures
accordingly. For heaven's sake, added she, give yourself the
trouble of examining the neighbourhood of Toledo, an act so
heinous cannot escape detection, and my family will owe you a
debt of ever lasting gratitude.

The lady was little aware how unseasonable an employment she was
thrusting upon me. My escape from Castile could not be too soon
effected; and yet how should such a reflection ever enter into
her head, when it was completely superseded in mine by a more
powerful suggestion? Delighted at finding myself important to the
most lovely creature in the universe, I caught at the commission
with eagerness, and promised to acquit myself of it with equal
zeal and industry. In fact, I did not wait for daybreak, to go
about fulfilling my engagement. A hasty leave of Seraphina gave
me occasion to beg her pardon for the alarm I had caused her, and
to assure her that she should speedily hear some what of my
adventure. I went out as I came in, but so wrapped up in
admiration of the lady, that it was palpable I was completely
caught. My sense of this truth was the more confirmed, by the
eagerness with which I embarked in  by the romantic, gaily-
coloured bubbles which my passion blew. It struck my fancy that
Seraphina, though engrossed by her affliction, had remarked the
hasty birth of my love, without being displeased at the
discovery. I even flattered myself that if I could furnish her
with any certain intelligence of her sister, and the business
should terminate in any degree to her satisfaction, my part in it
would be remembered to my advantage.

Don Alphonso broke the thread of his discourse at this passage,
and said to our aged host: I beg your pardon, father, if the
fullness of my passion should lead me to dilate too long upon
particulars, wearisome and uninteresting to a stranger. No, my
son, replied the hermit, such particulars are not wearisome: I am 
interested to know the state and progress of your passion for the
young lady you are speaking of; my counsels will be influenced by
the minute detail you are giving me.

With my fancy heated by these seductive images, resumed the young
man, I was two days hunting after Julia's ravisher: but in vain
were all the inquiries that could be made; by no means I could
devise was the least trace of him to be discovered. Deeply
mortified at the unsuccessful issue of my search, I bent my steps
back to Seraphina, whom I pictured to myself as overwhelmed with
uneasiness. Yet she was in better spirits than might have been
expected. She informed me that her success had been better than
mine; for she had learned how her sister was disposed of. She had
received a letter from Don Ferdinand himself, importing that
after being privately married to Julia, he had placed her in a
convent at Toledo. I have sent his letter to my father, pursued
Seraphina. I hope the affair may be adjusted amicably, and that a
solemn marriage will soon extinguish the feuds which have so long
kept our respective families at variance.

When the lady had thus informed me of her sister's fate, she
began making an apology for the trouble she had given me, as well
as the danger into which she might imprudently have thrown me, by
engaging my services in pursuit of a ravisher, without
recollecting what I had told her, that an affair of honour had
been the occasion of my flight. Her excuses were couched in such
flattering terms, as to convert her very oversight into an
obligation. As rest was desirable for me after my journey, she
conducted me into the saloon, where we sat down together. She
wore an undress gown of white taffety with black stripes, and a
little hat of the same materials with black feathers; which gave
me reason to suppose that she might be a widow. But she looked so
young, that I scarcely knew what to think of it.

If I was all impatient to get at her history, she was not less so
to know who I was. She besought me to acquaint her with my name,
not doubting, as she kindly expressed it, by my noble air, and
still more by the generous pity which had made me enter so warmly
into her interests, that I belonged to some considerable family.
The question was not a little perplexing. My colour came and
went, my agitation was extreme: and I must own that, with less
repugnance to the meanness of a falsehood than to the
acknowledgment of a disgraceful truth, I answered that I was the
son of Baron Steinbach, an officer of the German guard. Tell me,
likewise, resumed the lady, why you left Madrid. Before you
answer my question, I will insure you all my father's credit, as
well as that of my brother Don Gaspard. It is the least mark of
gratitude I can bestow on a gentleman who, for my service, has
neglected the preservation even of his own life. Without further
hesitation, I acquainted her with all the circumstances of my
rencounter: she laid the whole blame on my deceased antagonist,
and engaged to interest all her family in my favour.

When I had satisfied her curiosity, it seemed not unreasonable to
plead in favour of my own. I inquired whether she was maid, wife,
or widow. It is three years, answered she, since my father made
me marry Don Diego de Lara; and I have been a widow these fifteen
months. Madam, said I, by what misfortune were your wedded joys
so soon interrupted? I am going to inform you, sir, resumed the
lady, in return for the confidence you have reposed in me.

Don Diego de Lara was a very elegant and accomplished gentleman:
but, though his affection for me was extreme, and every day was
witness to some attempt at giving me pleasure, such as the most
impassioned and most tender lover puts in practice to win the
smile of her he loves; though he had a thousand estimable
qualities, my heart was untouched by all his merit. Love is not
always the offspring either of assiduity or desert. Alas! we are
often captivated at first sight by we know not whom, nor why, nor
how. To love, then, was not in my power. More disconcerted than
gratified by his repeated offices of tenderness, which I received
with a forced courtesy, but without real plea ure, if I accused
myself in secret of ingratitude, I still thought myself an object
as much of pity as of censure. To his unhappiness and my own, his
delicacy more than kept pace with his affection. Not an action or
a speech of mine, but he unravelled all its hidden motives, and
fathomed all my thoughts, almost before they arose. The inmost
recesses of my heart were laid open to his penetration. He
complained without ceasing of my indifference; and esteemed
himself only so much the more unfortunate, in not being able to
please me, as he was well assured that no rival stood in his way;
for I was scarcely sixteen years old; and, before he paid his
addresses to me, he had tampered with my women, who had assured
him that no one had hitherto attracted my attention. Yes,
Seraphina, he would often say, I could have been contented that
you had preferred some other to myself; and that there were no
more fatal cause of your insensibility. My attentions and your
own principles would get the better of such a juvenile
prepossession; but I despair of triumphing over your coldness,
since your heart is impenetrable to all the love I have lavished
on you. Wearied with the repetition of the same strain, I told
him that instead of disturbing his repose and mine by this excess
of delicacy, he would do better in trusting to the effects of
time. In fact, at my age, I could not be expected to enter into
the refinements of so sentimental a passion; and Don Diego should
have waited, as I warned him, for a riper period and more staid
reflection. But, finding that a whole year had elapsed, and that
he was no forwarder in my favour than on the first day, he lost
all patience, or rather, his brain became distracted. Affecting
to have important business at court, he took his leave, and went
to serve as a volunteer in the Low Countries; where he soon found
in the chances of war what he went to seek, the terminations of
his sufferings and of his life.

After the lady had finished her recital, her husband's uncommon
character became the topic of our discourse. We were interrupted
by the arrival of a courier, charged with a letter for Seraphina
from the Count De Polan. She begged my permission to read it; and
as she went on, I observed her to grow pale, and to become
dreadfully agitated. When she had finished, she raised her eyes
upward, heaved a long sigh, and her face was in a moment bathed
with her tears. Her sorrow sat heavily on my feelings. My spirits
were greatly disturbed; and, as if it were a forewarning of the
blow impending over my head, a death-like shudder crept through
my frame, and my faculties were all benumbed. Madam, said I, in
accents half choked with apprehension, may I ask of what dire
events that letter brings the tidings? Take it, sir, answered
Seraphina most dolefully, while she held out the letter to me.
Read for yourself what my father has written. Alas! you are but
too deeply concerned in the contents.

At these words, which made my blood run cold, I took the letter
with a trembling hand, and found in it the following
intelligence: "Your brother, Don Gaspard, fought yesterday at the
Prado. He received a small sword wound, of which he died this
day: and declared, before he breathed his last, that his
antagonist was the son of Baron Steinbach, an officer of the
German guard. As misfortunes never come alone, the murderer has
eluded my vengeance by flight, but wherever he may have concealed
himself, no pains shall be spared to hunt him out. I am going to
write to the magistrates all round the country, who will not fail
to take him into custody, if he passes through any one of the
towns in their jurisdiction, and by the notices I am going to
circulate, I hope to cut off his retreat in the country or at the
sea-ports. -- THE COUNT DE POLAN."

Conceive into what a ferment this letter threw all my thoughts. I
remained for some moments motionless and without the power of
speech. In the midst of my confusion, I too plainly saw the
destructive bearing of Don Gaspard's death on the passion I had
imbibed. My despair was unbounded at the thought. I threw myself
at Seraphina's feet, and offering her my naked sword, Madam, said
I, spare the Count de Polan the necessity of seeking further for
a man who might possibly withdraw himself from his resentment. Be
yourself the avenger of your brother: offer up his murderer as
the victim of your own hand: now, strike the blow. Let this very
weapon which terminated his life, cut short the sad remnant of
his adversary's days. Sir, answered Seraphina, a little softened
by my behaviour, I loved Don Gaspard, so that though you killed
him in fair and manly hostility, and though he brought his death
upon himself; you may rest assured that I take up my father's
quarrel. Yes, Don Alphonso, I am your decided enemy, and will do
against you all that the ties of blood and friendship require at
my hands. But I will not take advantage of your evil star: in
vain has it delivered you into my grasp: if honour arms me
against you, the same sentiment forbids to pursue a cowardly
revenge. The rights of hospitality must be inviolable, and I will
not repay such service as you have rendered me with the treachery
of an assassin. Fly! make your escape, if you can, from our
pursuit and from the rigour of the laws, and save your forfeit
life from the dangers that beset it.

What, then! madam, returned I, when vengeance is in your own
hands, do you turn it over to the laws, which may, perhaps, be
too slow for your impatience? Nay! rather stab a wretch who is
not worthy of your forbearance. No, madam, maintain not so noble
and so generous a proceeding with one like me. Do you know who I
am? All Madrid takes me for Baron Steinbach's son -- yet am I
nothing better than a foundling, whom he brought up from charity.
I know not even who were guilty of my existence. No matter,
interrupted Seraphina, with precipitation, as if my last words
had given her new uneasiness, though you were the lowest of
mankind I would do what honour bids. Well, madam, said I, since a
brother's death is insufficient to excite your thirst after my
blood, I will exasperate your hatred still further by a new
offence, of which I trust you will never pardon the boldness. I
dote on you: I could not behold your charms without being dazzled
by them: and, in spite of the cloud in which my destiny was
enveloped, I had cherished the hope of being united to you. I was
so infatuated by my passion, or rather by my pride, as to flatter
myself that heaven, which perhaps conceals from me my birth in
mercy, might discover it one day, and enable me without a blush
to acquaint you with my real name. After this injurious avowal,
can you hesitate a moment about punishing me?

This rash declaration, replied the lady, would doubtless prove
offensive at any other season; but I forgive it in consideration
of the trouble which bewilders you. Besides, my own condition so
engrosses me, as to render me deaf to any strange ideas that may
escape you. Once more, Don Alphonso, added she, shedding tears,
begone far from a house which you have cast into mourning: every
moment of your longer stay adds pungency to my distress. I no
longer oppose your will, madam, returned I, preparing to take my
leave: absence from you must then be my portion: but do not
suppose that, anxious for the preservation of a life which is
become hateful to you, I go to seek an asylum where I may be
sheltered from your search. No, no, I bare my breast to your
resentment. I shall wait with impatience at Toledo for the fate
which you design me; and by surrendering at once to my pursuers,
shall myself forward the completion of my miseries.

At the conclusion of this speech I withdrew. My horse was
returned to me, and I went to Toledo, where I abode eight days,
and really with so little care to conceal myself that I know not
how or why I have escaped an arrest; for I cannot suppose that
the Count de Polan, whose whole soul is set on cutting off my
retreat, should not have been aware that I was likely to pass
through Toledo. Yesterday I left that town, where it should seem
as if I was tired of my liberty, and without betaking myself to
any fixed course of travelling, I came to this hermitage, like a
man who had no reason to be ashamed of shewing himself. Such,
father, was the cause of my absence and distraction. I beseech
you to assist me with your counsels.



CH. XI. -- The old hermit turns out an extraordinary genius, and
Gil Blas finds himself among his former acquaintance.


WHEN Don Alphonso had concluded the melancholy recital of his
misfortunes, the old hermit said to him -- My son, you have been
excessively rash in tarrying so long at Toledo. I consider in a
very different light from that you affect to place it in, what
you have told me of your story; and your love for Seraphina seems
to me to be sheer madness. Take my word for it, you will do well
to cancel that young lady from your remembrance; she never can be
of your communion. Retreat like a skilful general, when you
cannot act with effect on the offensive; and pursue your fortune
on another field, where success may smile on your endeavours. You
will be terribly out of luck to kill the brother of the next
young lady who may chance to succeed this only possible object of
your affection.

He was going to add many other inducements to resignation, in
such a case as Don Alphonso's, when we saw another hermit enter
our retreat, with a well-stuffed wallet slung across his
shoulders. He was on his return, with the charitable
contributions of all the good folks in the town of Cuença; and
the gathering did credit to the religion of the age. He looked
younger than his companion, in spite of his thick, foxy beard.
Welcome home, brother Anthony, said the elder of the two
recluses; what news do you bring us from town? Bad enough,
answered the carroty friar, putting into his hands a paper,
folded in the form of a letter; this little instrument will
inform you. The hoary sage opened it, and after reading on with
an increased attention, as the contents seemed to grow more
interesting, exclaimed: Heaven's will be done! Since the
combustion is anticipated, we have only to fall in with the
humour of our fate. Let us change our dialect, Signor Don
Alphonso! pursued he, addressing his discourse to my young
companion: you behold in me a man, like yourself; who has been a
broad mark for the wantonness of fortune to take aim at. Word is
sent me from Cuença, a town at the distance of a league hence,
that some backbiter has been blackening my fair fame in the
esteem of justice; who is coming with her hue and cry to disturb
the repose of these rural scenes, and to lay her paw upon my
person. But an old fox is too cunning to be caught in a trap.
This is not the first time that I have cut and run before the
bloodhounds of the law. But, thanks to myself for having my wits
about me, I have always ended the chase in a whole skin, and held
myself in readiness for another. It is now time to assume another
form; for, whether you like me best in my old skin or my new, I
cast my hermit's decrepit slough, to bask in the sunshine of
youth and vigour.

To suit the action to the word, he threw off the incumbrance of
his ecclesiastical petticoat, and stood forth to view in a
doublet of black serge with slashed sleeves. Then off went his
cap, and snap went a string, which supported the hoary honours of
a beard, and our anchorite was at once transformed to a brawny
ruffian of eight-and-twenty or thirty. Brother Anthony, following
a good example, discarded the outward show of religion, treated
his fiery beard as the snowy one had been handled just before,
and pulled out of an old worm-eaten trunk a sorry rag of a
cassock, with which he invested his person. But what words can
express my surprise, when Signor Don Raphael presented himself to
my view, like a phoenix from the ashes of the old bead-counter!
To complete the trick of the pantomime, brother Anthony was
turned into my faithful vassal and trusty squire, Ambrose de
Lamela. Here are miracles! exclaimed I in a quandary; as far as I
can perceive, we are all hail fellow well met! You never were
more lucky in your life, Signor Gil Blas, said Don Raphael, with
a brazen-faced good humour: you have fallen among old friends
when you least expected it. It must be owned you have a crow to
pluck with us; but let the past be buried in oblivion, and thank
heaven, here we are together again. Ambrose and I will serve
under your banner; and let me tell you, you will have subalterns
of no contemptible prowess. You may object to our morals; but
they are better in the main than many a hypocrite's pretensions.
We never assassinate, and rarely maltreat: and that in pure self-
defence. The only liberty we take with society is to live at free
quarters: and though robbery may be considered as containing some
little spice of injustice, the necessity we labour under of
committing it restores its equilibrium to the scale. Even join
your fortune with ours: you will lead a life of hazard, but of
variety. Our predatory peregrinations have every pastoral beauty
except innocence, and the want of that is more than counterpoised
by subtlety and stratagem. Not but, with all our forecast, a
certain mechanical concatenation of second causes sometimes
frustrates our best-concerted projects, and drags our philosophy
through the mire. But a ducking now and then only makes us swim
the better. The seasons must all be taken in their turns; the
blanks as well as the prizes must be drawn in the cheating
lottery of life.

Courteous stranger, pursued the pretended hermit, speaking to Don
Alphonso, we extend the proposal of partnership to you, and it
may be a question whether you will better yourself by rejecting
it, in the lamentable condition of your affairs; for, to say
nothing of the chance-medley for which you are at hide and seek,
your fortune is probably a little out at elbows. Most lamentably
so, said Don Alphonso; and hence, since the truth must out, are
my forebodings more dark than even my present evils. That is the
very thing! replied Don Raphael. You were sent by our better
genius to join the party. You will find no such good berth in the
honest part of the world. Your wants will all be supplied, and
you may laugh at the vigilance of your pursuers. There is not a
corner in all Spain which we have not ferreted out; those who are
always on the scamper see a great deal of the country. We are
perfect connoisseurs in landscape, and affect Salvator Rosa's
rugged scenery. There we graze in peace and freedom, secure from
the brutality of justice. Don Alphonso expressed himself very
much obliged to them for their kind invitation; and finding
neither money in his purse, nor contrivance to procure it in his
pericranium, made up his mind at once not to stand upon punctilio
with morality. I too was led into a looser course than agreed
with my rigid principles, by a growing friendship for this young
man, whom I could not find in my heart to abandon in so perilous
an enterprise.

We all four agreed to set off in a body, and never to part
company. The question was put whether we should sound a retreat
on the instant, or first give a peremptory summons to a flagon of
excellent wine, which brother Anthony had invested by regular
approaches at Cuença the day before; but Raphael, a more
experienced general than any of us, represented that the first
thing to be done was to render our own camp impregnable, for
which purpose he proposed that we should march all night, to gain
a very thick wood between Villardesa and Almodabar, where we
should halt, as in a friendly country, and recruit after the
fatigues of the campaign. These general orders were approved of
in council. Our lay hermits then went about packing up their
baggage and provisions, which were swung in two bundles across
the back of Don Alphonso's horse. We were not long in our
preparations, after which we sheered off from the hermitage,
leaving a rich booty to legal rapine in the saintly paraphernalia
of the two hermits; including a white beard and a red one, two
rickety bedsteads, a table without a leg, a chest without a
bottom, two chairs without any seats, and an unmutilated image of
St Pacomo.

Our march was continued the whole night, and we began to chafe
and feel other inconveniences, when at daybreak we hailed the
wood where our toils were to end. Sailors after a long voyage
work the ship with double alacrity at sight of their native land.
So it was with us, we pushed forward and got to our journey's end
by sunrise. Dashing into the thickest of the wood, we pitched
upon a retired and pleasant spot, where the turf was circled in
by tall and branching oaks, whose gigantic limbs, interwoven over
our heads, formed a natural vault, not to be penetrated even by
noon-day heat. We took the bridle off the horse to let him feed
after he was unloaded. Then down we sat, pulling out of brother
Anthony's wallet some large pieces of bread and good substantial
slices of roast meat, at which we began pegging with all possible
pertinacity. Nevertheless, let our appetites be as obstinate as
they might, we every now and then suspended the fray to spar a
little with the flagon, which returned our blows till it made us
reel again.

About the end of the conflict, Don Raphael said to Don Alphonso -
- My brave comrade, after the confidence you have reposed in me,
it is but fair that in my turn I should recount the history of my
life to you with the same sincerity. You will do me a great
favour, answered the young man; and an equal one to me, chimed in
I. My curiosity is all alive to know your adventures, for
doubtless they must afford much matter of useful speculation. You
may rest assured of that, replied Don Raphael; and I mean to
leave behind me a history of my own times. The composition shall
be the amusement of my old age, for I am as yet in the prime of
life, and mean to furnish in propriâ personâ many new hints for
my commonplace-book. But we are all weary, let us recruit with
some hours of sleep. While we three lie down, Ambrose shall keep
watch for fear of a surprise, and shall then take a nap in his
turn. For though, to all appearance, we are here in perfect
safety, it is always good to keep a sentry at the out-posts.
After this precaution he stretched himself along upon the grass.
Don Alphonso did the same. I followed their example, and Lamela
performed the office of a scout.

Don Alphonso, so far from getting any rest, was incessantly
brooding over his misfortunes, and I could not get a wink of
sleep. As for Don Raphael, he snored most sonorously. But he
awoke in little more than an hour, when, finding us in a
listening mood, he said to Lamela -- My friend Ambrose, you may
now yield to the gentle influence of Morpheus. No, no, answered
Lamela, my sleepy fit is over; and though I know all the passages
of your life by rote, they are so instructive to the
practitioners of our art and mystery, that I do not care how
often I hear the tale over again. Without further preface, Don
Raphael began the narrative of his adventures in these terms.



BOOK THE FIFTH.



CH. I. -- History of Don Raphael.


I MADE my entrance on the stage of life at Madrid, where my
mother was an actress, famous for dramatic, and infamous for her
intriguing talents. Her name was Lucinda. As for my father, every
man must have one; but my arithmetic is too scanty to determine
the number of mine. It might indeed be a matter of history, that
such or such a man of fashion was dangling after my mother at the
epoch of my arrival in this system; but then, that mere fact
would by no means warrant a deduction that any individual gallant
of the mother must therefore be the father of the child. A lady,
so eminent as she was in so notorious and wholesale a profession,
must have many strings to her bow; where her blandishments are
most publicly lavished, her favours are most sparingly bestowed:
there is a show article or two for public exhibition, but her
everyday wares are cheap, and hackneyed to the meanest purchaser.

There is nothing like taking scandal by the beard, and treating
the opinion of the world with heroic indifference. Lucinda,
instead of cooping me up in a garret at home, made no scruple
about owning her little bastard, but took me in her hand to the
theatre with a modest assurance, regardless how the tongue of
rumour might babble at her expense, or how the laugh of malice
might peal at my unlucky appearance. In short, I was her pet, and
came in for the caresses of all the men who frequented the house.
One would have sworn that nature pleaded in my favour, and
inspired each of them with a father's pride in the brat they had
clubbed for. The twelve first years of my life were suffered to
waste away in all kinds of frivolous amusements. Scarcely did
they teach me to read and write. Still less was it thought of any
consequence to initiate me in the principles of my religion. To
dance, to sing, to play on the guitar, was the sum total of my
early attainments. With these gifts and graces for my only
acquisitions, the Marquis of Leganez asked for me to be about his
only son, who was nearly of my own age. Lucinda gave her consent
without reluctance, and it was then that I began to mind a little
what I was about. Young Leganez could not reproach me with my
ignorance, his little lordship was not cast in a scientific
mould, for he scarcely knew a letter of his alphabet, though he
had been under private tuition for fifteen months. None of his
masters could make anything of him, patience was never formed to
engage in so unequal a match. To be sure, they were expressly
forbid to exercise any severity on his noble carcass, their
orders were to teach, not to torture him; and this tender
precaution, acting on a subject of insufferably untoward
dispositions, was the means of throwing to the dogs all the
mental physic they poured in; he would none of it.

But the verb-grinder engendered in his noddle a most ingenious
device, by which to keep this troublesome young lordling in awe,
without trenching on his foolish father's injunctions. This
scheme was no other than to flog me when ever that scape-grace
Leganez had incurred the penalty of the rod, and this vicarious
execution was inflicted with the utmost rigour. My consent to the
transfer had never been asked, and there was nothing in the act
itself to recommend it; so that my only chance was to run away,
and appeal to my mother against so arbitrary a discipline.
However her maternal feelings might inwardly revolt, no trace of
woman's weakness could be detected in her manner of receiving my
complaint. The Leganez connection was too important to be lost
for a few whippings; and away went she, dragging her culprit into
the presence of his tormentor, who by this act of hers became
master of broom field. Experience had convinced him that the
success of his invention corresponded with its felicity. He
therefore went on improving the mind and manners of the little
grandee at the expense of my skin. Remorse for his delinquencies
was to be excited only by sympathy; so that whenever it became
necessary to make a bloody example, my seat of vengeance was
firked most unmercifully. The running account between young
Leganez and me was all on one side, and scarcely a day passed but
he sinned on tick and suffered by attorney. By the nearest
calculation of whole numbers, there went somewhere about a
hundred cuts to teach him each single letter of the alphabet; so
that if you multiply 100 by 24 for stupidity, and add an 0 to the
amount for moral offences, you will have the sum total of the
belabouring that his education cost me.

This thick and threefold companionship with birch was not the
only rub; my path through this family was more beset with thorns
than sweetened by flowers. As my birth and connections were no
secret, the whole of the establishment, to the very refuse of the
household, the stable-boys and scullions, twitted me with my
shameful origin. This stuck so terribly in my throat that I made
my escape once more, but not without borrowing my tutor's ready
money, amounting to upwards of a hundred and fifty ducats, for an
indefinite period, and without interest. Thus was the account
settled between us, since he had made a property of my hide for a
scarecrow, it was but fair that I should have a finger in the
earnings of his arm. For a first attempt at thieving both the
plan and execution were hopeful. A hue and cry was raised for two
days, it was hot while it lasted, but I lay snug, and they missed
me. Madrid was no longer a fit hiding-place, so I took to cover
in Toledo, and the hounds were thrown out.

I was just then entering into my fifteenth year. What a happy
fellow, at such an early age, to shape my own conduct and be in a
condition of forming a set of morals for myself! I soon scraped
acquaintance with some pleasant youths, who rescued me from the
dominion of prejudice, and shared liberally with me in the sin of
spending what was not my own. By degrees I rose in society and
leagued myself with a set of professional sharpers, who found me
so fine a subject to work upon, that a short time, with plenty of
practice, put me in possession of all the most desperate jobs. At 
the expiration of five years, an itch for travelling laid hold of
me. I therefore took leave of my comrades and got as far as
Alcantara, wishing to commence my peregrinations with the
province of Estremadura. In this my first excursion, an
opportunity of keeping in my hand occurred; and I was too
diligent a practitioner to let it escape. As I was on foot, and
loaded moreover with a pretty heavy knapsack, I halted from time
to time to avail myself of the shade, and recruit a little under
the trees which lined the highway. At one of these baits I picked
up two young gentlemen, who were chatting at their ease upon the
grass, and inhaling the freshness of the breeze. My mode of
accosting them was suited to the occasion; nor did its
familiarity seem to be taken in ill part. The eldest could not be
more than fifteen -- a couple of as practicable greenhorns as
ever fell into the hands of a man of genius. Courteous stranger,
said the youngest, we are the Sons of two rich citizens at
Placentia. Longing extremely to see the kingdom of Portugal, we
have each of us begged a hundred pistoles from our friends, and
are setting out to satisfy our curiosity. Travelling on foot as
we do, we shall be able to get a good way with that supply, shall
we not? What do you think of it? If I had as much, answered I,
they might take me who could catch me. I would scour over the
four known quarters of the globe, and then set out on new
discoveries. Fire and fury! Two hundred pistoles! Why it is an
entail for a dukedom! You ought to lay by out of the interest. If
it is agreeable to you, gentlemen, I will club with you as far as
Almeria, whither I am going to take possession of an estate left
me by an uncle who was settled there for twenty years or upwards.

My young cockneys testified at once the pleasure they should
derive from my company. Whereupon, when we were all three a
little refreshed, we trudged on towards Alcantara, where we
arrived early in the afternoon. No inn but the best was fit to
hold such guests. We asked for a room, and were shown into one
where there was a press with a good strong lock upon it. Supper
was ordered without delay; but as some time was required to get
it ready, I proposed to my travelling companions a gentle saunter
about the town. The party seemed perfectly agreeable. We locked
up our knapsacks in the press, the key of which one of the
citizens put in his pocket, and out sallied we from the inn. The
churches were the best lions we met with in our way; and while we
were gaping about the principal, I pretended to have recollected
on a sudden some very urgent business. Gentlemen, said I to my
companions, it has just come across me that a good man of Toledo
gave me a commission to say two words on his behalf to a merchant
who lives hard by this church. Have the goodness to wait for me
here, I will be back in a moment. With this excuse, I went off
like a shot, in the direction of our inn. The press was my point
of attack -- I forced the lock, ransacked the baggage of my young
citizens, and laid a sacrilegious hand on their pistoles. Poor
youths! How they were to pay their reckoning, it was not for me
to presume even to guess, for most assuredly I stripped them of
all the natural means. After this feat, I decamped as
expeditiously as my legs could carry me from the town, and took
the direction of Merida, without caring a curse what became of
the young brood I had plucked.

Such a windfall as this placed me in a condition of travelling
merrily. Though in the very blush of youth, a certain forecast
was not wanting to carry me discreetly through the world, and
keep my head above water. It must be admitted without question,
that I was a youth of forward parts for my age, and unfettered by
the prejudices of innocence. I determined to buy a mule, and
cheapened one at the first market town. My knapsack was
metamorphosed into a portmanteau, and by degrees I began to put
on the man of consequence. On the third day a man came across me
singing vespers with lungs like a pair of bellows on the highway.
By his air, he seemed to be a musician of the church
establishment, and I accosted him accordingly. Well done, my holy
howler of the hallelujahs! You sing your penitential ditties at a
good jovial pitch. To all appearance you sol-fa with your whole
heart and soul. Good sir, replied he, I belong, with your good
leave, to the musical department of the Catholic church: and it
is my common practice to keep my devotion and my wind in play by
the rehearsal of an anthem or two as I travel along the road.

With this disposition to be sociable, we soon got into
conversation. It was clear to me that I had fallen in with a
character not to be despised in point of shrewdness, nor
indisposed to society and merriment. He was four or five-and-
twenty. My companion being on foot, I slackened my pace, for the
pleasure of chatting with him. Among other things, we talked
about Toledo. I am perfectly well acquainted with that city, said
the brazen-lunged torturer of anthems. It was my residence for a
considerable time, and my connections there are not altogether
contemptible. And in what part of the town, interrupted I, did
you reside? In the New Street, was his answer. I was hand in
glove with Don Vincent de Buena Garra, Don Matthias de Cordello,
and two or three other gentlemen of very considerable fashion. We
lived together; took our meals at the same mess, and, in short,
were scarcely ever asunder. It was a charming society! This
avowal was no small surprise to me, for it is to be understood,
that the gentlemen whose names he cited with so pompous an air
were the very sharpers with whom I had been affiliated at Toledo.
Why, thou degenerate vicar choral! exclaimed I, these fine blades
of whom thou hast been boasting are among the number of my
acquaintance also, for I too have lived with them in the New
Street; we were hand in glove, took our meals at the same mess,
and, in short, were scarcely ever asunder. You are a wag! replied
he, with a knowing wink, that is to say, you got into the gang
three years ago, when I left it. My motive for quitting such a
worshipful fraternity, resumed I, was an itch for travelling. I
mean to make the tour of Spain. A little more knowledge of the
world will make me quite another thing. Doubtless, said he, there
is no possible way but travelling to rub off the rust, or bring
wit, talent, and address to perfection. It is for the self-same
reason that I too turned my back upon Toledo, though the time
glided away there very agreeably. But thanks to a kind
providence, which has yoked me with a labourer in my own
vineyard, when I least expected it. Let us join our forces, let
us travel the same road, let us make a joint-stock out of our
neighbours' purses, let us rob, let us cheat, let us avail
ourselves of every opportunity that may offer of exemplifying our
theory, and improving our practice, in the noble art on which our
skill is employed.

The proposal was made in so candid a spirit, so like a citizen of
the world, untainted with the selfishness of your honest men,
that I closed in with it at once. My confidence was surrendered
at the first summons to the frankness with which he volunteered
his own. We spoke our free hearts each to the other. I dilated
all my pilgrimage, and he spake of most disastrous chances, of
moving accidents through which he had passed even from his boyish
days to this very moment of his ripe and rampant roguery. It
appeared that he was on his way from Portalegre, whence he had
been obliged to decamp with the utmost expedition on account of a
little swindling transaction in which his luck happened not to
keep pace with his ingenuity. The habit he wore was
sacrilegiously adopted as a cloak to his person and real
character, since he thought it safest to be near the church,
however far from God. Thus did we two share all our counsel, and
pledge our brother's vows, till we grew together like a double
cherry, and determined, with two seeming bodies but one heart, to
incorporate our voices and minds in some master-stroke at Merida.
If it took, well and good; if not, we had only to cut and run.
From this moment, community of goods, that pure and simple
feature of patriarchal life, was enacted as a law between us.
Moralez, it is true, for that was my fellow-traveller's name, did
not find himself in the most splendid condition possible. His
funds were limited to five or six ducats, with a few little
articles in a bag. I therefore was the monied man of the firm;
but then there was brass in his forehead for an inexhaustible
coinage, and the seeming of a saint when he played the devil
most. So on we journeyed on the ride-and-tie principle, and
arrived in humble cavalcade at Merida.

We put up at an inn near the skirts of the town, where my comrade
changed his dress. When he had rigged himself in layman's attire,
we took a turn up and down, to reconnoitre the ground, and see if
we could pick out some opportunity of labouring in our vocation.
Had it been our good fortune to have lived before Homer, that old
apologist for sharping by wholesale would have dignified our
excursion with a simile.

Not half so keen, fierce vultures of the chase
Stoop from the mountains on the feathered race, &c.

To descend into plain prose, we were ruminating on the chapter of
accidents, and hammering out some theme for the employment of our
industry, when we espied a grey-headed old gentleman in the
street, sword in hand, defending himself against three men who
were thrusting at him with all their might and main. The
unfairness of the match was what stuck in my throat; so that
flying, with the spirit of a prize-fighter, to see fair play, I
made common cause with the old man. Moralez followed up my blows.
We proved ourselves match for the three assailants, and put them
completely to the rout.

Our rescued friend was profuse in his acknowledgments. We are in
rapture, said I, at our good luck in being here so seasonably for
your assistance: but let us at least know to whom we have been so
fortunate as to be serviceable; and what inducement those three
men could possibly have for their murderous attempt. Gentlemen
replied he, my obligations are too great to hesitate about
satisfying your curiosity; my name is Jerome de Moyadas, a
gentleman of this town, living on my means. One of these cut-
throat rascals, from whom you have rescued me, professes to be in
love with my daughter. He asked her of me in marriage within
these few days; and for want of gaining my consent in a quiet
way, has just attempted to force himself into my daughter's good
graces, by sending me into the other world. And may we take the
liberty, rejoined I, of inquiring farther, why you were so
obdurate to the proposals of this enamoured swain? I will explain
the whole to you at once, said he. I had a brother, a merchant in
this town; his name was Austin. Two months ago he happened to be
at Calatrava, and took up his abode with his correspondent, Juan
Velez de la Membrilla. They got to be as loving as turtles; and
my brother, to clench the connection, engaged my daughter
Florence to his good friend's son, not doubting but he had
influence enough with me to redeem his pledge when he returned to
Merida. Accordingly, he no sooner opened himself on the subject
than I consented out of pure fraternal affection. He sent
Florence's picture to Calatrava; but, alas! he did not live to
put the finishing hand to his own work. We laid him with his
forefathers three weeks ago! On his death-bed, he besought me not
to dispose of my girl but in favour of his correspondent's son. I
satisfied his mind on that point; and this is the reason why I
have refused Florence to the suitor by whom I was assaulted,
though the match would have been a very desirable one. But my
word is my idol; and we are in daily expectation of Juan Velez de
la Membrilla's heir, who is to be my son-in-law, though I know no
more of him, nor of his father neither, than if they were just
imported from an undiscovered island. But I beg pardon; this is
an old man's garrulity. Yet you yourselves led me into the
scrape.

This tale did I swallow with a greedy ear; and pouncing at once
upon a part to play, which my fruitful imagination suggested, I
put on an air of inordinate surprise, and ventured at all hazards
to lift my eyes upward to a purer region. Then turning to my
father-in-law, with an expression of feeling which nothing but
hypocrisy could personate: Ah! Signor de Moyadas, is it possible
that, on my arrival at Merida, I should enjoy the heartfelt
triumph of rescuing from foul assassination the honoured parent
of my peerless love? This exclamation produced all the
astonishment it was levelled to excite in the old citizen. Even
Moralez himself stared like an honest man, and shewed by his face
that there was a degree of impudence to which his conceptions had
not hitherto risen. What! do not my ears deceive me? exclaimed
the old gentleman. And are you really the son of my brother's
correspondent? Really and truly, Signor Jerome de Moyadas,
rejoined I with impregnable effrontery, and a hug round his neck
that had nearly sent him after his brother. Behold the selected
mortal of his species, to whose arms the adorable Florence is
devoted! But these nuptial anticipations, transporting as they
are, must yield to the anguish of my soul for the demise of their
founder. Poor Austin! He is gone, and we must all follow! I
should be ingratitude personified, if my heart was not lacerated
and rent by the death of a man to whom I owe all my hopes of
bliss. At the term of this period, I squeezed good Jerome's
wezand once more, and drew the back of my hand across my eyes, to
wipe away the tears it had not been convenient to shed. Moralez,
who by this time had conned over the pretty pickings to be made
out of this juggle, was not wanting to play his underpart. He
passed himself off for my servant, and improved upon his master
in lamentation for the untimely death of Signor Austin. My
honoured master Jerome, exclaimed he, what a loss have you
sustained, since your brother is no more! He was such an honest
man. Honest men are not to be met with every day. A superfine
sample of commerce! A dealer in friendship without a percentage!
A dealer in merchandise without an underhand advantage! A dealer
who dealt as dealers very seldom do deal!

We had our hands to play against a man who was a novice at the
game. Simple and cullible, so far from smelling out the rat, he
took his stink for a nosegay. And why, said he, did you not come
straight to my house? It was not friendly to put up at an inn. On
the footing we are likely to be upon, there should be none of
those punctilios. Sir, said Moralez, helping me out of the
scrape, my master is a little too much given to stand upon
ceremony. Though to be sure, in the present instance, he is in
some degree excusable for declining to appear before in this
uncouth trim. We have been robbed upon the road, and have lost
all our travelling equipage. My lad, interrupted I, has let the
cat out of the bag, Signor de Moyadas. This unlucky accident has
prevented me from paying my respects sooner. True love is
diffident; nor could I venture in this garb into the presence of
a mistress who was unacquainted with my person. I was therefore
waiting the return of a servant whom I have sent to Calatrava.
Such a trifle, rejoined the old man, must not deprive us of your
company; and I insist upon it, that you make my house your home
from this very moment.

With such sort of importunity, he forced me into his family: but
as we were on our way, the pretended robbery was a natural topic
of conversation; and I should have made light of my baggage,
though the loss was very considerable, had not Florence's picture
unluckily formed a part of the booty! The old codger chuckled at 
that, and observed, that such a loss was easily repaired: the
original was worth five hundred per cent. more than the copy. To
make me amends, as soon as we got home, he called his daughter, a
girl of not more than sixteen, with a person to have reclaimed a
libertine, if beauty ever possessed that power except in romance.
You behold, said he, the bale of goods my late brother has
consigned to you. Oh! my good sir, exclaimed I in an impassioned
tone, words are not wanting to assure me that this must be the
lovely Florence: those bewitching features are engraven on my
memory, their impression is indelible on my heart. If the
portrait I have lost, the mere outline of these embodied charms,
could kindle passion by its cold and lifeless likeness, judge
what must be my agitation, my transport at this moment. Such
language is too flattering to be sincere, said Florence; nor am I
so weak and vain as to be persuaded that my merits warrant it.
That is right! interchange your fine speeches, my children! This
was a good-natured encouragement from the father, who at once
left me alone with his daughter, and taking Moralez aside, said
to him; My friend, those who made so free with your baggage,
doubtless did not stand upon any ceremony with your money. Very
true, sir, answered my colleague; an overpowering band of robbers
poured down upon us near Castil-Blazo, and left us not a rag but
what we carry on our backs: but we are in momentary expectation
of receiving bills of exchange, and then we shall appear once
more like ourselves.

While you are waiting for your bills of exchange, replied the old
man, taking a purse out of his pocket, here are a hundred
pistoles with which you may do as you please. Oh, sir! rejoined
Moralez, as if he were shocked, my master will never take them.
You do not know him. Heaven and earth! he is a man of the nicest
scruples in money matters. Not one of your shabby fellows, always
spunging upon his friends, and ready to take up money wherever he
can get it! Running in debt is ratsbane to him. If he is to beg
his bread or go into an hospital, why there is an end of it! but
as for borrowing, he will never be reduced to that. So much the
better! said the good burgess: I value him the more for his
independence. Running in debt is a mean thing; it ought to be
ratsbane to him and everybody else. Your people of quality, to be
sure, may plead prescription in their favour; there is a sort of
privileged swindling, not incompatible with high honour, in high
life. If tradesmen were to be paid, they would be too nearly on a
level with their employers. But as your master has such upright
principles, heaven forbid they should be violated in this house!
Since any offer of pecuniary assistance would hurt his feelings,
we must say no more about it. As the point seemed to be settled,
the purse was for steering its course back again into the pocket;
but my provident partner laid hold of Signor de Moyadas by the
arm, and delayed the convoy. Stay, sir, said he, whatever
aversion my master may have to borrowing on a general principle,
and considered as borrowing, yet there is a light in which, with
good management, he may be brought to look kindly on your hundred
pistoles. In fact, it is only in a mercantile point of view, as
an affair of debtor and creditor between strangers, that he holds
this formal doctrine; but he is free and easy enough where he is
on a family footing. Why, there is his own father! It is only ask
and have; and he does ask and have accordingly. Now you are going
to be a second father to him, and are fairly entitled to be put
on the same confidential footing. He is a young man of nice
discrimination, and will doubtless think you entitled to the
compliment.

By thus shifting his ground, Moralez got possession of the old
gentleman's purse. As for the girl and myself, we were engaged in
a little agreeable flirting; but were soon joined by our honoured
parent, who interrupted our tête-à-tête. He told Florence how
much he was obliged to me, and expressed his gratitude to myself,
in terms which left no doubt of our being a very happy family. I
made the most of so favourable a disposition, by telling the good
man, that if he would bestow on me an acknowledgment the nearest
to my heart, he must hasten my marriage with his daughter. My
eagerness was not taken amiss. He assured me, that in three days
at latest I should be a happy bridegroom, and that instead of six
thousands ducats, the fortune he had promised to give my wife, he
would make it up ten, as a substantial proof how deeply he felt
himself indebted to me for the service I had rendered him.

Here we were, therefore, quite at home with our good friend
Jerome de Moyadas, sumptuously entertained, and catching every
now and then a vista vision of ten thousand ducats, with which we
proposed to march off abruptly from Merida. Our transports,
however, were not without their alloy. It was by no means
improbable that within three days the bonâ fide son of Juan Velez
de la Membrilla might come and interrupt our sport. This fear had
for its foundation more than the weakness of our nerves. On the
very next morning, a sort of clodpole, with a portmanteau across
his shoulders, knocked at the door of Florence's father. I was
not at home at the time, but my colleague had to bear the brunt
of it. Sir, said the rustic to our sagacious friend, I belong to
the young gentleman at Calatrava who is to be your son-in-law --
to Signor de la Membrilla. We have both just come off our
journey: he will be here in an instant, and sent me forward to
prepare you for his arrival. Hardly had these unaccountable
tidings been announced, when the master appeared in person; which
stretched the old fellow's blinkers into a stare, and put Moralez
a little to the blush.

Young Pedro was what we call a tall fellow of his inches. He
began at once paying his compliments to the master of the house;
but the good man did not give him time to finish his speech; and
turning towards my partner in iniquity, asked what was the
meaning of all this. Hereupon Moralez, whose power of face was
not to be exceeded by any human impudence, boldly asserted our
identity, and said to the old gentleman -- Sir, these two men
here before you belong to the gang which pillaged us on the
highway. I have a perfect recollection of their features; and in
particular could swear to him who has the effrontery to call
himself the son of Signor Juan Velez de la Membrilla. The old
citizen gulped down the lies of Moralez like nectar, and told the
intruders, on the supposition of their being the impostors --
Gentlemen, you are come the day after the fair; the trick was a
very good one, but it will not pass; the enemy has taken the
ground before you. Pedro de la Membrilla has been under this roof
since yesterday. Have all your wits about you, answered the young
man from Calatrava; you are nursing a viper in your bosom. Be
assured that Juan Velez de la Membrilla has neither chick nor
child but myself. And what relation is the hangman to you?
replied the old dupe: you are better known than liked in this
house. Can you look this young man in the face? or can you deny
that you robbed his master? If I were anywhere but under your
roof, rejoined Pedro in a rage, I would punish the insolence of
this scoundrel who fancies to pass me off for a highwayman. He is
indebted for his safety to your presence, which puts a curb upon
my choler. Good sir, pursued he, you are grossly imposed on. I am
the favoured youth to whom your brother Austin has promised your
daughter. Is it your pleasure for me to produce the whole
correspondence with my father on the subject of the impending
match? Will you be satisfied with Florence's picture sent me by
him as a present a little while before his death?

No, put in the old burgess crustily; the picture will work just
as strongly on my conviction as the letters. I am perfectly aware
by what chance they all fell into your hands; and if you will
take a stupid fellow's advice, Merida will soon be rid of such
rubbish. A quick march may save you a trouncing. This is beyond
all bearing, screamed out the young royster with an overwhelming
vehemence. My name shall never be stolen from me, and assumed by
a common cheat with impunity; neither shall my person be
confounded with that of a free-booter. There are those in this
town who can identify me: they are forth coming, and shall expose
the fallacy by which you are prejudiced against me. With this
assurance he withdrew, attended by his servant, and Moralez kept
possession of the field. The adventure had even the effect of
determining Jerome de Moyadas to fix the wedding for the very
time being. Accordingly he went his way, for the purpose of
giving the necessary orders for the celebration.

Though my colleague in knavery was well enough pleased to see
Florence's father in a humour so pat for our purposes, he was not
without certain scruples of conscience about our safety. It was
to be feared, lest the probable proceedings of Pedro might be
followed up by awkward consequences; so that he waited
impatiently for my arrival, to make me acquainted with what had
occur red. I found him over head and ears in a brown study. What
is the matter, my friend? said I, seemingly there is something
upon your mind. Indeed there is; and something that will be
minded, answered he. At the same time he let me into the affair.
Now you may judge, added he after a pause, whether we have not
some food for reflection. It is your ill star, rash contriver,
which has thrown us into this perplexity. The idea, it must he
confessed, was full of fire and ingenuity; had it answered in the
application, your renown would have been emblazoned in the
chronicles of our fraternity; but according to present
appearances, the run of luck is against us, and my counsels
incline to a prudent avoidance of all explanations, by quietly
sneaking off with the market-penny we have made of the silly old
fellow's credulity.

Master Moralez, replied I to this desponding speech, you give way
to difficulties with more haste than good speed. Such
pusillanimity does but little honour to Don Matthias de Cordel,
and the other gallant blades with whom you were affiliated at
Toledo. After serving a campaign under such experienced generals,
it is not soldierly to shrink from the perils of the field. For
my part, I am resolved to fight the battles of these heroes over
again, or, in more vulgar phrase, to prove myself a chip from the
old blocks. The precipice which makes your head turn giddy only
stiffens my sinews to surmount the toils of the way, and push
forward to the end of our career. If you arrive at your journey's
end in a whole skin, said my companion, I will myself be your
biographer, and set your fame far above all the parallels of
Plutarch.

Just as Moralez was finishing this learned allusion, Jerome de
Moyadas came in. You shall be my son-in-law this very evening,
said he. Your servant must have given you an account of what has
just passed. What say you to the impudence of the scoundrel who
wanted to make me believe that he was the son of my brother's
correspondent? Honoured sir, answered I, with a melancholy air,
and in a tone of voice the most insinuating that ever cajoled the
easy faith of a dotard, I feel within me that it is not in my
nature to carry on an imposition without betraying it in my
countenance. It now becomes necessary to make you a sincere
confession. I am not the son of Juan Velez de la Membrilla. What
is it you tell me? interrupted the old man, out of breath with
surprise, and out of his wits with apprehension. So then! you are
not the young man to whom my brother. . . . . For pity's sake,
sir, interrupted I in my turn, condescend to give me a hearing
patiently to the end of my story. For these eight days have I
doted to distraction on your daughter; and this dotage, this
distraction, has riveted me to Merida. Yesterday, after having
rescued you from your danger, I was making up my mind to ask her
of you in marriage; but you gave a check to my passion and put a
tie upon my tongue, by the intelligence that she was destined for
another. You told me that your brother, on his death-bed,
enjoined you to give her to Pedro de la Membrilla; that your word
was pledged, and that you were the sworn vassal and bondman of
your veracity. These circumstances, it must be owned, were
overwhelming in the extreme; and my romantic passion, at the last
gasp of its despair, gained breath by the stratagem with which
the god of love inspired me. I must at the same time declare that
a trick is at the best but a mean thing, and, however sanctified
by the motive, my conscience recoiled at the delusion. Yet I
could not but think that my pardon would be granted on the
discovery, when it should come out that I was an Italian prince
travelling through this country as a private gentle man. My
father reigns supreme over a nest of inaccessible valleys, lying
between Switzerland, the Milanese, and Savoy. It could not but
occur to me that you would be agreeably surprised when I should
unfold to you my birth, and having married Florence under my
fictitious character, should announce to her the rank she had
attained, with all the rapture of an enamoured husband, and all
the stage effect of a hero in tragedy or romance. But heaven,
pursued I, with an hypocritical softening down of my accents, has
visited my sins by cutting me off from such a perennial stream of
joy. Pedro de la Membrilla was introduced upon the scene; he must
have his name back again, whatever the restitution may cost me.
Your promise binds you hand and foot to fix upon him for your
son-in-law; it is your duty to give him the preference, without
taking my rank and station into the account; without mercy on the
forlorn condition to which you are going to reduce me. To be
sure, it might be said, but then I should say it who ought not to
say it, that your brother had only the authority of an uncle over
your daughter, that you are her father, and that there is more
right and reason in discharging an actual debt of gratitude
towards your preserver, than in being mealy-mouthed about a
verbal promise which would press but lightly on the conscience of
the most scrupulous casuist.

Yes, without doubt, that argument is indisputable, exclaimed
Jerome de Moyadas; and on that ground there can no longer be any
question between you and Pedro de la Membrilla. If my brother
Austin were still living, he would not think it bad morality to
give the preference to a man who has saved my life, nor a bad
speculation to close the bargain with a prince who has not
disdained to court our alliance. It were an absolute suicide on
the part of all my opening prospects; the frantic desperation of
an acknowledged incurable, not to dispose of my daughter so
illustriously, not to solicit your highness's acceptance of her
hand. And yet, sir, resumed I, these things are not to be
determined without due deliberation; look at your own interests
and safety with a microscopic eye, for though the illustrious
channel through which my blood has flowed for ages . . . . You
are scarcely serious, interrupted he, in supposing that I can
hesitate for a moment. No, may it please your highness; it is my
most humble and earnest request that you will deign, on this very
evening, to honour the happy Florence with your hand. Well, then!
said I, be it so; go yourself and be the bearer of the unlooked-
for tidings, announce to her the brilliant career of her exalted
destiny.

While the good citizen was putting his best foot foremost, to
instil into his daughter that she had made the conquest of a
prince, Moralez, who had taken in the whole conversation with
greedy ear, threw himself upon his knees before me, and did
homage in these bantering terms. Most potent, grave, and august
Italian prince, son of a sovereign, supreme over a nest of
inaccessible valleys, lying between Switzerland, the Milanese,
and Savoy, permit me to humble myself at your highness's feet, in
humble acknowledgment of the ecstasy into which you have thrown
me. By the honour of a swindler, you are one of the wonders of
our world. I always thought myself the first man in the line; but
in good truth I doff my bonnet before you, whose genius seems to
supersede the lessons of experience. Then you are no longer
uneasy about the result, said I to my colleague in iniquity. Oh!
as to that, not in the least, answered he. I no longer care a fig
for Master Pedro; let him come as soon as he pleases, we are a
match for him. Here we are, then, Moralez and myself, safe seated
on the saddle, and rising in our stirrups. We even went so far as
to begin settling the course we should pursue with the fortune,
on which we reckoned so securely, that if it had already been in
our pockets, we could not have chuckled more triumphantly over
the proverb of "a bird in the hand." Yet we were not in actual
possession, which is more than legal right: and the sequel of the
adventure proved to us, that manythings fall out between the cup
and the lip.

We very soon saw the young man of Calatrava returning. He was
accompanied by two citizens and by an alguazil, whose dignity was
as much supported by his whiskers, and by the lowering overcast
of his swarthy aspect, as by the weight of his official
character. Florence's father was of the party. Signor de Moyadas,
said Pedro to him, here are three honest people come to answer
for me; they are acquainted with my person, and can tell you who
I am. Yes, undoubtedly, exclaimed the alguazil, I can depose to
the fact. I certify to all those whom it may concern, that you
are known to me: your name is Pedro, and you are the only son of
Juan Valez de la Membrilla: whosoever dares to maintain the
contrary is an impostor. I believe you implicitly, master
alguazil, said the good creature Jerome de Moyadas, rather drily.
Your evidence is gospel to me, as well as that of these fair and
honest tradesmen you have brought with you. I am fully satisfied
that the young gentleman on whose behalf you come is the only son
of my brother's correspondent. But what is that to me? I am no
longer in the humour to give him my daughter, so there is an end
of that.

Oh! then it is quite another matter, said the alguazil. I only
come to your house for the purpose of assuring you that this
young man is no impostor. You have the authority of a parent over
your child, and no one has any right to dictate to you how you
are to marry her, and whether you will or no. Neither do I, on my
part, interrupted Pedro, pretend to lay any force on the
inclinations of Signor de Moyadas; but he will perhaps allow me
to ask him why he has so suddenly changed his resolution. Has he
any reason to be dissatisfied with me? Alas! let me at least
understand, that in losing the sweet hope of becoming his son-in-
law, my promised bliss has not been wrested from me by any
misconduct of my own. I have no complaint to make of you,
answered the old man; nay, I will even tell you more; it is with
sincere sorrow that I find myself under the necessity of breaking
my word with you, and I heartily beseech you to forgive me for
having done so. I am persuaded that you are too generous to bear
me any ill-will for having thrown the balance into the scale of a
rival, who has saved my life. You see him here, pursued he,
introducing my noble self, this is the illustrious personage who
threw round me the shield of his protection in my great peril:
and, the better still to apologize for my seemingly harsh
treatment of yourself, you are to know that he is an Italian
prince.

At these last words, Pedro was dumb-founded, and looked as if he
could not help it. The two tradesmen opened their eyes as wide as
they could stare, with surprise at finding themselves for the
first time in princely society. But the alguazil, in the habit of
looking at things with the cross eye of suspicion, divined most
perspicuously that this marvellous adventure must be a complete
humbug; and the verification of the prophecy was calculated to
put money into the pocket of the prophet. He therefore conned
over my countenance with a very inquisitive regard; but as my
features, which were new to justice, threw him out most cruelly
from hunting down the game he was in chase of, he had no
alternative but to try his luck on my companion. Unfortunately
for my highness of the inaccessible valleys, he knew again the
hang-dog features of Moralez; and recollecting to have seen him
within the purlieus of a gaol, Ay, ay! exclaimed he, this is one
of my established customers. This gentleman is a particular
acquaintance of mine, and you may take his character from me for
one of the rankest rascals within the kingdoms and principalities
of Spain. Softly, look before you leap, most adventurous
alguazil, said Jerome de Moyadas; this lad, of whom you draw so
unfavourable a picture, is in the travelling retinue of a prince.
So much the better, retorted the alguazil; a man would not desire
clearer evidence on which to bring in his verdict. If we can but
hang the servant, we shall soon send the master to the devil. The
case is as undeniable as a feed counsel's plea; these pleasant
sparks are a couple of fortune-hunters, who have laid their heads
together to take you in. I am an old hound upon this scent; so
that, by way of proof presumptive that these merry vagabonds are
within the contemplation of the law in that case provided, I
shall lodge them where they will be well taken care of. They will
have plenty of time for meditation under the chastising
philosophy of a turnkey; or should confinement fail to mend their
morals, we have a sort of tangible discipline, which insinuates
reformation by the inlet of a smarting hide. Stop there, and
bethink you in good time, master officer, rejoined the old
gentleman; we must not draw the cord tighter than it will bear.
You never make any bones, you hangers-on of the law, about
hurting the feelings of better men than yourselves. May not this
servant be a common cheat, without his master being a swindler?
Princes are persons of honour as a matter of course; yet the
retainers to a court are inordinate rascals; it requires no
conjurer to find that out. Are you playing into the hands of your
deluders, with your princes? interrupted the alguazil. This new
manufacturer of false pretences is a proficient, take my word for
it; but I shall quench his zeal in the service, and gravel the
ingenuity of his partner, with a whereas and a commitment in due
form. The scouts of justice are all round the door, who will
worry their game every inch of the chase, if they do not suffer
themselves to be taken quietly on their form. So come along, may
it please your serene highness, let us proceed to our
destination.

This upshot of the business was a death-blow to me, as well as to
Moralez; and our confusion did but infuse doubts into the mind of
Jerome de Moyadas, or rather burned, sunk, and destroyed us in
his esteem. He began rather to think, not without reason, that we
had some little design to impose on his credulity. Nevertheless
he acted on this occasion in the spirit of a man of honour and a
gentleman. My good friend and protector, said he to the alguazil,
your conjectures may be without foundation; on the other hand,
they may turn out to have too much truth in them. Whichever of
these alternatives may be the fact, let us not look too curiously
into their characters. They are both young, and have time enough
for amendment if they want it; let them go their ways, and
withdraw whithersoever it may best please them. Make no
opposition, I beseech you, to their safe egress; it is a favour
which you may consider as done to me, and my motive for asking it
is to acquit myself of my debt to them. If my heart was not too
soft for my profession, answered the alguazil, I should lodge
these pretty gentlemen in limbo, in defiance of all your
pleadings in their favour; but your eloquence and my
susceptibility have relaxed the stern demeanour of justice for
this evening. Let them, however, leave town on the spur of the
occasion: for if I come across them to-morrow, and there is any
faith in an alguazil, they shall see such sport as will be no
sport to them.

When it was signified to Moralez and me, culprits as we were,
that we were to be let off scot free, we polished up the brass
upon our foreheads a little. It was time now to bounce and
swagger, and to maintain that we were men of undeniable
respectability; but the alguazil looked askew at us, and muttered
that least said was soonest mended. I do not know how, but those
gentry have a strange knack of curbing our genius; they are
complete lords of the ascendant. Florence and her dowry therefore
were lost to Pedro de la Membrilla by a turn of the dice, and we
may conclude that he was received as the son-in-law of Jerome de
Moyadas. I took to my heels with my companion. We blundered on
the road to Truxillo, with the consolation at our hearts of
having at least pocketed a hundred pistoles by our frolic. An
hour before night-fall we passed through a little village with
the intention of putting up for the evening at the next stage. An
inn of very tolerable appearance for the place attracted our
notice. The landlord and landlady were sitting at the door, on a
long bench such as usually graces a pot-house porch. Our host, a
tall man, withered, and with one foot in the grave, was tinkling
on a cracked guitar to the unbounded emolument of his wife, whose
faculties seemed to hang in rapture on the performance.
Gentlemen, cried out the intrepid tavern-keeper, when he found
that we were not upon the halt, you will do well to stop here;
you may fare worse further off. There is a devil of a three
leagues to the nearest village, and you will find nothing to make
you amends for what you leave behind; you may assure yourselves
of that. Take a word of advice, know when you are well used; I
will treat you with the fat of the land, and charge you at the
lowest rate. There was no resisting such a plea. We came up to
our courteous entertainers, paid them the compliments of course,
and sitting down by their side, the conversation was supported by
all four on the indifferent topics of the day. Our host announced
himself as an officer of the Holy Brotherhood, and his rib was a
fat laughing squab of a woman, withoutward good-nature, but with
an eye to make the most of her commodities.

Our discourse was broken in upon by the arrival of from twelve to
fifteen riders, some mounted on mules, others on horseback,
followed by about thirty sumpter-mules laden with packages. Ah!
what a princely retinue! exclaimed the landlord at the sight of
so much company: where can I put them all? In an instant the
village was crammed full of men and beasts. As luck would have
it, there was near the inn an immense barn, where the sumpter
mules and their packages were secured; the saddle-mules and
horses were taken care of in other places. As for their masters, 
they thought less about bespeaking beds than about calling for
the bill of fare, and ordering a good supper. The host and
hostess, with a servant girl whom they kept, were all upon the
alert to make things agreeable. They laid a heavy hand upon all
the fowls in the poultry-yard. These precious roasts, with some
undisguised rabbits, cats in the masquerade of a fricassee, and a
deluging tureen of soup, stinking of cabbage and greasy with
mutton fat, were enough to have given a sickener to the 
inveterate stomachs of a regiment.

As for Moralez and myself, we cast a scrutinizing eye on these
troopers, nor were they behindhand in passing their secret
judgments upon us. At last we came together in conversation, and
it was proposed on our part, if they had no objection, that we
should all sup together. They assured us that they should be
extremely happy in our company. Here we are, then, all seated
round the table. There was one among them who seemed to take the
lead; and for whom the rest, though in the main they were on the
most intimate terms with him, thought it necessary on some
occasions to testify their deference. In case of a dispute, this
high gentleman assumed the umpire, he talked in a tone above the
common pitch, going so far sometimes as to contradict in no very
courtly phrase the sentiments of others, who, far from giving him
back his own, were ready to swear to his assertions and crouch
under his rebuke. By accident the discourse turned on Andalusia.
Moralez happening to launch out into the praise of Seville, the
man about whom I have been talking said to him -- My good fellow-
traveller, you are ringing the chimes on the city which gave
birth to me; at least I am a native of the neighbourhood, since
the little town of Mayrena is answerable for my appearance in the
world. I have the same story to tell you, answered my companion.
I am also of Mayrena; and it is scarcely possible but that our
families should be acquainted. Whose son are you? An honest
notary's, replied the stranger, by name Martin Moralez. As fate
will have it, exclaimed my comrade with emotion, the adventure is
very remarkable! You are then my eldest brother, Manuel Moralez?
Exactly so, said the other, and if my senses do not deceive me,
you your very self are my little brother Lewis, whom I left in
the cradle when I turned my back upon my father's house? You are
right in your conjectures, answered my honest colleague. At this
discovery they both got up from table, and almost hugged the
breath out of each other's bodies. At last Signor Manuel said to
the company -- Gentlemen, this circumstance is altogether
marvellous. By mere chance, I have met with a brother and have
been challenged by him, whom I have not seen for more than twenty
years: allow me to introduce him. At once all the travellers, who
had risen from their seats out of curiosity and good manners,
paid their compliments to the younger Moralez, and made him run
the gauntlet through their salutations. When these were over, the
party returned to the table, nor did they think any more of an
adjournment. Bed-time never entered. into their heads. The two
brothers sat next to one another, and talked in a whisper about
their family affairs; the other guests plied the bottle, and made
merry in a louder key.

Lewis had a long conference with Manuel; and afterwards, taking
me aside, said to me: All these troopers belong to the household
of the Count de Montanos, whom the king has very lately appointed
to the vice-regal government of Majorca. They are convoying the
equipage of the viceroy to Alicant, where they are to embark. My
brother, who has risen to be steward to that noble man, proposes
to take me along with him; and on the difficulty I started about
leaving you, he told me that if you would be of the party, he
would procure you a good berth. My dear friend, pursued he, I
advise you not to stand out against this proposal. Let us take
flight together for the island of Majorca. If we find our
quarters pleasant, we will fix there; and if they are otherwise,
we have nothing to do but to return into Spain.

I accepted the proposal with the best grace possible. What a
reinforcement, in the person of young Moralez and myself, to the
household of the count! We took our departure in a body from the
inn, before daybreak. We got to the city of Alicant by long
stages, and there I bought a guitar, and arranged my dress in a
manner suited to my new destination, before we embarked. Nothing
ran in my head but the island of Majorca; and Lewis Moralez was a
new man as well as myself. It should seem as though we had bid
farewell to the rogueries of this wicked world. Yet, not to play
the liar in the ear of so rigorous a confessor as my own
conscience, we had a mind not to pass for villains incarnate, now
that we had got into company that had some pretensions to
decency: and that was the sum total of our honesty. The natural
bent of our genius remained much the same; we were still men of
business, but just now keeping a vacation. In short, we went on
board gallantly and gaily in this lucid interval of innocence,
and had no idea but of landing at Majorca under the especial care
of Neptune and AEolus. Hardly, however, had we cleared the gulf
of Alicant, when a sudden and violent storm arose, enough to have
frightened better men. Now is my opportunity, or never, to speak
of moving accidents by flood; to set the atmosphere on fire, and
give a louder explosion to the thunder-cloud; to compare the
whistling of the winds to the factions of a populace, and the
rolling of the waves to the shock of conflicting hosts; with
other such old-fashioned phraseologies as have been heirlooms of
Parnassus from time immemorial. But it is useless to be poetical
without invention. Suffice it therefore to say, in slang
metaphor, that the storm was a devil of a storm, and obliged us
to stand in for the point of Cabrera. This is a desert island,
with a small fort, at that time garrisoned by an officer and five
or six soldiers. Our reception was hospitable and cordial.

As it was necessary for us to stay there some days, for the
purpose of refitting our sails and rigging, we devised various
kinds of amusements to keep off the foul fiend, melancholy. Every
one did as seemed good in his own eyes: some played at cards,
others diverted themselves in other ways; but as for me, I went
about exploring the island, with such of our gentry as had either
a curiosity or a taste for the picturesque. We were frequently
obliged to clamber from rock to rock; for the face of the country
is rugged, and the soil scanty, presenting a scene difficult of
access, but interesting from its wildness. One day, while we were
speculating on these dry and barren prospects, and extracting a
moral from the vagaries of nature, who can swell into the
fruitful mother and the copious nurse, or shrink into the lean
and loathsome skeleton as she pleases, our sense was all at once
regaled with a most delicious fragrance. We turned as with a
common impulse towards the east, whence the scented gale seemed
to come. To our utter astonishment, we discovered among the rocks
a green plat of considerable dimensions, gay with honeysuckles
more luxuriant and more odorous than even those which thrive so
greatly in the climate of Andalusia. We were not sorry to
approach nearer these delicious shrubs, which were wasting their
sweetness in such unchecked profusion, when it turned out that
they lined the entrance of a very deep cavern. The opening was
wide, and the recess in consequence partially illuminated. We
were determined to explore; and descended by some stone steps
overgrown with flowers on each side, so that it was difficult to
say whether the approach was formed by art or nature. When we had
got down, we saw several little streams winding over a sand, the
yellow lustre of which outrivalled gold. These drew their sources
from the continual distillations of the rock within, and lost
themselves again in the hollows of the ground. The water looked
so clear, that we were tempted to drink of it; and such was its
freshness, that we made a party to return the next day, with some
bottles of generous wine, which we were persuaded would acquire
new zest from the retreat where they were to be quaffed.

It was not without regret that we left so agreeable a place: nor
did we omit, on our return to the fort, boasting among our
comrades of so interesting a discovery. The commander of the
fortress, however, with the warmest professions of friendship,
warned us against going any more to the cavern, with which we
were so much delighted. And why so? said I, is there anything to
be afraid of? Most undoubtedly, answered he. The corsairs of
Algiers and Tripoli sometimes land upon this island, for the
purpose of watering at that spring. One day they surprised two
soldiers of my garrison there, whom they carried into slavery. It
was in vain that the officer assumed a tone of kind dissuasion;
nothing could prevent us from going. We fancied that he meant to
play upon our fears; and the day following I returned to the
cavern with three adventurous blades of our establishment. We
were even fool-hardy enough to leave our fire-arms behind as a
sort of bravado. Young Moralez declined being of the party: the
fort and the gaming-table had more charms for him, as well as for
his brother.

We went down to the bottom of the cave, as on the preceding day,
and set some bottles of the wine we had brought with us to cool
in the rivulets. While we were enjoying them in all the luxury of
elegant conviviality, our wits set in motion by the novelty of
the scene, and the echo reverberating to the music of our
guitars, we espied at the mouth of the cavern several abominable
faces overgrown with whiskers; neither did their turbans and
Turkish dresses render them a whit more amiable in our conceits.
We nevertheless took it into our heads that it was a frolic of
our own party, set on by the commanding officer of the fort, and
that they had disguised themselves for the purpose of playing us
a trick. With this impression on our minds, we set up a horse-
laugh, and allowed a quiet entrance to about ten, without
thinking of making any resistance. In a few moments our eyes were
opened to that fatal error, and we were convinced, in sober
sadness, that it was a corsair at the head of his crew, come to
carry us away. Surrender, you Christian dogs, cried he in most
outlandish Castilian, or prepare for instant death. At the same
time the men who accompanied him levelled their pieces at us, and
our ribs would have been well lined with the contents, if we had
resisted in the least. Slavery seemed the better alternative than
death, so that we delivered our swords to the pirate. He ordered
us to be handcuffed and carried on board his vessel, which was
moored not far off; then, setting sail, he steered with a fair
wind towards Algiers.

Thus were we punished for having neglected the warning given us
by the officer of the garrison. The first thing the corsair did
was to put his hand into our pockets and make free with our
money. No bad windfall for him! The two hundred pistoles from the
greenhorns at Placentia; the hundred which Moralez had received
from Jerome de Moyadas, and which, as ill luck would have it,
were in my custody; all this was swept away without a single
qualm of conscience. My companions too had their purses well
lined; and it was all fish that came to the net. The pirate
seemed to chuckle at so successful a drag; and the scoundrel, not
contented with chousing us of our cash, insulted us with his
infernal Moorish witticisms: but the edge of his satire was not
half so keen as the dire necessity which made us the subject of
it. After a thousand clumsy sarcasms, he called for the bottles
which we had set to cool in the fountain; those irreligious
Mahometans not having scrupled to load their consciences with the
conveyance of the unholy fermentation. The master and his man
pledged one another in many a Christian bumper, and drank to our
better acquaintance with a most provoking mockery.

While this farce was acting, my comrades wore a hanging look,
which testified how pleasantly their thoughts were employed. They
were so much the more out of conceit with their captivity, as
they thought they had drawn a prize in the lottery of human life.
The island of Majorca, with all its luxuries and delights, was a
melancholy contrast with their present situation. For my part, I
had the good sense to take things as I found them. Less put out
of my way by my misfortune than the rest, I joined in
conversation with this transmarine joker, and shewed him that wit
was the common language of Africa and of Europe. He was pleased
with my accommodating spirit. Young man, said he, instead of
groaning and sighing, you do well to arm yourself with patience,
and to fall in with the current of your destiny. Play us a little
air, continued he, observing that I had a guitar by my side; let
us have a specimen of your skill. I complied with his command, as
soon as my arms were loosened from their confinement, and began
to thrum away in a style that drew down the applauses of my
discerning audience. It is true that I had been taught by the
best master in Madrid, and that I played very tolerably for an
amateur upon that instrument. A song was then called for, and my
voice gave equal satisfaction. All the Turks on board testified
by gestures of admiration the delight with which my performance
inspired them; from which circumstance it was but modest to
conclude, that vocal music had made no very extraordinary
progress in their part of the world. The pirate whispered in my
ear, that my slavery should be no disadvantage to me; and that
with my talents I might reckon upon an employment, by which my
lot would be rendered not only supportable, but happy.

I felt somewhat encouraged by these assurances; but flattering as
they were, I was not without my uneasiness as to the employment,
which the corsair held out as a nameless, but invaluable boon.
When we arrived in the port of Algiers, a great number of persons
were collected to receive us; and we had not yet disembarked,
when they uttered a thousand shouts of joy. Add to this, that the
air re-echoed with a confused sound of trumpets, of Moorish
flutes, and of other instruments, the fashion of that country,
forming a symphony of deafening clangour, but very doubtful
harmony. The occasion of these rejoicings proceeded from a false
report, which had been current about the town. It had been the
general talk that the renegado Mahomet, meaning our amiable
pirate, had lost his life in the attack of a large Genoese
vessel; so that all his friends, informed of his return, were
eager to hail him with these thundering demonstrations of
attachment.

We had no sooner set foot on shore, than my companions and myself
were conducted to the palace of the bashaw Soliman, where a
Christian secretary, questioning us individually one after
another, inquired into our names, our ages, our country, our
religion, and our qualifications. Then Mahomet, presenting me to
the bashaw, paid my voice more compliments than it deserved, and
told him that I played on the guitar with a most ravishing
expression. This was enough to influence Soliman in his choice of
me for his own immediate service. I took up my abode therefore in
his seraglio. The other captives were led into the public market,
and sold there at the usual rate of Christian cattle. What
Mahomet had foretold to me on ship-board was completely verified;
my condition was exactly to my mind. I was not consigned to the
stronghold of a prison, nor kept to any works of oppressive
labour. My indulgent master stationed me in a particular quarter,
with five or six slaves of superior rank, who were in momentary
expectation of being ransomed, and were therefore favoured in the
distribution of our tasks. The care of watering the orange-trees
and flowers in the gardens was allotted as my portion. There
could not be a more agreeable or less fatiguing employment.

Soliman was a man about forty years of age, well made as to
figure, tolerably accomplished as to his mind, and as much of a
lady's man as could be expected from a Turk. His favourite was a
Cashmirian, whose wit and beauty had acquired an absolute
dominion over his affections. He loved her even to idolatry. Not
a day but he paid his court to her by some elegant entertainment;
at one time a concert of vocal and instrumental music, at
another, a dramatic performance after the fashion of the Turks,
which fashion implies a loose sort of comedy, where moral and
modesty enter about as much into the contemplation of the
contriver, as do Aristotle and his unities. The favourite, whose
name was Farrukhnaz, was passionately enamoured of these
exhibitions; she sometimes even got up among her own women some
Arabian melodramas to be performed before her admirer. She took
some of the parts herself; and charmed the spectators by the
abundant grace and vivacity of her action. One day when I was
among the musicians at one of these representations, Soliman
ordered me to play on the guitar, and to sing a solo between the
acts of the piece. I had the good fortune to give satisfaction,
and was received with applause. The favourite herself, if my
vanity did not mislead me, cast glances towards me of no
unfavourable interpretation.

On the next day, as I was watering the orange-trees in the
gardens, there passed close by me an eunuch, who, without
stopping or saying a word, threw down a note at my feet. I picked
it up with an emotion, strangely compounded of pleasure and
alarm. I crouched upon the ground, for fear of being observed
from the windows of the seraglio; and, concealing myself behind
the boxes in which the orange-trees were planted, opened this
unexpected enclosure. There I found a diamond of very
considerable value, and these words, in genuine Castilian: "Young
Christian, return thanks to heaven for your captivity. Love and
fortune will render it the harbinger of your bliss: love, if you
are alive to the attractions of a fine person, and fortune, if
you have the hardihood to confront danger in every direction."

I could not for a moment doubt that the letter was written by the
favourite sultana; the style and the diamond were more than
presumptive evidence against her. Besides that nature did not
cast me in the mould of a coward, the vanity of keeping up a good
understanding with the mistress of a scoundrelly Mahometan in
office, and, more than all the temptations of vanity or
inclination, the hope of cajoling her out of four times as much
as the curmudgeon her master would demand for my ransom, put me
into conceit with. the intention of trying my luck at a venture,
whatever risk might be incurred in the experiment. I went on with
my gardening, but always harping on the means of getting into the
apartment of Farrukhnaz, or rather waiting till she opened a door
of communication; for I was clearly of opinion that she would not
stop upon the threshold, but meet me half way in the career of
love and danger. My conjecture was not altogether without
foundation. The same eunuch who had led me into this amorous
reverie passed the same way an hour afterwards, and said to me:
Christian, have you communed with your own determinations, and
will you win a fair lady, by abjuring a faint heart? I answered
in the affirmative. Well, then, rejoined he, heaven sprinkle its
dew upon your resolutions! You shall see me betimes to-morrow
morning. With this comfortable assurance, he withdrew. The
following day, I actually saw him make his appearance about eight
o'clock in the morning. He made a signal for me to go along with
him: I obeyed the summons; and he conducted me into a hall where
was a large wrapper of canvas which he and another eunuch had
just brought thither, with the design of carrying it to the
sultana's apartment, for the purpose of furnishing a scene for an
Arabian pantomime, in preparation for the amusement of the
bashaw.

The two eunuchs unrolled the cloth, and laid me at my length on
the proscenium; then, at the risk of turning the farce into a
tragedy by stifling me, they rolled it up again, with its
palpitating contents. In the next place, taking hold of it at
each end, they conveyed me with impunity by this device into the
chamber devoted to the repose of the beautiful Cashmirian. She
was alone with an old slave devoted to her wishes. They helped
each other to unroll their precious bale of goods; and
Farrukhnaz, at the sight of her consignment, set up such an alarm
of delight, as exhibited the woman of the East, without for
getting her prurient propensities. With all my natural bias
towards adventure, I could not recognize myself as at once
transported into the private apartment of the women, without
something like an inauspicious damp upon my joy. The lady was
aware of my feelings, and anxious to dissipate the unpleasant
part of them, Young man, said she, you have nothing to fear.
Soliman is just gone to his country-house: he is safely lodged
for the day; so that we shall be able to entertain one another
here at our ease.

Hints like these rallied my scattered spirits, and gave a cast to
my countenance which confirmed the speculation of the favourite.
You have won my heart, pursued she, and it is in my contemplation
to soften the severity of your bondage. You seem to be worthy of
the sentiments which I have conceived for you. Though disguised
under the garb of a slave, your air is noble, and your
physiognomy of a character to recommend you to the good graces of
a lady. Such an exterior must belong to one above the common.
Unbosom yourself to me in confidence; tell me who you are. I know
that captives of superior condition and family disguise their
real circumstances, to be redeemed at a lower rate; but you have
no inducement to practise such a deception on me; and it would
even be a precaution revolting to my designs in your favour,
since I here pledge myself for your liberty. Deal with sincerity,
therefore, and own to me at once that you are a youth of
illustrious rank. In good earnest then, madam, answered I, it
would ill become me to repay your generous partiality with
dissimulation. You are absolutely bent upon it, that I should
entrust you with the secret of my quality, and commands like
yours are not to be questioned or resisted. I am the son of a
Spanish grandee. And so it might actually have been, for anything
that I know to the contrary; at all events, the sultana gave me
credit for it, so that with considerable self-congratulation, at
having fixed her regard on a gentleman of some little figure in
the world, she assured me that it only depended on herself,
whether or no we should meet pretty often in private. In fact, we
were no niggards of our mutual good-will at the very first
approaches. I never met with a woman who was more what a man
wishes her to be. She was besides an expert linguist, above all
in Castilian, which she spoke with fluency and purity. When she
conceived it to be time for us to part, I got by her order into a
large osier basket, with an embroidered silk covering of her own
manufacture; then the two slaves who had brought me in were
called, to carry me out as a present from the favourite to her
deluded lord; for under this pretence it is easy to screen any
amorous exports from the inspection of the officers entrusted
with the superintendence of the women.

As for Farrukhnaz and myself, we were not slack in other devices
to bring us together; and that lovely captive inspired me by
degrees with as much love as she herself entertained for me. Our
good understanding was kept a profound secret for full two
months, notwithstanding the extreme difficulty in a seraglio of
veiling the mysteries of love for any length of time from those
uninitiated, whose eyes are jaundiced by their own
disqualification. Neither was the discovery made at last by the
means of envious spies. An unlucky chance disconcerted all our
little arrangements, and the features of my fortune were at once
aggravated into a frown. One day when I had been introduced into
the presence of the sultana, in the body of an artificial dragon,
invented as a machine for a spectacle, while we were parleying
most amicably together, Soliman, to whom we had given credit for
having gone out of town, made his unwelcome appearance. He
entered so abruptly into his favourite's apartment, as scarcely
to leave time for the old slave to give us notice of his
approach. Still less was there any opportunity to conceal me.
Thus therefore, with all my enormities on my head, was I the
first object which presented itself to the astonished eyes of the
bashaw.

He seemed considerably startled at the sight; and his countenance
flashed with indignation on the instant. I considered myself as a
wretch just hovering on the brink of the grave; and death seemed
arrayed in all the paraphernalia of torture. As for Farrukhnaz,
it was very evident, in good truth, that she was miserably
frightened; but instead of owning her crime and imploring pardon,
she said to Soliman: My lord, before you pronounce my sentence,
be pleased to hear my defence. Appearances, doubtless, condemn
me; and it must strike you that I have committed an act of
treason, worthy the most dreadful punishments. It is true, I have
brought this young captive hither; it is true that I have
introduced him into my apartment, with just such artifices as I
should have used if I had entertained a violent passion for him.
And yet, I call our great prophet to witness, in spite of these
seeming irregularities, I am not faithless to you. It was my wish
to converse with this Christian slave, for the purpose of
disengaging him from his own sect, and proselytising him to that
of the true believers. But I have found in him a principle of
resistance for which I was not well prepared. I have, however,
conquered his prejudices; and he came to give me an assurance
that he would embrace Mahometanism.

I do not mean to deny that it was an act of duty to have
contradicted the favourite flatly, without paying the least
attention to the dangerous predicament in which I stood: but my
spirits were taken by surprise; the beloved partner of my
imprudence was hovering on the brink of perdition; and my own
fate was involved with hers. How could I do otherwise than give a
silent and perturbed assent to her impious fiction? My tongue,
indeed, refused to ratify it; but the bashaw, persuaded by my
acquiescence that his mistress had told him the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, suffered his angry spirit to be
tranquillized. Madam, answered he, I am willing to believe that
you have committed no infidelity towards me; and that the desire
of doing a thing agreeable to the prophet has been the means of
leading you on to risk so hazardous and delicate a proceeding. I
forgive, therefore, your imprudence, on condition that this
captive assumes the turban on the spot. He sent immediately for a
priest to initiate me. [These wandering priests are at present
known in Africa by the name of Marabut. The first gymnosophists
of Ethiopia most probably were nothing more. --  TRANSLATOR.]  My
dress was changed with all due ceremony into the Turkish. They
did just what they pleased with me; nor had I the courage to
object: or, to do myself more justice, I knew not what was
becoming of me, in so dreadful a disorder of all my faculties and
feelings. There are other good Christians in the world, who have
been guilty of apostatizing on less imminent emergencies!

After the ceremony, I took my leave of the seraglio, to go and
possess myself, under the name of Sidy Hali, of an inferior
office which Soliman had given me. I never saw the sultana more;
but an eunuch of hers came one day to look after me. He brought
with him, as a present from his mistress, jewels to a very
considerable amount, accompanied with a letter, in which the lady
assured me she should never forget my generous compliance, in
turning Mahometan to save her life. In point of fact, besides
these rich gifts, lavished upon me by Farrukhnaz, I obtained
through her interest a more considerable employment than my
first, and in the course of six or seven years became one of the
richest renegadoes in the town of Algiers.

You must be perfectly aware, that if I assisted at the prayers
put up by the Mussulmen in their mosques, or fulfilled the other
observances of their religion, it was all a mere copy of my
countenance. My inclination was always uniform and determined, as
to returning before my death into the bosom of our holy church;
and with this view I looked forward to withdrawing some time or
other into Spain or Italy with the riches I should have
accumulated. But there seemed no reason whatever against enjoying
life in the interval. I was established in a magnificent mansion,
with gardens of extent and beauty, a numerous train of slaves,
and a well-appointed equipage of pretty girls in my seraglio.
Though the Mahometans are forbidden the use of wine in that
country, they are not backward for the most part in their stolen
libations. As for me, my orgies were without either a mask or a
blush, after the manner of my brother renegadoes. I remember in
particular two of my bottle companions, with whom I often drank
down the night before we rose from table. One was a Jew, and the
other an Arabian. I took them to be good sort of people; and,
with that impression, lived in unconstrained familiarity with
them. One evening I invited them to sup at my house. On that very
day a dog of mine died --  it was a pet; we performed our pious
ablutions on his lifeless clay, and buried him with all the
solemn obsequies attendant on a Mahometan funeral. This act of
ours was not designed to turn the religion we outwardly professed
into ridicule; it was only to furnish ourselves with amusement,
and give loose to a ludicrous whim which struck us in the moment
of jollity, that of paying the last offices of humanity to my
dog.

This action was, however, very near laying me by the heels. On
the following day there came a fellow to my house, saying, Master
Sidy Hali, it is no laughing matter that induces me to pay you
this visit. My employer, the cadi, wants to have a word in your
ear; be so good, if you please, as just to step to his office,
without loss of time. An Arabian merchant, who supped with you
last night, has laid an information respecting a certain act of
irreverence perpetrated by you, on occasion of a dog which you
buried. It is on that charge that I summon you to appear this day
before the judge; and in case of failure, you are hereby warned
that you will be the subject of a criminal prosecution. Away went
he, leaving me to digest his discourse; but the citation stuck in
my throat, and took away my appetite. The Arabian had no reason
whatever to set his face against me; and I could not comprehend
the meaning of the dog's trick the scoundrel had played me. The
circumstance at all events demanded my prompt attention. I knew
the cadi's character: a saint on the outside, but a sinner in his
heart. Away went I therefore to wait on this judge, but not with
empty pockets. He sent for me into his private room, and began
upon me in all the vehemence of pious indignation: You are a
fellow rejected out of paradise! a blasphemer of our holy law! a
man loathsome and abominable to look upon! You have performed the
funeral service of a Mussulman over a dog. What an act of
sacrilege! Is it thus, then, that you reverence our most holy
ceremonies? Have you only turned Mahometan to laugh at our
devotions and our rites? My honoured master, answered I, the
Arabian who has told you such a cock-and-bull story is a wolf in
sheep's clothing; and more than that, he is even an accomplice in
my crime, if it is one, to grant such rest as to peace-parted
souls to a faithful household servant, to an animal with more
good qualities than half the two-legged Mahometans out of
Christendom. His attachment besides to people of merit and
consideration in the world was at once moral and sensible; and at
his death he left several little tokens of remembrance to his
friends. By his last will and testament, he bequeathed his
effects in the manner therein mentioned, and did me the honour to
name me for his executor. This old crony came in for twenty
crowns, that for thirty, and another for a cool hundred; but your
worship is interested deeply in this instrument, pursued I,
drawing out my purse; he has left you residuary legatee, and here
is the amount of the bequest. The cadi's gravity could not but
relax, after the posthumous kindness of his deceased friend; and
he laughed outright in the face of the mock executor. As we were
alone, there was no occasion to make wry mouths at the purse, and
my acquittal was pronounced in these words: Go, Master Sidy Hali;
it was a very pious act of yours, to enlarge the obsequies of a
dog, who had so manly a fellow-feeling for honest folks.

By this device I got out of the scrape; and if the hint did not
increase my religion, it doubled my circumspection. I was
determined no longer to open either my cellar or my soul in
presence of Arabian or Jew. My bottle companion henceforward was
a young gentleman from Leghorn, who had the happiness of being my
slave. His name was Azarini. I was of another kidney from
renegadoes in general, who impose greater hardships on their
Christian slaves than do the Turks themselves. All my captives
waited for the period of their ransom, without any impatient
hankering after home. My behaviour to them was, in truth, so
gentle and fatherly, that many of them assured me they were more
afraid of changing their master than anxious after their liberty;
whatever magic that word may have to the ears of those who have
felt what it is to be deprived of it.

One day the bashaw's corsairs came into port with considerable
prizes. Their cargo amounted to more than a hundred slaves of
either sex, carried off from the Spanish coast. Soliman retained
but a very small number, and all the rest were sold. I happened
to go to market, and bought a Spanish girl, ten or twelve years
old. She cried as if her heart would break, and looked the
picture of despair. It seemed strange, that at her age slavery
should make such an impression on her. I told her, in Castilian,
to combat with her terrors: and assured her that she was fallen
into the hands of a master who had not put off humanity when he
took up the turban. The little mourner, not initiated in the
trade of grief, pursued the subject of her lamentations without
listening to me. Her whole soul seemed to be breathed in her
sighs; she descanted on her wretched fate, and exclaimed from
time to time in softened accents: O my mother, why were we ever
parted? I could bear my lot with patience, might we share it
together. With these lamentations on her lips, she turned round
towards a woman of from five-and-forty to fifty, standing at the
distance of several paces, and waiting with her eyes fixed to the
ground, in a determined, sullen silence, till she met with a
purchaser. I asked my young bargain if the lady she was looking
at was her mother. Alas! she is, indeed, sir, replied the girl;
for the love of God, do not let me be parted from her. Well,
then, my distressed little damsel, said I, if it will give you
any pleasure, there is no more to do than to settle you both in
the same quarters, and then you will give over your murmuring. On
the very moment I went up to the mother, with the intention of
cheapening her; but no sooner did I cast my eyes on her face,
than I knew again, with what emotion you may guess! the very form
and pressure of Lucinda. Just heaven! said I within myself; this
is my mother! Nature whispers it in my ear, and can I doubt her
evidence? On her part, whether a keen resentment of her woes
pointed out an enemy in every object on which she glanced, or
else it might be my dress that disfigured me; . . . . or else I
might have grown a little older in about a dozen years since she
had seen me . . . . but however historians may account for it,
she did not know me. But I knew her, and bought her: the pair
were sent home to my house.

When they were safely lodged, I wished to surprise them with the
pleasure of ascertaining who I was. Madam, said I to Lucinda, is
it possible that my features should not strike you? 'Tis true, I
wear whiskers and a turban: but is Raphael less your son for
that? My mother thrilled through all her frame at these words,
looked at me with an eager gaze, my whole self rushed into her
recollection, and into each other's arms we affectionately flew.
I then caressed, in moderated ecstasies, her daughter, who
perhaps knew as much about having a brother as I did about having
a sister. Tell the truth, said I to my mother; in all your
theatrical discoveries, did you ever meet with one so truly
natural and dramatic as this? My dear son, answered she, in an
accent of sorrow, the first sight of you after so long a
separation overwhelmed me with joy, but the revulsion was only
the more deeply distressing. In what condition, alas! do I again
behold you? My own slavery is a thousand times less revolting to
my feelings than the disgraceful habiliments . . . . Heyday! By
all the powers, madam, interrupted I with a hearty laugh, I am
quite delighted with your newly-acquired morality: this is
excellent in an actress. Well! well! as heaven is my judge, my
honoured mamma, you are mightily improved in your principles, if
my transformation astounds your religious eyesight. So far from
quarrelling with your turban, consider me rather as an actor,
playing a Turkish character on the stage of the world. Though a
conformist, I am just as much a Mussulman as when I was in Spain;
nay, in the bottom of my heart, I never was a more firm believer
in our Christian creed than at the present moment. When you shall
become acquainted with all my hair-breadth escapes, since I have
been domesticated in this country, you will not be rigorous in
your censure. Love has been the cause of my apostasy, and he who
worships at that shrine may be absolved from all other
infidelities. I have a little of my mother in me, take my word
for it. Another reason besides ought to moderate your disgust at
seeing me under my present circumstances. You were expecting to
experience a harsh captivity in Algiers, but you find in your
protector a son, with all the tenderness and reverence befitting
his relation to you, and rich enough to maintain you here in
plenty and comfort, till a favourable opportunity offers of
returning with safety into Spain. Admit, therefore, the force of
the proverb, which says that evil itself is good for something.

My dear son, said Lucinda, since you fully intend one day to go
back into your own country, and to throw off the mantle of
Mahomet, my scruples are all satisfied. Thanks to heaven,
continued she, I shall be able to carry back your sister Beatrice
safe and sound into Castile. Yes, madam, exclaimed I, so you may.
We will all three, as soon as the season may serve, go and throw
ourselves into the bosom of our family: for I make no matter of
doubt but you have still in Spain other indisputable evidences of
your prolific powers. No, said my mother, I have only you two,
the offspring of my body; and you are to know that Beatrice is
the fruit of a marriage, manufactured in as workmanlike a manner
as any within the pale of the church. And pray, for what reason,
replied I, might not my little sister have been just as
contraband as myself? How did you ever work yourself up to the
formidable resolution of marrying? I have heard you say a hundred
times, in my childhood, that there was no benefit of clergy for a
pretty woman who could commit such an offence as to take up with
a husband. Times and seasons ebb and flow, my son, rejoined she.
Men of the most resolute character may be shaken in their
purposes: and do you require that a woman should be inflexible in
hers? But I will now relate to you the story of my life since
your departure from Madrid. She then began the following recital,
which will never be obliterated from my memory. I will not
withhold from you so curious a narrative.

It is nearly thirteen years, if you recollect, said my mother,
since you left young Leganez. Just at that time, the Duke of
Medina Coeli told me that he had a mind to sup with me one
evening in private. The day was fixed. I made preparations for
his reception: he came, and I pleased him. He required from me
the sacrifice of all his rivals, past, present, and to come. I
came into his terms, in the hope of being well paid for my
complaisance. There was no deficiency on that score. On the very
next morning, I received presents from him, which were followed
up by a long train of kindred attentions. I was afraid of not
being able to hold in my chains a man of his exalted rank: and
this apprehension was the better founded, because it was a matter
of notoriety, that he had escaped from the clutches of several
celebrated beauties, whose chains he had worn, only for the
purpose of breaking. But for all that, so far from surfeiting on
the relish of my kindness, his appetite grew by what it fed on.
In short, I found out the secret of entertaining him, and
impounding his heart, naturally roving, so that it should not go
astray according to its usual volatility.

He had now been my admirer for three months, and I had every
reason to flatter myself that the arrangement would be lasting,
when a lady of my acquaintance and myself happened to go to an
assembly, where the duchess his wife was of the party. We were
invited to a concert of vocal and instrumental music. We
accidentally seated ourselves too near the duchess, who took it
into her head to be affronted, that I should exhibit my person in
a place where she was. She sent me word by one of her women, that
she should take it as a favour if I would quit the room
immediately. I sent back an answer, just as saucy as the message.
The duchess, irritated to fury, laid her wrongs before her
husband, who came to me in person, and said: Retire, Lucinda.
Though noblemen of the first rank attach themselves to pretty
playthings like yourself, it is highly unbecoming in you to
forget your proper distance. If we love you better than our
wives, we honour our wives more than you: whenever, therefore,
your insolence shall go so far as to set yourselves up for their
rivals under their very noses, you will always be mortified, and
made to know your places.

Fortunately the duke held his cruel language to me in so low a
tone of voice as not to have been overheard by the people about
us. I withdrew in deep confusion, and cried with vexation at
having incurred such an affront. At once, to crown my shame and
aggravate my chastisement, the actors and actresses got hold of
the story on the very same evening. To do them justice, these
gentry must contrive to entertain a familiar spirit, whose
business is to fly about, and whisper in the ear of one whatever
falls out amiss to the other. Suppose, for instance, that an
actor gets drunk and makes a fool of himself; or an actress gets
hold of a rich cully and makes a fool of him! The green-room is
sure to ring with all the particulars, and a few more than are
true. All my kindred of the sock and buskin were informed at once
of what had happened at the concert, and a blessed life they led
me with their quips and quiddities. Never was there charity like
theirs. Without beginning at home, heaven only knows where it
ends! But I held myself too high to be affected by their jibes
and jeers: nor did even the loss of the Duke de Medina Coeli hang
heavy on my spirits; for true it was, I never saw him more at my
toilette, but learned, a very short time after, that he had got
into the trammels of a little warbler.

When a theatrical lady has the good luck to be in fashion, she
may change her lover as often as her petticoat: and one noble
fool, should he even recover his wits at the end of three days,
serves excellently well for a decoy to his successor. No sooner
was it buzzed about Madrid, that the duke had raised the siege,
than a new host of would-be conquerors appeared before the
trenches. The very rivals whom I had sacrificed to his wishes,
looking at my charms through the magnifying medium of delay and
disappointment, came back again in crowds to encounter new
caprices; to say nothing of a thousand fresh hearts, ready to
bargain on the mere report of my being to let. I had never been
so exclusively the mode. Of all the men who put in for being
cajoled by me, a portly German, belonging to the Duke of Ossuna's
household, seemed to bid highest. Not that his personal
attractions were by any means the most catching; but then there
were a thousand amiable pistoles on the list of candidates,
scraped together by perquisites in his master's service, and
turned adrift with the prodigality of a prince, in the hope of
becoming my favoured lover. This fat pigeon to be plucked was by
name Brutandorf. As long as his pockets were lined, his reception
was warm: empty purses meet.with fastened doors. The principles
on which my friendship rested were not altogether to his taste.
He came to the play to look after me during the performance. I
was behind the scenes. It was his humour to load me with
reproaches; it was mine to laugh in his face. This provoked his
boorish wrath, and he gave me a box on the ear, like a clumsy-
fisted German as he was. I set up a loud scream: the business of
the stage was suspended. I came forward to the front, and,
addressing the Duke of Ossuna, who was at the play on that
occasion with his lady duchess, begged his protection from the
German gallantry of his establishment. The duke gave orders for
our proceeding with the piece, and intimated that he would hear
the parties after the curtain had dropped. At the conclusion of
the play I presented myself in all the dreary pomp of tragedy
before the duke, and laid open my griefs in all the majesty of
woe. As for my German pugilist, his defence was on a level with
his provocation; so far from being sorry for what he had done,
his fingers itched to give me another dressing. The cause being
heard pro and con, the Duke of Ossuna said to his Scandinavian
savage: Brutandorf I dismiss you from my service, and beg never
to see anything more of you, not because you have given a box on
the ear to an actress, but for your failure in respect to your
master and mistress, in having presumed to interrupt the progress
of the play in their presence.

This decision was a bitter pill for me to swallow. It was high
treason against my histrionic majesty, that the German was not
turned off on the ground of having insulted me. It seemed
difficult to conceive the possibility of a greater crime than
that of insulting a principal actress: and where crimes are
parallel, punishments should tally. The retribution in this case
would have been exemplary; and I expected no less. This
unpleasant occurrence undeceived me, and proved, to my
mortification, that the public distinguished between the actors
and the personages they may chance to enact. On this conviction,
my pride revolted at the theatre: I resolved to give up my
engagements to go and live at a distance from Madrid. I fixed on
the city of Valencia for the place of my retreat, and went
thither under a feigned character, with a property of twenty
thousand ducats in money and jewels: a sum in my mind more than
sufficient to maintain me for the remainder of my days, since it
was my purpose to lead a retired life. I rented a small house at
Valencia, and limited my establishment to a female servant and a
page, who were as ignorant of my birth, parentage, and education,
as the rest of the town. I gave myself out for the widow of an
officer belonging to the king's household, and intimated that I
had made choice of Valencia for my residence, on the report that
it was one of the most agreeable neighbourhoods in Spain. I saw
very little company, and maintained so reserved a deportment,
that there never was the slightest suspicion of my having been an
actress. Yet, not withstanding all the pains I took to hide
myself from the garish eye of day, I had worse success against
the piercing ken of a gentleman, who had a country seat near
Paterna. He was of an ancient family, in person genteel and
manly, from five-and-thirty to forty years of age, nobly
connected, but scandalously in debt; a contradiction in the
vocabulary of honour, neither more unaccountable nor uncommon in
the kingdom of Valencia, than what takes place every day in other
parts of the civilized world.

This gentleman of a generation or two before the present, finding
my person to his liking, was desirous of knowing if in other
respects I was a commodity for his market. He set every engine at
work to inquire into the most minute particulars, and had the
pleasure to learn from general report, that I was a warm widow
with a comfortable jointure, and a person little, if anything,
the worse for wear. It struck him that this was just the match;
so that in a very short time an old lady came to my house,
telling me, from him, that with equal admiration of my virtues
and my charms, he laid himself and his fortune at my feet, and
was ready to lead me to the altar, if I could condescend so far
as to become his wife. I required three days to make up my mind
on the subject. In this interval, I made inquiries about the
gentleman; and hearing a good character of him, notwithstanding
the deranged state of his finances, it was my determination to
marry him without more ado, so that the preliminaries were soon
ratified by a definitive treaty.

Don Manuel de Xerica, for that was my husband's name, took me
immediately after the ceremony to his castle, which had an air of
antiquity highly flattering to his family pride. He told a story
about one of his ancestors who built it in days of yore, and
because it was not founded the day before yesterday, jumped to a
conclusion that there was not a more ancient house in Spain than
that of Xerica. But nobility, like perishable merchandise, will
run to decay; the castle, shored up on this side and on that, was
in the very agony of tumbling to pieces: what a buttress for Don
Manuel and for his old walls was his marriage with me! More than
half my savings were laid out on repairs; and the residue was
wanted to set us going in a genteel style among our country
neighbours. Behold me, then, you who can believe it, landed on a
new planet, transformed into the presiding genius of a castle,
the Lady Bountiful of my parish: our stage machinery could never
have furnished such a change! I was too good an actress not to
have supported my new rank and dignity with appropriate grace. I
assumed high airs, theatrical grandeurs, a most dignified strut
and demeanour; all which made the bumpkins conceive a wonderful
idea of my exalted origin. How would they not have tickled their
fancies at my expense, had they known the real truth of the case!
The gentry of the neighbourhood would have scoffed at me most
unmercifully, and the country people would have been much more
chary of the respect they shewed me.

It was now near six years that I had lived very happily with Don
Manuel, when he ended ways, means, and life together. My legacy
consisted of a broken fortune to splice, and your sister
Beatrice, then more than four years old, to maintain. The castle,
which was our only tangible resource, was unfortunately mortgaged
to several creditors, the principal of whom was one Bernard
Astuto. Cunning by name, and cunning by nature! He practised as
an attorney at Valencia, and bore his faculties in all the infamy
of pettifogging; law and equity conspired in his person to push
the trade of cozening and swindling to the utmost extremity. To
think of falling into the clutches of such a creditor! A
gentleman's property under the gripe of such a claw as this
attorney's affords much the same sport as a lamb to a wolf or a
dove to a kite. Nearly after the fashion of these beasts and
birds of prey, did Signor Astuto, when informed of my husband's
death, hover over his victim, concealing his fell purpose under
the ambush of the law. The whole estate would have been swallowed
up in pleadings, affidavits, demurrers, and rejoinders, but for
the light thrown upon the proceedings by my lucky star; under
whose influence the plaintiff was turned at once into defendant,
and was left without a reply to the arguments of these all-
powerful eyes. I got to the blind side of him in an interview,
which I contrived during the progress of our litigation. Nothing
was wanting on my part, I own it frankly, to fill him brimful of
the tender passion; an ardent longing to save my goods, chattels,
and domain, made me practise upon him, to my own disgust, that
system of coquettish tactics and flirtation which had drawn so
many former fools into an ambuscade. Yet, with all the resources
of a veteran, I was very near letting the attorney escape. He was
so barricaded by mouldy parchments, so immured in actions and
informations, as scarcely to seem susceptible of any love but the
love of law. The truth, however, was, that this moping
pettifogger, this porer over ponderous abridgments, this scrawler
of acts and deeds, had more young blood in him than I was aware
of, and a trick of looking at me out of the corner of his eye. He
professed to be a novice in the art of courtship. My whole heart 
and soul, madam, said he, have been wedded to my profession; and
the consequence has been, that the uses and customs of gallantry
have seemed weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable to me. But
though not a man of outward show, I am well furnished with the
stock in trade of love. To come to the point at once, if you can
resolve in your mind to marry me, we will make a grand bonfire of
the whole lawsuit; and I will give the go-by to those rascally
creditors, who have joined issue with me in our attack upon your
estate. You shall have the life interest, and your daughter the
reversion. So good a bargain for Beatrice and myself would not
allow of any wavering: I closed without delay on the conditions.
The attorney kept his word most miraculously: he turned short
round upon the other creditors, defeated them with the very
weapons himself had furnished with their joint campaign, and
secured me in the possession of my house and lands. It was
probably the first time in his life that he had taken up the
cause of the widow and the orphan.

Thus did I become the honoured wife of an attorney, without
losing my rank as the lady of the manor. But this incongruous
marriage ruined me in the esteem of the gentry about Valencia.
The women of quality looked upon me as a person who had lowered
herself, and refused any longer to visit me. This inevitably
threw me on the acquaintance of the tradespeople; a circumstance
which could not do otherwise than hurt my feelings a little at
first, because I had been accustomed, for the last six years, to
associate only with ladies of the higher classes. But it was in
vain to fret about it; and I soon found my level. I got most
intimately acquainted with the wives of my husband's brethren of 
the quill and brief. Their characters were not a little
entertaining. There was an absurdity in their manners, which
tickled me to the very soul. These trumpery fine ladies held
themselves up for something far above the common run. Well-a-day!
said I to myself, every now and then, when they forgot the blue-
bag: this is the way of the world! Every one fancies himself to
be something vastly superior to his neighbour. I thought we
actresses only did not know our places; women at the lower end of
private life, as far as I see, are just as absurd in their
pretensions. I should like, by way of check upon their
presumption, to propose a law, that family pictures and pedigrees
should be hung up in every house. Were the situation left to the
choice of the owner, the deuce is in it if these legal gentry
would not cram their scrivening ancestors either into the cellar
or the garret.

After four years passed in the holy state of wedlock, Signor
Bernardo d'Astuto fell sick, and went the way of all flesh. We
had no family. Between my settlement and what I was worth before,
I found myself a well-endowed widow. I had too the reputation of
being so; and on this report, a Sicilian gentleman, by name
Colifichini, determined to stick in my skirts, and either ruin or
marry me. The alternative was kindly left to my own choice. He
was come from Palermo to see Spain, and, after having satisfied
his curiosity, was waiting, as he said, at Valencia for an
opportunity of taking his passage back to Sicily. The spark was
not quite five-and-twenty; of an elegant, though diminutive
person; . . . . in short, his figure absolutely haunted me. He
found the means of getting to the speech of me in private; and, I
will own it to you frankly, I fell distractedly in love with him
from the moment of our very first interview. On his part, the
little knave flounced over head and ears in admiration of my
charms. I do really think, God forgive me for it, that we should
have been married out of hand, if the death of the attorney,
whose funeral baked meats were scarcely cold enough to have
furnished forth the marriage tables, would have allowed me to
contract a new engagement at so short a warning. But since I had
got into the matrimonial line, it was necessary that where the
church makes the feast, the devil should not send cooks; I
therefore took care always to season my nuptials to the palate of
the world at large.

Thus did we agree to delay our coming together for a time, out of
a tender regard to appearances. Colifichini, in the mean time,
devoted all his attentions to me: his passion, far from
languishing, seemed to become more a part of himself from day to
day. The poor lad was not too flush of ready money. This struck
my observation; and he was no longer at a loss for his little
pocket expenses. Besides being very nearly twice his age, I
recollected having laid the men under contribution in my younger
days; so that I looked upon what I was then lavishing as a sort
of restitution, which balanced my debtor and creditor account,
and made me quits with my conscience. We waited, as patiently as
our frailty would allow, for the period when widows may in
decency so far surmount their grief as to try their luck again.
When the happy morning rose, we presented ourselves before the
altar, where we plighted our faith to each other by oaths the
most solemn and binding. We then retired to my castle, where I
may truly say that we lived for two years, less as husband and
wife than as tender and unfettered lovers. But alas l such an
union, so happy and sentimental, was not long to be the lot of
humanity: a pleurisy carried off my dear Colifichini.

At this passage in her history, I interrupted my mother. Heyday l
madam, your third husband dispatched already? You must he a most
deadly taking. What do you mean? answered she: is it for me to
dispute the will of heaven, and lengthen the days parcelled out
to every son of earth? If I have lost three husbands, it was none
of my fault. Two of them cost me many a salt tear. If I buried
any with dry eyes, it was the attorney. As that was merely a
match of interest, I was easily reconciled to the loss of him.
But to return to Colifichini, I was going to tell you, that some
months after his death, I had a mind to go and take possession of
a country house near Palermo, which he had settled on me as a
jointure, by our marriage contract. I took my passage for Sicily
with my daughter; but we were taken on the voyage by Algerine
corsairs. This city was our destination. Happily for us, you
happened to he at the market where we were put up for sale. Had
it been otherwise, we must have fallen into the hands of some
barbarian purchaser, who would have used us ill; and we probably
might have passed our whole life in slavery, nor would you ever
have heard of us.

Such was my mother's story. To return to my own, gentlemen, I
gave her the best apartment in my house, with the liberty of
living after her own fashion; which was a circumstance very
agreeable to her taste. She had a confirmed habit of loving,
brought to such a system by so many repeated experiments, that it
was impossible for her to do without either a gallant or a
husband. At first she looked with favour on some of my slaves;
but Hali Pegelin, a Greek renegado, who sometimes came and called
upon us, soon drew all her glances on himself. She conceived a
stronger passion for him than she had ever done for Colifichini:
and such was her aptitude for pleasing the men, that she found
the way to wind herself about the heart of this man also. I
seemed as if unconscious of their good understanding; being then
intent only on my return into Spain. The bashaw had already given
me leave to fit out a vessel, for the purpose of sweeping the sea
and committing acts of piracy. This armament was my sole object.
Just a week before it was completed, I said to Lucinda: Madam, we
shall take our leave of Algiers almost immediately; so that you
will bid a long farewell to an abode which you cannot but detest.

My mother turned pale at these words, and stood silent and
motionless. My surprise was extreme. What do I see? said I to
her: whence comes it that you present such an image of terror and
despair? My design was to fill you with transport; but the effect
of my intelligence seems only to overwhelm you with affliction. I
thought to have been thanked for my welcome news; and hastened
with eagerness to tell you that all is ready for our departure.
Are you no longer in the mind to go back into Spain? No, my son;
Spain no longer has any charms for me, answered my mother. It has
been the scene of all my sorrows, and I have turned my back on it
for ever. What do I hear? exclaimed I in an agony: Ah! tell me
rather, that it is a fatal passion which alienates you from your
native country. Just heavens! what a change! When you landed
here, every object that met your eyes was hateful to them, but
Hali Pegelin has given another colour to your fancy. I do not
deny it, replied Lucinda: I love that renegado, and mean to take
him for my fourth husband. What an idea! interrupted I with
horror: you, to marry a Mussulman! You forget yourself to be a
Christian, or rather have hitherto been one only in name and not
in heart. Ah! my dear mother, what a futurity do you present to
my imagination! You are running headlong to your eternal ruin.
You are going to do voluntarily, and from impure motives, what I
have only done under the pressure of necessity.

I urged many other arguments in the same strain, to turn her
aside from her purpose: but all my eloquence was wasted; she had
made up her mind to her future destiny. Not satisfied with
following the bent of her base inclinations, and leaving her son
to go and live with this renegado, she had even formed a design
to settle Beatrice in her own family. This I opposed with all my
might and main. Ah! wretched Lucinda, said I, if nothing is
capable of keeping you within the limits of your duty, at least
rush on perdition alone; confine with in yourself the fury which
possesses you; cast not a young innocent headlong over a
precipice, though you yourself may venture on the leap. Lucinda
quitted my presence in moody silence. It struck me that a remnant
of reason still enlightened her, and that she would not
obstinately persevere in requiring her daughter to be given up to
her. How little did I know of my mother! One of my slaves said to
me two days afterwards: Sir, take care of yourself. A captive
belonging to Pegelin has just let me into a secret, of which you
cannot too soon avail yourself. Your mother has changed her
religion; and as a punishment upon you for having refused
Beatrice to her wishes, it is her purpose to acquaint the bashaw
with your flight. I could not for a moment doubt but what Lucinda
was the woman to do just what my slave had said she would. The
lady had given me manifold opportunities of studying her
character; and it was sufficiently evident that by dint of
playing bloody parts in tragedy, she had familiarized herself
with the guilty scenes of real life. It would not in the least
have gone against her nature to have got me burned alive; nor
probably would she have been more affected by my exit after that
fashion, than by the winding up of a dramatic tale.

The warning of my slave, therefore, was not to be neglected. My
embarkation was hastened on. I took some Turks on board,
according to the practice of the Algerine corsairs when going on
a piratical expedition: but I engaged no more than was necessary
to blind the eyes of jealousy, and weighed anchor from the port
as soon as possible, with all my slaves and my sister Beatrice.
You will do right to suppose, that I did not forget, in that
moment of anxiety, to pack up my whole stock of money and jewels,
amounting probably to the worth of six thousand ducats. When we
were fairly out at sea, we began by securing the Turks. They were
easily mastered, as my slaves outnumbered them. We had so
favourable a wind, that we made the coast of Italy in a very
short time. Without let or hindrance, we got into the harbour of
Leghorn, where I thought the whole city must have come out to see
us land. The father of my slave Azarini, either accidentally or
from curiosity, happened to be among the gazers. He looked with
all his eyes at my captives, as they came ashore; but though his
object was to discover his lost son among the number, it was with
little hope of so fortunate a result. But how powerful is the
plea of nature! What transports, expressed by mutual embraces,
followed the recognition of a tie so close, but so painfully
interrupted for a time!

As soon as Azarini had acquainted his father who I was, and what
brought me to Leghorn, the old man obliged me, as well as
Beatrice, to accept of an apartment in his house. I shall pass
over in silence the description of a thousand ceremonies,
necessary to be gone through, in order to my return into the
bosom of the church; suffice it to say, that I forswore
Mahometanism with much more sincerity than I had pledged myself
to it. After having entirely purged myself from my Algerine
leaven, I sold my ship, and set all my slaves at liberty. As for
the Turks, they were committed to prison at Leghorn, to be
exchanged against Christians. I received kind attention in
abundance from the Azarini family: indeed, the young man married
my sister Beatrice, who, to speak the truth, was no bad match for
him, being a gentleman's daughter, and inheriting the castle of
Xerica, which my mother had taken care to let out to a rich
tanner of Paterna, when she resolved upon her voyage to Sicily.

From Leghorn, after having staid there some time, I departed for
Florence, a town I had a strong desire to see. I did not go
thither without letters of recommendation. Azarini the father had
connections at the grand duke's court, and introduced me to them
as a Spanish gentleman related to his family. I tacked don to my
name, in honest rivalry of impudence with other low Spaniards,
who take up that travelling title of honour without compunction,
when far enough from home to set detection at defiance. Boldly
then did I dub myself Don Raphael; and appeared at court with
suitable splendour, on the strength of what I had brought from
Algiers, to keep my nobility from starving. The high personages,
to whom old Azarini had written in my favour, gave out in their
circle that I was a person of quality; so that with this
testimony, and a natural knack I had of giving myself airs, the
deuce must have been in it if I could not have passed muster for
a man of some consequence. I soon got to be hand in glove with
the principal nobility; and they presented me to the grand duke.
I had the good fortune to make myself agreeable. It then became
an object with me to pay court to that prince, and to study his
humour. I sucked in with greedy ear all that his most experienced
courtiers said about him, and by their conversation fathomed all
his peculiarities. Among other things, he encouraged a play of
wit; was fond of good stories and lively repartees. On this hint
I formed myself. Every morning I wrote down in my pocket-book
such anecdotes as I meant to rack off in the course of the day.
My stock was considerably extensive; so that I was a walking
budget of balderdash. Yet even my estate in nonsense required
economy; and I began to get out at elbows, so as to be reduced to
borrow from myself, and mortgage my resources twenty times over:
but when the shallow current of wit and wisdom was nearly at its
summer drought, a torrent of matter-of-fact lies gave new force
to the exhausted stream of quibble. Intrigues which never had
been intrigued, and practical jokes which had never been played
off were the tools I worked with, and exactly to the level of the
grand duke: nay, what often happens to dull dealers in
inextinguishable vivacity, the mornings were spent in finaciering
those hinds of conversation, which were to be drawn upon after
dinner, as if from a perennial spring of preternatural wealth.

I had even the impudence to set up for a poet, and made my
broken-winded muse trot to the praises of the prince. I allow
candidly that the verses were execrable; but then they were quite
good enough for their readers; and it remains a doubt whether, if
they had been better, the grand duke would not have thrown them
into the fire. They seemed to be just what he would have written
upon himself. In short, it was impossible to miss the proper
style on such a subject But whatever might be my merit as a poet,
the prince, by little and little, took such a liking to my
person, as gave occasion of jealousy to his courtiers. They tried
to find out who I was. This, however, was beyond their compass.
All they could learn was, that I had been a renegado. This was
whispered forthwith in the prince's ear, in the hopes of hurting
me. Not that it succeeded: on the contrary, the grand duke one
day commanded me to give him a faithful account of my adventures
at Algiers. I obeyed; and the recital, without reserve on my
part, contributed more than any other of my stories to his
entertainment

Don Raphael, said he, after I had ended my narrative, I have a
real regard for you, and mean to give you a proof of it, which
will place my sincerity beyond a doubt Henceforth you are
admitted into my most private confidence, as the first fruits of
which, you are to know that one of my ministers has a wife, with
whom I am in love. She is the most enchanting creature at court;
but at the same time the most impregnable. Shut up in her own
household, exclusively attached to a husband who idolizes her,
she seems to be ignorant of the combustion her charms have
kindled in Florence. You will easily conceive the difficulty of
such a conquest And yet this epitome of loveliness, so deaf to
all the whispers of common seduction, has sometimes listened to
my sighs. I have found the means of speaking to her without
witnesses. She is not unacquainted with my sentiments. I do not
flatter myself with having warmed her into love; she has given me
no reason to form so sweet a conjecture. Yet I will not despair
of pleasing her by my constancy, and by the cautious conduct,
even to mystery, which I take care to observe.

My passion for this lady, continued he, is known only to herself.
Instead of pursuing my game wantonly, and overleaping the rights
of my subjects like a true sovereign, I conceal from all the
world the knowledge of my love. This delicacy seems due to
Mascarini, the husband of my beloved mistress. His zeal and
attachment to me, his services and honesty, oblige me to act in
this business with the closest secrecy and circumspection. I will
not plunge a dagger into the bosom of this ill-starred husband,
by declaring myself a suitor to his wife. Would he might for ever
be insensible, were it within possibility, to the secret flame
which devours me: for I am persuaded that he would die of grief,
were he to know the circumstances I have just now confided to
you. I therefore veil my pursuit in impenetrable darkness; and
have determined to make use of you, for the purpose of conveying
to Lucretia the merit of the sacrifices my delicacy imposes on my
feelings. Of these you shall be the interpreter. I doubt not but
you will acquit yourself to a marvel of your commission. Contrive
to be intimate with Mascarini; make a point of worming yourself
into his friendship. Then an introduction to his family will be
easy; and you will secure to yourself the liberty of conversing
freely with his wife. This is what I require from you, and what I
feel assured that you will execute with all the dexterity and
discretion necessary to so delicate an undertaking.

I promised the grand duke to do my utmost, in furtherance of his
good opinion, and in aid of his success with the object of his
desires. I kept my word without loss of time. No pains were
spared to get into Mascarini's good graces; and the design was
not difficult to accomplish. Delighted to find his friendship
sought by a man possessing the affections of the prince, he
advanced half way to meet my overtures. His house was always open
to me, my intercourse with his lady was unrestrained; and I have
no hesitation in affirming my measures to have been taken so
well, as to have precluded the slightest suspicion of the embassy
intrusted to my management. It is true, he had but a small share
of the Italian jealousy, relying as he did on the virtue of his
Lucretia; so that he often shut himself up in his closet, and
left me alone with her. I entered at once into the pith and
marrow of my subject. The grand duke's passion was my topic with
the lady; and I told her that the motive of my visits was only to
plead for that prince. She did not seem to be over head and ears
in love with him; and yet, methought, vanity forbade her to frown
decisively on his addresses. She took a pleasure in listening to
his sighs, without sighing in concert. A certain propriety of
heart she had; but then she was a woman; and it was obvious that
her rigour was giving way insensibly to the triumphant image of a
sovereign, bound in the fetters of her resistless charms. In
short, the prince had good reason to flatter himself that he
might dispense with the ill-breeding of a Tarquin, and yet bend
Lucretia to a compliance with his longings. An incident, however,
the most unexpected in the annals of romance, blasted his
flattering prospects; in what manner you shall hear.

I am naturally free and easy with the women. This constitutional
assurance, whether a blessing or a curse, was ripened into
inveterate habit among the Turks. Lucretia was a pretty woman. I
forgot that I was courting by proxy, and assumed the tone of a
principal. Nothing could exceed the warmth and gallantry with
which I offered my services to the lady. Far from appearing
offended at my boldness, or silencing me by a resentful answer,
she only said with a sarcastic smile: Own the truth, Don Raphael;
the grand duke has pitched upon a very faithful and zealous
agent. You serve him with an integrity not sufficiently to be
commended. Madam, said I in the same strain, let us not examine
things with too much nicety. A truce, I beseech you, with moral
discussions; they are not of my element: good honest passion
tallies better with our natures. I do not believe myself, after
all, the first prince's confidant who has ousted his master in an
affair of gallantry; your great lords have often dangerous
rivals, in more humble messengers than myself. That may be,
replied Lucretia: but a haughty temper stands with me in the
place of virtue, and no one under the degree of a prince shall
ever sully these charms. Regulate your behaviour accordingly,
added she in a tone of serious severity, and let us change the
subject. I willingly bury your presumption in oblivion, provided
you never hold similar discourse to me again: if you do, you may
repent of it.

Though this was a comment of some importance on my text, and
ought to have been heedfully conned over, it was no bar to my
still entertaining Mascarini's wife with my passion. I even
pressed her with more importunity than heretofore, for a kind
consent to my tender entreaties; and was rash enough to feel my
ground, by some little personal freedoms. The lady then, offended
at my words, and still more at my Mahometan quips and cranks,
gave a complete set down to my assurance. She threatened to
acquaint the grand duke with my impertinence; and declared she
would make a point of his punishing me as I deserved. These
menaces bristled up my spirit in return. My love turned at once
into hatred, and determined me to revenge myself for the contempt
with which Lucretia had treated me. I went in quest of her
husband; and after having bound him by oath not to betray me, I
informed him of his wile's correspondence with the prince, and
failed not to represent her as distractedly enamoured of him, by
way of heightening the interest of the scene. The minister, lest
the plot should become too intricately entangled, shut his wife
up, without any law but his own will, in a secret apartment,
whore he placed her under the strict guard of confidential
persons. While she was thus kept at bay by the watch-dogs of
jealousy, who prevented her from acquainting the grand duke with
her situation, I announced to that prince, with a melancholy air,
that he must think no longer of Lucretia. I told him that
Mascarini had doubtless discovered all, since he had taken it
into his head to keep a guard over his wife: that I could not
conceive what had induced him to suspect me, as I flattered
myself with having always behaved according to the most approved
rules of discretion in such cases. The lady might, I suggested,
have been beforehand, and owned all to her husband; and had
perhaps, in concert with him, suffered herself to be immured, in
order to lie hid from a pursuit so dangerous to her virtue. The
prince appeared deeply afflicted at my relation. I was not
unmoved by his distress, and repented more than once of what I
had done; but it was too late to retract. Besides, I must
acknowledge, a spiteful joy tingled in my veins, when I meditated
on the distressed condition of the disdainful fair, who had
spurned my vows.

I was feeding with impunity on the pleasure of revenge, so
palatable to all the world, but most of all to Spaniards, when
one day the grand duke, chatting with five or six nobles of his
court and myself, said to us: In what manner would you judge it
fitting for a man to be punished, who should have abused the
confidence of his prince, and designed to step in between him and
his mistress? The best way, said one of the courtiers, would be
to have him torn to pieces by four horses. Another gave it as his
verdict, that he should be soundly beaten, till he died under the
blows of the executioner. The most tender-hearted and merciful of
these Italians, with comparative lenity towards the culprit,
wished only just to admonish him of his fault, by throwing him
from the top of a tower to the bottom. And Don Raphael, resumed
the grand duke after a pause, what is his opinion? The Spaniards,
in all likelihood, would improve upon our Italian severity, is a
case of such aggravated treachery.

I fully understood, as you may well suppose, that Mascarini had
not kept his oath, or that his wife had devised the means of
acquainting the prince with what had passed between her and me.
My countenance sufficiently betokened my inward agitation. But
for all that, suppressing as well as I could my rising emotion
and alarm, I replied to the grand duke in a steady tone of voice
-- My lord, the Spaniards are more generous; under such
circumstances, they would pardon the unworthy betrayer of his
trust, and by that act of unmerited goodness would kindle in his
soul an everlasting abhorrence of his own villany. Yes, truly,
said the prince, and I fed in my own breast a similar spirit of
forbearance. Let the traitor then be pardoned; since I have
myself only to blame for having given my confidence to a man of
whom I had no knowledge, but, on the contrary, much ground of
suspicion, according to the current of common report. Don
Raphael, added he, my revenge shall be confined to this single
interdict. Quit my dominions immediately, and never appear again
in my presence. I withdrew in all haste, less hurt at my
disgrace, than delighted to have got off so cheaply. The very
next day I embarked in a Barcelona ship, just setting sail from
the port of Leghorn on its return.

At this period of his history I interrupted Don Raphael to the
following effect. For a man of shrewdness, methinks you were not
a little off your guard, in trusting yourself at Florence for
even so short a time, after having discovered the prince's love
of Lucretia to Mascarini. You might well have foreboded that the
grand duke would not be long in getting to the knowledge of your
duplicity. Your observation is very just, answered the well-
matched son of so eccentric a mother as Lucinda: and for that
reason, not trusting to the minister's promise of screening me
from his master's indignation, it had been my intention to
disappear without taking leave.

I got safe to Barcelona, continued he, with the remnant of the
wealth I had brought from Algiers; but the greater part had been
squandered at Florence in enacting the Spanish gentleman. I did
not stay long in Catalonia. Madrid was the dear place of my
nativity, and I had a longing desire to see it again, which I
satisfied as soon as possible; for mine was not a temper to stand
parleying with its own inclinations. On my arrival in town, I
chanced to take up my abode in a ready-furnished lodging, where
dwelt a lady, by name Camilla. Though at some distance from her
teens, she was a very spirit-stirring creature, as Signor Gil
Blas will hear me out in saying; for he fell in with her at
Valladolid nearly about the same time. Her parts were still more
extraordinary than her beauty; and never had a lady with a
character to let a happier talent of inveigling fools to their
ruin. But she was not like those selfish jilts, who put out the
cullibility of their lovers to usury. The pillage of the plodding
merchant, or the grave family man, was squandered upon the first
gambler or prize-fighter who happened to find his way into her
frolicsome fancy.

We loved one another from the first moment, and the conformity of
our tempers bound us so closely together, that we soon lived on
the footing of joint property. The amount, in sober sadness, was
little better than a cypher, and a few good dinners more reduced
it to that ignoble negative of number. We were each of us
thinking, as the deuce would have it, of our mutual pleasures,
without profiting in the least by those happy dispositions of
ours for living at the expense of other folks. Want at last gave
a keener edge to our wits, which indulgence had blunted. My dear
Raphael, said Camilla, let us carry the war into the enemy's
quarters, if you love me; for while we are as faithful as
turtles, we are as foolish; and fall into our own snare, instead
of laying it for the unwary. You may get into the head and heart
of a rich widow; I may conjure myself into the good graces of
some old nobleman: but as for this ridiculous fidelity, it brings
no grist to the mill. Excellent Camilla, answered I, you are
beforehand with me. I was going to make the very same proposal.
It exactly meets my ideas, thou paragon of morality. Yes; the
better to maintain our mutual fire, let us forage for substantial
fuel. As good may always be extracted out of evil, those
infidelities which are the bane of other loves, shall be the
triumph of ours.

On the basis of this treaty we took the field. At first, there
was much cry but little wool; for we had no luck at finding
cullies. Camilla met with no thing but pretty fellows, with
vanity in their hearts, tinsel on their backs, and not a maravedi
in their pockets; my ladies were all of a kidney to levy, rather
than to pay contributions. As love left us in the lurch, we paid
our devotions at the shrine of knavery. With the zeal of martyrs
to a new religion, did we encounter the frowns of the civil
power, whose myrmidons, as like the devil in their nature as
their office, were ordered on the look-out after us; but the
alguazil, with all the good qualities of which the corregidor
inherited the contraries, gave us time to make our escape out of
Madrid, for the good of the trade and a small sum of money. We
took the road to Valladolid, meaning to set up in that town. I
rented a house for myself and Camilla, who passed for my sister,
to avoid evil tongues. At first we kept a tight rein over our
speculative talents, and began by reconnoitring the ground before
we determined on our plan of operations.

One day a man accosted me in the street, with a very civil
salutation, to this effect -- Signor Don Raphael, do you
recollect my face? I answered in the negative. Then I have the
advantage of you, replied he, for yours is perfectly familiar to
me. I have seen you at the court of Tuscany, where I was then in
the grand duke's guards. It is some months since I quitted that
prince's service. I came into Spain with an Italian, who will not
discredit the politics of his country: we have been at Valladolid
these three weeks. Our residence is with a Castilian and a
Galician, who are, without dispute, two of the best creatures in
the world. We live together by the sweat of our brows, and the
labour of our hands, Our fare is not abstemious, nor have we made
any vow against the temptations of a life about the court If you
will make one of our party, my brethren will be glad of your
company; for you always seemed to me a man of spirit, above all
vulgar prejudices, in short, a monk of our order.

Such frankness from this arch-scoundrel was met half-way by mine.
Since you talk to me with so winning a candour, said I, you
deserve that I should be equally explicit with you. In good truth
I am no novice in your ritual; and if my modesty would allow me
to be the hero of my own tale, you would be convinced that your
compliments were not lavished on an unworthy subject. But enough
of my own commendations; proceed we to the point in question.
With all possible desire to become a member of your body, I shall
neglect no opportunity of proving my title to that distinction. I
had no sooner told this sharper at all points, that I would agree
to swell the number of his gang, than he conducted me to their
place of meeting, and introduced me in proper form. It was on
this occasion that I first saw the renowned Ambrose de Lamela.
These gentlemen catechised me in the religion of coveting my
neighbour's goods, and doing as I would not be done by. They
wanted to discern whether I played the villain on principle, or
had only some little practical dexterity; but I shewed them
tricks which they did not know to be on the cards, and yet
acknowledged to be better than their own. They were still deeper
lost in admiration, when in cool disdain of manual artifice, as
an every-day effort of ingenuity, I maintained my prowess in such
combinations of roguery as require an inventive brain and a solid
judgment to support them. In proof of these pretensions, I
related the adventure of Jerome de Moyadas; and on this single
specimen of my parts, they conceived my genius of so high an
order, as to elect me by common con sent for their leader. Their
choice was fully justified by a host of slippery devices, of
which I was the master-wheel, the corner-stone, or according to
whatever other metaphor in mechanics you may best express the
soul of a conspiracy. When we had occasion for a female performer
to heighten the interest, Camilla was sent upon the stage, and
played up to admiration in the parts she had to perform.

Just at that period, our friend and brother Ambrose was seized
with a longing to see his native country once more. He went for
Galicia with an assurance that we might reckon on his return. The
visit cured his patriotic sickness. As he was on the road back,
having halted at Burgos to strike some stroke of business, an
innkeeper of his acquaintance introduced him into the service of
Signor Gil Blas de Santillane, not forgetting to instruct him
thoroughly in the state of that gentleman's affairs. Signor Gil
Blas, pursued Don Raphael, addressing his discourse to me, you
know in what manner we eased you of your moveables in a ready-
furnished lodging at Valladolid; and you must doubtless have
suspected Ambrose to have been the principal contriver of that
exploit, and not without reason. On his coming into town, he ran
himself out of breath to find us, and laid open every particular
of your situation, so that the associated swindlers had nothing
to do but to build on his foundation. But you are unacquainted
with the consequences of that adventure; you shall therefore have
them on my authority. Your portmanteau was made free with by
Ambrose and myself. We also took the liberty of riding your mules
in the direction of Madrid, not dropping the least hint to
Camilla nor to our partners in iniquity, who must have partaken
in some measure of your feelings in the morning, at finding their
glory shorn of two such beams.

On the second day we changed our purpose. Instead of going to
Madrid, whence I had not sallied forth without an urgent motive,
we passed by Zebreros, and continued our journey as far as
Toledo. Our first care, in that town, was to dress ourselves in
the genteelest style; then assuming the character of two brothers
from Galicia on our travels of mere curiosity, we soon got
acquainted in the most respectable circles. I was so much in the
habit of acting the man of fashion, as not easily to be detected;
and as the generality of people are blinded by a free
expenditure, we threw dust into the eyes of all the world, by the
elegant entertainments to which we invited the ladies. Among the
women who frequented our parties, there was one not indifferent
to me. She appeared more beautiful than Camilla, and certainly
much younger. I inquired who she was; and learned that her name
was Violante, and that she was married to an ungrateful spark,
who soon grew weary of her chaste caresses, and was running after
those of a prostitute, with whom he was in love. There was no
need to say any more, to determine me on enthroning Violante the
sovereign lady and mistress of my thoughts and affections.

She was not long in coming to the knowledge of her conquest. I
began by following her about from place to place, and playing a
hundred monkey tricks to instil into her comprehension, that
nothing would please me better than the office of making her
amends for the ill usage of her husband. The pretty creature
ruminated on my proffered kindness, and to such purpose as to let
me know in the end that my labour was not wasted on an ungrateful
soil. I received a note from her in answer to several I had
transmitted by one of those convenient old dowagers, in such high
request throughout Spain and Italy. The lady sent me word that
her husband supped with his mistress every evening, and did not
return home till very late. It was impossible to mistake the
meaning of this. On that very night I planted myself under
Violante's windows, and engaged her in a most tender
conversation. At the moment of parting, it was settled between us
that every evening, at the same hour, we should meet and converse
on the same everlasting topic, without gainsaying any such other
acts of gallantry as might safely be submitted to the peering eye
of day.

Hitherto Don Balthazar, as Violante's husband was called, had no
reason to complain of his forehead; but I was a natural
philosopher, and little satisfied with metaphysical endearments.
One evening, therefore, I repaired under my lady's windows, with
the design of telling her that there was an end of life and
everything, if we could not come together on more accommodating
terms than from the balcony to the street; for I had never yet
been able to get into the house. Just as I got thither, a man
came within sight, apparently with the view of dogging me. In
fact, it was the husband returning earlier than usual from his
precious bit of amusement; but observing a male nuisance near his
nunnery, instead of coming straight home, he walked backwards and
forwards in the street. It was almost a moot point with me what I
ought to do. At last, I resolved on accosting Don Balthazar,
though neither of us had the slightest knowledge of each other.
Noble gentleman, said I, you would do me a most particular favour
by leaving the street vacant to me for this one night; I would do
as much for you another time. Sir, answered he, I was just going
to make the same request to you. I am on the look-out after a
girl, over whom a confounded fellow of a brother keeps watch and
ward like a gaoler; and she lives not twenty yards from this
place. I could wish to carry on my project without a witness. We
have the means, replied I, of attaining both our ends without
clashing; for the lady of my desires lives there, added I,
pointing to his own house. We had better even help one another,
in case of being attacked. With all my heart, resumed he; I will
go to my appointment, and we will make common cause if need be.
Under this pretence he went away, but only to observe me the more
narrowly; and the darkness of the night favoured his doing so 
without detection.

As for me, I made up to Violante's balcony in the simplicity of
my heart. She soon heard my signal, and we began our usual
parley. I was not remiss in pressing the idol of my worship to
grant me a private interview in some safe and practicable place.
She was rather coy to my entreaties, as favours hardly earned are
the higher valued: at length she took a letter out of her pocket,
and flung it down to me. There, said she, you will find in that
scrap of paper the promise of what you have teased me so long
about. She then withdrew, as the hour approached when her husband
usually came home. I put the note up carefully, and went towards
the place where Don Balthazar had told me that his business lay.
But that staunch husband, with the sagacity of an old sportsman
where his own wife was the game, came more than half-way to meet
me, with this question: Well, good sir, are you satisfied with
your happy fortunes? I have reason to be so, answered I. And as
for yourself, what have you done? has the blind god befriended
you? Alas! quite the contrary, replied he; that impertinent
brother, who takes such liberties with my beauty, thought fit to
come back from his country house, whence we hugged ourselves as
sure that he would not return till to-morrow. This infernal
chance has put all my soft and soothing pleasures out of tune.

Nothing could exceed the mutual pledges of lasting friendship
which were exchanged between Don Balthazar and me. To draw the
cords the closer, we made an appointment for the next morning in
the great square. This plotting gentleman, after we had parted,
betook himself to his own house, without giving Violante at all
to understand that he knew more about her than she wished him. On
the following day he was punctual in the great square, and I was
not five minutes after him. We exchanged greetings with all the
warmth of old friendship; but it was a vapour to mislead on his
part, though a spark of heavenly flame on mine. In the course of
conversation, this hypocritical Don Balthazar palmed upon me a
fictitious confidence, respecting his intrigue with the lady
about whom he had been speaking the night before. He put together
a long story he had been manufacturing on that subject, and all
this to hook me in to tell him, in return, by what means I had
got acquainted with Violante. The snare was too subtle for me to
escape; I owned all with the innocence of a new-born babe. I did
not even stick at shewing the note I had received from her, and
read the contents, to the following purport: "I am going to-
morrow to dine with Donna Inez. You know where she lives. It is
in the house of that confidential friend that I mean to pass some
happy moments along with you. It is impossible longer to refuse a
boon your patience has so well merited."

Here indeed, said Don Balthazar, is an epistle which promises to
crown all your wishes at once. I congratulate you beforehand on
your approaching happiness. He could not help fidgeting and
wriggling a little, while he talked in these terms of his own
household; but all his hitches and wry faces passed off, and my
eyes were as fast sealed as ever. I was so full of anticipating
titillations, as not to think of noticing my new friend, who was
obliged to get off as fast as be could, for fear of betraying his
agitation in my presence. He ran to acquaint his brother-in-law
with this strange occurrence. I know not what might pass between
them: it is only certain that Don Balthazar happened to knock at
Donna Inca's door, just when I was at that lady's house with
Violante. We were warned who it was, and I escaped by a back door
exactly as he went in at the front As soon as I had got safe off,
the women, whom the unexpected visit of this troublesome husband
had disconcerted a little, recovered their presence of mind, and
with it so large a stock of assurance, as to stand the brunt of
his attack, and put him to a nonplus in ascertaining whether they
had hid me or smuggled me out. I cannot exactly tell you what he
said to Donna Inca and his wife; nor do I believe that history
will ever furnish any authentic particulars of the squabble.

In the mean time, without suspecting yet how completely I was
gulled by Don Balthazar, I sallied forth with curses in my mouth,
and returned to the great square, where I had appointed Lamela to
meet me. But no Lamela was there. He also had his little snug
parties, and the scoundrel fared better than his comrade. As I
was waiting for him, I caught a glimpse of my treacherous
associate, with a knowing smile upon his countenance. He made up
to me, and inquired, with a hearty laugh, what news of my
assignation with my nymph, under the convenient roof of Donna
Inca. I cannot conceive, said I, what evil spirit, jealous of my
joys, takes delight to nip them in their blossom: but after we
had embraced, kissed, protested, and, as it were, spoke the
prologue of our comedy, comes the peaking cornuto of a husband
(the furies fly away with him), and knocks at the door in the
instant of our encounter. There was nothing to be done but to
secure my retreat as fast as possible. So I got out at a back
door, sending to all the inhabitants of hell and its suburbs the
jealous knave, who was so uncivil as to search another lady's
house for his own horns. I am sorry you sped so ill-favouredly,
exclaimed Don Balthazar, who was chuckling with in ward
satisfaction at my disappointment. What a mechanical rogue of a
husband! I would advise you to shew no mercy to the wittol. Oh!
you need not teach me how to predominate over such a peasant,
replied I. Take my word for it, a new quarter shall be added to
his coat of arms this very night. His wife, when I went away,
told me not to be faint-hearted for such a trifle; but to place
myself without fail under her windows at an earlier hour than
usual, for she was resolved to let me into the house; and as a
precaution against all accidents, she begged me to bring two or
three friends in my train, for fear of a surprise. What a
discreet and inventive lady! said he. I should have no objection
to being of your party. Ah! my dear friend, exclaimed I, out of
wits with joy, and throwing my arms about Don Balthazar's neck,
how infinitely you will oblige me! I will do more, resumed he; I
know a young man, armed like another Caesar, for either field of
love or war; he shall be of our number, and you may then rely
boldly on the sufficiency of your escort.

I knew not in what words to thank this seeming friend, so that my
gratitude might be equivalent to his zeal. To make short of the
matter, I accepted his proffered aid. Our meeting was fixed under
Violante's balcony early in the evening, and we parted. He went
in quest of his brother-in-law, who was the hero in question. As
for me, I walked about all day with Lamela, who had no more
misgivings than myself, though somewhat astonished at the warmth
with which Don Balthazar engaged in my interests. We slipt our
own necks completely into the noose. I own this was mere
infatuation on our parts, whose natural instinct ought to have
warned us of a halter. When I thought it proper time to present
myself under Violante's windows, Ambrose and I took care to be
armed with small swords. There we found the husband of my fair
dame and another man, waiting for us with a very determined air.
Don Balthazar accosted me, and introducing his brother-in-law,
said: Sir, this is the brave officer whose prowess I have
extolled so highly to you. Make the best of your way into your
mistress's house, and let no fear of the consequences be any bar
to the enjoyment of the most rapturous human bliss.

After a mutual interchange of compliments, I knocked at
Violante's door. It was opened by a kind of duenna. In I went,
and without looking back after what was passing behind me, made
the best of my way to the lady's room. While I was paying her my
preliminary civilities, the two cut-throats, who had followed me
into the house, and had banged the door after them so violently
that Ambrose was left in the street, made their appearance. You
may well suppose that then was the appeal to arms. They both fell
upon me at the same time, but I shewed them some play. I kept
them engaged on either side so fiercely, that they were sorry
perhaps not to have taken a safer road to their revenge. The
husband was run through the body. His brother-in-law, seeing him
on his travels to the shades below, made the best of his way to
the door, which the duenna and Violante had opened, to make their
escape while we were fighting. I ran after him into the street,
where I met with Lamela once more, who by dint of not being able
to get a word out of the women, running as they did for their
very lives, did not know exactly what he was to divine from the
infernal noise he had just heard. We got back to our inn. After
packing up what was best worth taking with us, we mounted our
mules, and got out of town, without waiting for daybreak or fear
of robbers.

It was sufficiently clear that this business was not likely to be
without its consequences, and that a hue and cry would be set up
in Toledo, which we should act like wise men to anticipate by a
retreat. We stayed the night at Vilarubia. At the inn where we
put up, some time after our arrival, there alighted a tradesman
of Toledo on his way to Segorba. We clubbed our suppers. He
related to us the tragical catastrophe of Violante's husband; and
so far was he from suspecting us of being parties concerned, that
we inquired into particulars with the curious indifference of
common newsmongers. Gentlemen, said he, just as I was setting out
this morning, the report of this melancholy event was handed
about. Every one was on the hunt after Violante; and they say
that the corregidor, a relation of Don Balthazar, is determined
on sparing no pains to discover the perpetrators of this murder.
So much for my knowledge of the business.

The corregidor of Toledo and his police gave me very little
uneasiness. But for fear of the worst, I determined to
precipitate my retreat from New Castile. It occurred to me that
Violante, when hunted out of her hiding-place, would turn
informer, and in that case she might give such a description of
my person to the clerks in office as might enable them to put
their scouts upon a right scent. For this reason, on the
following day we struck out of the high road, as a measure of
safety. Fortunately Lamela was acquainted with three-fourths of
Spain, and knew by what cross paths we could get securely into
Arragon. Instead of going straight to Cuença, we threaded the
defiles of the mountains overhanging that town, and arrived, by
ways with which my guide was well acquainted, at a grotto looking
very much like a hermitage. In fact, it was the very place
whither you came yesterday evening to petition me for an asylum.

While I was reconnoitring the neighbourhood, which presented a
most delicious landscape to my view, my companion said to me, It
is six years since I travelled this way. At that time the grotto
before us afforded a retreat to an old hermit who entertained me
charitably. He made me fare as he did. I remember that he was a
holy man, and talked in such a strain as almost to wean me from
the vices and follies of this nether world. He may possibly be
still living; I will ascertain whether it be so or not. With
these words in his mouth, Ambrose, under the influence of natural
curiosity, alighted from his mule, and went into the hermitage.
He remained there some minutes, and then returned, calling after
me, and saying, Come hither, Don Raphael, come and bear witness
to a most affecting event. I dismounted immediately. We tied our
mules to a tree, and I followed Lamela into the grotto, where I
descried an old anchoret stretched at his length upon a couch,
pale and at the point of death. A white beard, very thick, hung
down to his middle, and he held a large rosary, most piously
ornamented, in his clasped hands. At the noise which we made in
coming near him, he opened his eyes, upon which death had already
begun to lay his leaden hand; and after having looked at us for a
moment, said, "Whosoever you are, my brethren, profit by the
spectacle which presents itself to your observation. I have seen
out forty years in the world, and sixty in this solitude. But
mark! At this eternal crisis, the time I have devoted to my
pleasures seems an age, and that on the contrary which has been
sacred to repentance, but a minute! Alas! I fear lest the
austerities of brother Juan should be found light in the balance
with the sins of the licentiate Don Juan de Solis."

No sooner were these words out of his mouth than he breathed his
last. We were struck by the solemn scene. Objects of this kind
always make some impression even on the greatest libertines; but
our serious thoughts were of no long duration. We soon forgot
what he had been saying to us, and begun making an inventory of
what the hermitage contained; an employment which was not
oppressively laborious, since the household furniture extended no
further than what you remarked in the grotto. Brother Juan was
not only in ill-furnished lodgings; his kitchen, too, was in a
very rustic plight All the store laid in consisted of some small
nuts and some pieces of crusty barley bread as hard as flint,
which had all the appearance of having been impregnable to the
gums of the venerable man. I specify his gums, because we looked
for his teeth, and found they had all dropped out. The whole
arrangement of this solitary abode, every object that met our
eyes, made us look upon this good anchoret as a pattern of
sanctity. One thing only staggered us in our opinion. We opened a
paper folded in the form of a letter, and lying upon the table,
wherein he besought the person who should read the contents, to
carry his rosary and sandals to the bishop of Cuença. We could
not make out in what spirit this modern recluse of the desert
could aim at making such a present to his bishop. It seemed to us
to tread somewhat on the heels of his humility, and to savour of
one who was a candidate for a niche in the calendar. Though
indeed it might be, that there was nothing in it but a simple
supposition, that the bishop was such another as himself; but
whether his ignorance was really so extreme, I shall not pretend
to decide.

In talking over this subject, a very pleasant idea occurred to
Lamela. Let us take up our abode, said he, in this holy retreat.
The disguise of hermits will become us. Brother Juan must be laid
quietly in the earth. You shall personate him; and for myself, in
the character of brother Anthony, I will go and see what is to be
done in the neighbouring towns and villages. Besides that we
shall be too cunningly ensconced for the prying curiosity of the
corregidor, since it is not to be supposed that he will think of
coming hither to look for us, I have some good connections at
Cuença, which may be of essential service to us. I fell in with
this odd whim, not so much for the reasons given me by Ambrose,
as in compliance with the humour of the thing, and as it were to
play a part in a dramatic piece. We made an excavation in the
ground at about thirty or forty yards from the grotto, and buried
the old anchoret there without any pompous rites, after having
stripped him of his wardrobe, which consisted of a single gown
tied round the middle with a leathern girdle. We likewise
despoiled him of his beard to make me an artificial one: and
finally, after his interment, we took possession of the
hermitage.

The first day our table was but meanly served; the provisions of
the deceased were all we had to feed on; but on the following
morning, before sunrise, Lamela set off to sell the two mules at
Toralva, and returned in the evening, laden with provisions and
other articles which he had purchased. He brought everything
necessary to metamorphose us completely. For himself he had
provided a gown of coarse dark cloth, and a little red horse-hair
beard, so ingeniously appended to his ears, that one would have
sworn it had been natural. There is not a cleverer fellow in the
universe for a frolic. Brother Juan's beard was also new-
modelled, and adapted to the plumpness of my face. My brown
woollen cap completed the masquerade. In fact, nothing was
wanting to make us pass for what we were not. Our equipage was so
ludicrously out of character, that we could not look at one
another without laughing, under a garb so diametrically at
variance with our general complexion. With brother Juan's mantle,
I caught and kept his rosary and sandals; taking the liberty of 
borrowing them for the time being from the bishop of Cuença.

We had already been three days in the hermitage, without having
been interrupted by a living soul; but on the fourth, two
countrymen came into the grotto. They brought bread, cheese, and
onions, for the deceased, whom they supposed to be still living.
I threw myself on our miserable couch as soon as they made their
appearance; and it was not difficult to impose on them. Besides
that it was too dark to distinguish my features accurately, I
imitated the voice of brother Juan, whose last words I had heard,
to the best of my ability. They had no suspicion of the trick,
though a good deal surprised at finding another hermit there.
Lamela, taking advantage of their stupid wonder, said in a
canting tone: My brethren, be not astonished at seeing me in this
solitude. I have quitted a hermitage of my own in Arragon, to
come hither and be a companion to the venerable and edifying
brother Juan, who, at his advanced age, wants a yoke-fellow to
administer to his necessities. The rustics lavished their clumsy
panegyrics on the charity of Ambrose, and congratulated
themselves that they might triumph over their neighbours, and
boast of two holy personages residing in their country.

Lamela, laden with a large wallet which he had not forgotten
among the number of his purchases, went for the first time to
reconnoitre the town of Cuença, which is but a very short
distance from the hermitage. With a mortified exterior, by which
nature had dubbed him for a cheat, and the art of making that
natural deception go as far as possible, by a most hypocritical
and factitious array of features, he could not fail to play upon
the feelings of the charitable and humane, and those whom heaven
has blessed with affluence. His knapsack bore testimony to the
extravagance of their pious liberalities. Master Ambrose, said. I
on his return, I congratulate you on your happy knack at
softening the souls of all good Christians. As we hope to be
saved! one would suppose that you had been a mendicant friar
among the Capuchins. I have done something else besides bringing
in food for the convent, answered he. You must know that I have
ferreted out a certain lass called Barbara, with whom I used to
flirt formerly. She is as much altered as any of us: for she also
has addicted herself to a godly life. She forms a coterie with
two or three other sanctified dames, who are an example to the
faithful in public, and flounce over head and ears in every sort
of private vice. She did not know me again at first. What then,
mistress Barbara, said I, is it possible that you should have
discharged one of your oldest friends from your remembrance, your
servant Ambrose? As I am a true Christian, Signor de Lamela,
exclaimed she, I never thought to have turned you up in such a
garb as that. By what transformation are you become a hermit?
This is more than I can tell you just now, rejoined I. The
particulars are rather long; but I will come to morrow evening
and satisfy your curiosity. Nay, more; I will bring brother Juan,
my companion, along with me. Brother Juan, interrupted she, the
venerable hermit who has taken up his saintly residence near this
town? You do not know what you are saying; he is supposed to be
more than a hundred years old. It is very true, said I, that he
was of that age some little while ago; but time; in deference to
his sanctity, has gone backward with him; and he is grown
considerably younger within these few days. He is at present just
about my turn of life. Say you so! Then let us have him too,
replied Barbara. I perceive there is something more in this
mystery than the church will be able to explain.

We did not miss our appointment with these whited sepulchres on
the following night To make our reception the more agreeable,
they had laid out a sumptuous entertainment. Off went our beards
and cowls, and vestments of mortification; and without any
squeamishness we confessed our birth, education, and real
character, to these sisters in hypocrisy. On their part, for fear
of being behindhand with us in freedom from prejudice, they
fairly let us see of what pretended religionists are capable,
when they drop the veil of the sanctuary, and exhibit their
unmanufactured faces. We spent almost the whole night at table,
and got back to our grotto but a moment before daybreak. We were
not long in repeating our visit; or, if the truth must be told,
it was nightly for three months; till we had ate up more than
two-thirds of our ways and means in the company of these delicate
creatures. But an unsuccessful candidate for their favour got
wind of our proceedings, and prated of our whereabout in the ear
of justice, which was to have been in motion towards the
hermitage this very day, to lay hold of our persons. Yesterday
Ambrose, while picking up eleemosynary at Cuença, stumbled upon
one of our whining sisterhood, who gave him a note, with this
caution: A female friend of mine has written me this letter,
which I was going to send to you by a man on purpose. Shew it to
brother Juan, and regulate your proceedings accordingly. It was
this very note, gentlemen, that Lamela gave me in your presence,
which occasioned us to take so abrupt a leave of our solitary
dwelling.



CH. II -- Don Raphael's consultation with his company, and their
adventures as they were preparing to leave the wood.


WHEN Don Raphael had finished the narrative of his adventurous
life, which, with all the other qualities of a romance, had the
tediousness, Don Alphonso, according to the laws of good
breeding, swore himself black in the face that he had been
prodigiously entertained. After the usual exchange of
compliments, Signor Ambrose put in his oar, with an admonitory
hint to the partner of his exploits and peregrinations. Consider,
Don Raphael, that the sun is setting. It would not be amiss,
methinks, to take counsel on what we are to do. You are in the
right, answered his comrade, we must determine on the place of
our destination. For my own part, replied Lamela, I am of opinion
that we should get upon the road again without loss of time,
reach Requena to-night, and enter upon the territory of Valencia
to-morrow, where we will go to work full tilt at our old trade. I
have some prognosticating twitches, which tell me that we shall
strike some good strokes in that quarter. His colleague, from
ample experience of his infallibility in such prophecies, voted
on his side of the question. As for Don Alphonso and myself,
having nothing to do but to follow the lead of these two worthy
gentlemen, we waited, in silent acquiescence, the issue of this
momentous debate.

Thus it was determined that we should take the direction of
Requena; and all hands were piped to make the necessary
arrangements. We made our meal after the same fashion as in the
morning, and the horse was laden with the bottle, and with the
remnant of our provisions. After a time, the approach of night
seemed to promise us that darkness so friendly, and even so
necessary, to the safety of our retreat; and we were beginning
our march through the wood: but before we had gone a hundred
paces, a light among the trees gave us a subject of anxious
speculation. What can be the meaning of that? said Don Raphael;
these surely must be blood-hounds of the police from Cuença,
uncoupled and eager for the sport, with a fresh scent of us in
this forest, and in full cry after their game. I am of a very
different opinion, said Ambrose; they are more likely to be
benighted travellers taking shelter in the thicket till daybreak.
But there is no trusting to conjecture: I will examine into the
real truth. Stay you here all three of you; I will be back again
instantly. No sooner said than done; he stole, just as if he had
been used to it, towards the light, which was not far off; no
brute or human thief of forest or city could have done it better.
With a gentle removal of the leaves and branches which obstructed
his passage, the whole scene was laid open to his silent
contemplation; and it afforded sufficient food. On the grass,
round about a lighted candle with a clod for its candlestick,
were seated four men, just finishing a meat pie, and hugging a
pretty large bottle, which was at its last gasp, after having
sustained their alternate embraces for successive rounds. At some
paces from these gentry, he espied a lady and gentleman tied to
the trees, and a little further off, a carriage with two mules
richly caparisoned. He determined at once in his own mind that
the fellows carousing on the ground were banditti; and the tenor
of their talk assured him that he had not belied their trade by
his conjecture. The four cut-throats all avowed a like desire of
possessing the female who had fallen into their hands; and they
were proposing to draw lots for her. Lamela, having made himself
master of the business, came back to us, and gave an exact
account of all he had seen and heard.

My friends, said Don Alphonso on his recital, that lady and
gentleman whom the robbers have tied to trees, are probably
persons of the first condition. Shall we suffer scoundrels like
these to triumph over their honour and take away their lives? Put
yourselves under my direction: let us assail the desperate
outlaws, and they will perish under our attack. With all my
heart, said Don Raphael. It is all one to me, I had just as soon
engage on the right side as on the wrong. Ambrose, for his part,
protested that he wished for nothing better than to lend a hand
in so moral an enterprise, as it promised to combine much profit
with some share of honour. And indeed, if a man may speak a good
word for himself, danger stood better recommended than usual to
my comprehension; all the boiling courage of knighthood, pledged
up to the knuckles of the chin on the behalf of female innocence,
was oozing out at every pore of this chivalrous person. But, if
we are to state facts in the spirit of history rather than of
romance, the danger was more in imagination than in reality.
Lamela having brought us word that the arms of the robbers were
all piled up at the distance of ten or twelve paces out of their
reach, there was no difficulty in securing the mastery of the
field. We tied our horses to a tree, and drew near, as softly as
possible, to the spot where the robbers were seated. They were
debating with some impetuosity, and their vociferous argument was
all in favour of our covert attack. We got possession of their
arms before they had any suspicion of us. But the enemy was
nearer than they imagined: too near to miss aim, and they were
all stretched lifeless on the ground.

During the conflict the candle went out, so that we proceeded in
our business by guess-work. We were not remiss, however, in
unbinding the prisoners, of whom fear had got such complete
possession, that they had not their wits enough about them to
thank us for what we had done for them. It must be allowed that
they could not at first distinguish whether they were to consider
us as their deliverers, or as a fresh gang who had taken them out
of one furnace to cast them hissing into another. But we
recovered their spirits by the assurance, that we should lodge
them safely in a public-house which Ambrose mentioned as not
being more than half a mile off, whence they might take all
necessary measures to pursue their journey in whatever direction
they thought proper. After these words of comfort, which seemed
to sink deep, we placed them in their carriage, and conducted
them out of the wood, holding their mules by the bridle. Our
clerical friends instituted a ghostly visitation to the pockets
of the vanquished banditti. Our next step was to recover Don
Alphonso's horse. We also took to ourselves the steeds of the
robbers, waiting as they were to be released from the trees to
which they were tied near the field of battle. With this
extensive cavalcade we followed brother Anthony, mounted on one
of the mules, and conducting the carriage to the inn, whither we
did not arrive in less than two hours, though he had pledged his
credit that the distance from the wood was very short.

We knocked roughly at the door. Every living creature was
napping, except the fleas. The landlord and landlady got on their
clothes in a hurry, and were not at all annoyed at finding their
rest disturbed by the arrival of an equipage, which promised to
do more for the good of the house than it eventually did. The
whole inn was lighted up in an instant. Don Alphonso and the
stage-bred son of Lucinda lent their assistance to the gentleman
and lady in alighting from the carriage, and acted as their
ushers in leading the way to the room prepared for them by the
landlord. Compliments flew backwards and forwards like
shuttlecocks; but we were not a little astonished at discovering
the Count de Polan himself and his daughter Seraphina, in the
persons we had just rescued. It would be difficult to represent
by words the surprise of that lady, as well as of Don Alphonso,
when they recognized each other's features. The count took no
notice of it, his attention being engrossed by other matters. He
set about relating to us in what manner the robbers had attacked
him, and how they secured his daughter and himself, after having
killed his postilion, a page, and a valet-de-chambre. He ended
with declaring how deeply he felt his obligation; and that if we
would call upon him at Toledo, where he should be in a month, we
should judge for ourselves whether he felt as a grateful heart
ought to feel.

His lordship's daughter was not backward in her acknowledgments
for her timely rescue; and as we were of opinion, that is,
Raphael and myself, that we should do a good turn to Don Alphonso
by giving him an opportunity of a minute's private parley with
the young widow, we contrived to keep the Count de Polan in play.
Lovely Seraphina, said Don Alphonso to the lady in a low voice, I
no longer lament over the lot which obliges me to live like a man
banished from civil society, since I have been so fortunate as to
assist in the important service just rendered you. What then!
answered she, with a sigh, is it you who have saved my life and
honour? Is it to you that we are so indebted, myself equally with
my father? Ah! Don Alphonso, why were you the instrument of my
brother's death? She said no more upon the subject; but he
conceived clearly by these words, and by the tone in which they
were pronounced, that if he was over head and ears in love with
Seraphina, she was equally out of her depth in the same passion.



BOOK THE SIXTH.



CH. I.  -- The fate of Gil Blas and his Companions after they
took leave of the Count de Polan. One of Ambrose's notable
contrivances set off by the manner of its execution.


THE Count de Polan, after having exhausted half the night in
thanking us, and protesting that we might reckon upon his
substantial acknowledgments, sent for the landlord to consult him
on the best method of getting safely to Turis, whither it was his
intention to go. We had nothing to do with this nobleman's
further progress, and therefore left him to take his own
measures. Our departure from the inn was now resolved on; and we
followed Lamela like sheep after the bell-wether.

After two hours' travelling, the day overtook us near Campillo.
We made as expeditiously as possible for the mountains between
that hamlet and Requena. There we wore out the day in taking our
rest and reckoning up our stock, which the spoil of the robbers
had considerably replenished, to the amount of more than three
hundred pistoles, the lawful ravage of their pockets. We began
our march again with the setting-in of the night; and on the
following morning reached the frontier of Valencia in safety. We
got quietly into the first wood that offered as a shelter. The
inmost recesses of it were best suited to our purpose, and led us
on by winding paths to a spot where a rivulet of transparent
water was meandering in its slow and silent course, to
incorporate with the waters of Guadalaviar. The refreshing shade
afforded by the foliage, and the rich pasturage in which our
toil-won beasts so much delighted, would have fixed this for the
place of our halting, if our resolution had not been previously
taken to that effect.

We therefore alighted, and were preparing to pass the day very
pleasantly, but a good breakfast was amongst the foremost of our
intended pleasures; and we found that there was very little
ammunition left. Bread was beginning to be a nonentity; and our
bottle was becoming an evidence of the material system, mere
carnal leather without a vivifying soul. Gentlemen, said Ambrose,
scenery and the picturesque have but hungry charms for me, unless
Bacchus and Ceres preside over the landscape. Our provisions must
be lengthened out. For this purpose, away post I to Xelva. It is
a very pretty town, not more than two leagues off. I shall soon
make this little excursion. Speaking after this manner, he slung
the bottle and the wallet over a horse's back, leaped merrily
into his seat, and shot out of the wood with a rapidity which 
seemed to bid fair for a speedy return,

He did not, however, come back quite so soon as he had given us
reason to expect. More than half the day had elapsed; nay, night
herself was already pranking up her dun and gloomy wings, to
overshadow the thicket with a denser horror, when we saw our
purveyor once again, whose long stay was beginning to give us
some uneasiness. Our extreme wishes were lame and impotent,
compared with the abundance of his stores. He not only produced
the bottle filled with some excellent wine, and the wallet
stuffed with game and poultry ready dressed, to say nothing of
bread; the horse was laden besides with a large bundle of stuffs,
of which we could make neither head nor tail. He took notice of
our wonder, and said with a smile: I will lay a wager, neither
Don Raphael nor all the colleges of soothsayers upon earth can
guess why I have bought these articles. With this fling at our
dulness, we untied the bundle, and lectured on the intrinsic
value of what we had been considering only as an empty pageant.
In the inventory was a cloak and a black gown of trailing
dimensions; doublets, breeches, and hose to correspond; an
inkstand and writing paper, such as a secretary of state need not
be ashamed of; a key, such as a treasurer might carry; a great
seal and green wax, such as a chancellor might affix to his
decrees. When he had at length exhausted the display of his
bargains, Don Raphael observed in a bantering tone -- Faith and
troth, Master Ambrose, it must be confessed that you have made a
good sensible speculation. But pray, how do you mean to turn the
penny on your purchase? Let me alone for that, answered Lamela.
All these things cost me only ten pistoles, and it shall go hard
but they bring us in above five hundred. The tens in five hundred
are fifty; a good improvement of money, my masters! I am not a
man to burden myself with a trumpery pedlar's pack; and to prove
to you that I have not been making ducks and drakes of our joint
stock, I will let you into the secret of a plan which has just
taken birth in my pericranium.

After having laid in my stock of bread, I went into a cook's
shop, where I ordered a range of partridges, chickens, and young
rabbits, half-a-dozen of each, to be put instantly on the spit.
While these relishing little articles were roasting, in came a
man in a violent passion, open-mouthed against the coarse conduct
of a tradesman to his consequential self. This faggot of fury
observed to the lord paramount of the dripping-pan: By St James!
Samuel Simon is the most wrong-headed retail dealer in the town
of Xelva. He has just insulted me in his own shop before his
customers. The skinflint would not trust me for six ells of
cloth, though he knows very well that my credit is as good as the
bank, and that no one could say he ever lost anything by me. Are
not you delighted with the outlandish monster? He has no
objection to getting people of fashion on his books. He had
rather toss up heads or tails with them, than oblige a plain
citizen in an honest way, and be paid in full at the time
appointed. What a strange whim! But he is an infernal Jew. He
will be taken in some day or other! All the merchants on the
Exchange are lying in wait to catch him upon the hip; and his
disgrace or ruin will be nuts to me.

While this reptile of the warehouse was thus spitting his spite
and blurting out many other ill-natured innuendoes, there came
over me a sort of astrological anticipation that I should be lord
of the ascendant over this Samuel Simon. My friend, said I to the
man who was complaining against that hawker of damaged goods, of
what character is the strange fellow you are talking about? Of a
confoundedly bad character, answered he in a pet, Depend on it,
he is one of the most extortionate usurers in existence, though
with the affectation of not letting his left hand know what his
right gives away in charity. He was a Jew, and has turned
Catholic; but rip your way into his heart if he has any, and you
will find him still as inveterate a Jew as ever Pilate was. As
for his conversion it was all in the way of trade.

I took in with greedy ear the whole invective of the shop-keeping
declaimant, and failed not, on coming out of the eating-house, to
inquire for Samuel Simon's residence. A person directed me to the
part of the town, and there was no difficulty in finding out the
house. It was not enough to skim my eye cursorily over his shop.
I peered into every hole and corner of it; and my imagination,
always on the alert when any profit is to be picked up, has
already engendered a rogue's trick, which only waits the period
of gestation, when it may turn out a bantling not unworthy to be
fathered by the sanctimonious servant of Signor Gil Blas.
Straightway went I to the ready-made warehouse, where I bought
these dresses, into which we may stuff an inquisitor, a notary,
and an alguazil, and play the parts in the spirit of the solemn
offices they represent.

Ah! my dear Ambrose, interrupted Don Raphael, transported with
rapture at the suggestion, what a wonderful idea! a glorious
scheme indeed! I am quite jealous of the contrivance. Willingly
would I blot out the proudest quarter from my escutcheon, to have
owned an effort of genius so transcendent. Yes, Lamela, I see, my
friend, all the rich invention of the design, and you need be at
no loss for instruments to carry it into effect. You want two
good actors to play up to you; and you have not far to look for
them. You have yourself a face that can look sanctified,
magisterial, or blood-thirsty at will, and may do very well to
represent the inquisition. My character shall be that of the
notary; and Signor Gil Blas, if he pleases, may enact the
alguazil. Thus are the persons of the drama distributed: to-
morrow we will play the piece, and I will pledge myself for its
success, bating one of those unlucky chance medleys, which turn
awry the currents of the most pithy and momentous enterprises.

As yet Don Raphael's masterpiece of roguery had made but a clumsy
impression on my plodding brain; but the argument of the fable
was developed at supper-time, and the hinge upon which it turned
was, to my mind, of an ingenious contrivance. After having
despatched part of our game, and bled our bottle to the last
stage of evacuation, we stretched our length upon the grass, and
soon fell fast asleep. Up with you! up with you! was the alarum
of Signor Ambrose, as the day begun to dawn. People who have a
great enterprise on hand ought not to indulge themselves in
indolence. A plague upon you, master inquisitor, said Don
Raphael, rubbing his eyes, you are confounded early on the move!
It is as good as an order for execution to master Samuel Simon.
Many a true word is spoken in jest, replied Lamela. Nay, you
shall know more, added he with a sarcastic grin. I dreamt last
night that I was plucking the hairs out of his beard. Was not
that a left-handed dream for him, master secretary? These
pleasant hits were followed by a thousand others, which called
forth new bursts of merriment. Our breakfast passed off with the
utmost gaiety; and when it was over, we made our arrangements for
the pageant we had got up. Ambrose arrayed himself in sables, as
befitted so ghostly an instrument for the suppression of vice. We
also took to our official habits; nor has the dignity of
magistracy been often more gravely represented than by Don
Raphael and myself. The making up of our persons was rather a
tedious operation; for it was later than two o' clock in the
afternoon when we sallied from the wood to attend our call at
Xelva. It is true, there was no hurry, since the play was not to
begin till the setting-in of the evening. That being the case, we
jogged on leisurely, and stopped at the gates of the town till
the day was closed.

At that eventful hour, we left our horses where they were, to the
care of Don Alphonso, who was very well satisfied to have so
humble a cast in the distribution. As for Don Raphael, Ambrose,
and myself, our first visit was not to Samuel Simon in person,
but to a tavern-keeper who lived very near him. His reverence the
inquisitor walked foremost. In went he to the bar; and said
gravely to the landlord: Master, I want to speak a word with you
in private. The obsequious publican shewed us into a room, where
Lamela, now that we had got him to ourselves, said: I have the
honour to be an unworthy member of the holy office, and am come
here on a business of very great importance. At this intimation,
the man of liquor turned pale, and answered in a tremulous tone
that he was not conscious of having given any umbrage to the holy
inquisition. True, replied Ambrose with encouraging affability;
neither do we meditate any harm against you. Heaven forbid, that
august tribunal, too hasty in its punishments, should make no
distinction between guilt and innocence. It is unrelenting, but
always just: to become obnoxious to its vengeance, you must have
earned its displeasure by wickedness or contumacy. Be satisfied
therefore that it is not you who bring me to Xelva, but a certain
dealer and chapman, by name Samuel Simon. A very ugly story about
him has come round to us. He is still a Jew in his heart, they
say; and has only embraced Christianity from sordid and secular
motives. I command you, in the name of the tremendous court I
represent, to tell me all you know about that man. Beware how you
are induced by good neighbourhood, or possibly by close
friendship, to gloss over and palliate his errors; for, I warn
you authoritatively, if I detect the slightest prevarication in
your evidence, you are yourself even as one of the abandoned and
accursed. Where is my secretary? pursued he, turning down towards
Don Raphael. Sit down and do your duty.

Mr Secretary, with his paper already in his hand and his pen
behind his ear, took his seat most pompously, and made ready to
take down the landlord's deposition; who promised solemnly on his
part not to suppress one tittle of the real fact. So far, so
good! said the worshipful commissioner; we have only to proceed
in our examination. You will only just answer my questions; but
do not interlard your replies with any comments of your own. Do
you often see Samuel Simon at church? I never thought of looking
for him, said the drawer of corks; but I do not know that I ever
saw him there in my life. Very good! cried the inquisitor. Write
down that the defendant never goes to church. I do not say so,
your worship, answered the landlord, I only say that I never
happened to see him there. We may have been at church together
and yet not have come across each other. My good friend, replied
Lamela, you forget that you are deposing to facts, and not
arguing. Remember what I told you; contempt of court is a heinous
offence. You are to give a sound and discreet evidence; every
iota of what makes against him, and not a word in his favour, if
you knew volumes. If that is your practice, O upright and
impartial judge, resumed our host, my testimony will scarcely be
worth the trouble of taking. I know nothing about the tradesman
you are inquiring after; and therefore can tell neither good nor
harm of him: but if you wish to examine into the history of his
private life, I will run and call Gaspard, his apprentice, whom
you may question as much as you please. The lad comes and takes
his glass here sometimes with his friends. Bless us, what a
tongue! He will rip up all the minutest actions of his master's
life, and find employment for your secretary till his wrist
aches, take my word for it.

I like your open dealing, said Ambrose with a nod of approbation.
To point out a man so capable of speaking to the bad morals of
Simon, is an instance of Christian charity as well as of
religious zeal. I shall report you very favourably to the
inquisition. Make haste, therefore; go and fetch this Gaspard, of
whom you speak; but do the thing cautiously, so that his master
may have no suspicion of what is going forward. The multiplier of
scores acquitted himself of his commission with due diligence and
laudable privacy. Our little shopman came along with him. The
youth had a tongue with a tang, and was just the sort of fellow
that we wanted. Welcome, my good young man! said Lamela, You
behold in me an inquisitor, appointed by that venerable body to
collect informations against Samuel Simon, on an accusation of 
still adhering to Judaism in his secret devotions. You are an
inmate of his family, consequently you must be an eye-witness to
many of his most private transactions. It probably may be
unnecessary to warn you, that you are obliged in conscience, and
by fear of punishment, to declare all you know about him,
notwithstanding any promise to the contrary, when I order you so
to do on the part of the holy inquisition. May it please your
reverence, answered the plodding little rascal, I am quite ready
to satisfy your heart's desire on that head, without being
commanded thereto in the name of the holy office. If ever my
acquittal was to depend on my master's character of me, I am
persuaded that my chance would be a sorry one; and for that
reason, I shall serve him as he would serve me. And I may tell
you in the first place, that he is a fly-by-night whose
proceedings it is no easy matter to take measure of; a man who
puts on all the starch formalities of an inveterate religionist,
but at bottom has not a spark of principle in his composition. He
goes every evening dangling after a little girl no better than
she should be. . . . I am vastly glad indeed to find that,
interrupted Ambrose, because I plainly perceive, by all you have
been telling me, that he is a man of corrupt morals and
licentious practices. But answer point by point to the questions
I shall put to you. It is above all on the subject of religion
that I am commissioned to inquire into his sentiments and
conduct. Pray tell me, do you eat much pork at your house? I do
not think, answered Gaspard, that we have seen it at table twice
in the year that I have lived with him. Better and better!
replied the paragon of inquisitors write down in legible
characters that they never eat pork in Samuel Simon's family. But
as a set-off against that, doubtless a joint of lamb is served up
every now and then? Yes, every now and then, rejoined the
apprentice; we killed one for our own consumption about last
Easter. The season is pat and to the purpose, cried the
ecclesiastical commissioner. Come, write down, that Simon keeps
the passover: This goes on merrily to a complete conviction; and
it seems, we have got a good serviceable information here.

Tell me again, my friend, pursued Lamela, whether you have not
often seen your master fondle young children. A thousand times,
answered Gaspard. When he sees the little urchins playing about
before the shop, if they happen to be pretty, he calls them in
and makes much of them. Write that down, be sure you write that
down! interrupted the inquisitor. Samuel Simon is very grievously
suspected of lying in wait for Christian children, and enticing
them into his den to circumcise them. Vastly well! vastly well,
indeed, Master Simon! you will have an account to settle with the
society for the suppression of Judaism, take my word for it. Do
not take it into your savage head that such bloody sacrifices are
to be perpetrated with impunity. A pretty use you make of baptism
and shaving! Cheer up, religious Gaspard, thou foremost of elect
apprentices! Make a full confession of all thy master's sins;
complete thine honest testimony by telling us how this simular of
a Catholic is more than ever wedded to his Jewish customs and
ceremonies. Is it not a fact, that one day in the week he sits
with his hands before him, and will not even perform the most
necessary offices for himself? No, answered Gaspard, I have not
exactly observed that. What comes nearest to it is that on some
days he shuts himself up in his closet, and stays there a long
time. Ay! now we have it, exclaimed the commissary. He keeps the
sabbath, or I am not an inquisitor. Note that particularly,
officer; note that he observes the fast of the sabbath most
superstitiously! Out upon him! What a shocking fellow! One
question more, and his business is done. Is not he always
parleying about Jerusalem? Pretty often indeed, replied our
informer. He knows the Old Testament by heart, and tells us how
the temple of Jerusalem was destroyed. The very thing! resumed
Ambrose. Secretary! be sure you do not neglect that feature of
the case. Write, in letters of an inch long, that Samuel Simon
has contracted with the devil for the rebuilding of the temple,
and that he is plotting day and night for the re-establishment of
his nation. That is all I want to know; and it is labour in vain
to pursue the examination any further. What Gaspard, in the
spirit of truth and charity, has deposed, would be sufficient to
make a bonfire of all Jewry.

When the august mouth-piece of the holy tribunal had sifted the
little scoundrelly apprentice after this manner, he told him he
might go about his business; at the same time commanding him,
under the severest penalties of the inquisition, not to say a
word to his master about what was going forward. Gaspard promised
implicit obedience, and marched off. We were not long in coming
after him: our procession from the inn was as grave and solemn as
our pilgrimage thereunto, till we knocked at Samuel Simon's door.
He opened it in person. Three figures such as ours might have
dumbfounded a better man; but his face was as long as a lawsuit,
when Lamela, our spokesman, said to him in a tone of authority:
Master Samuel, I command you in the name of the holy inquisition,
whose delegate I have the honour to be, to give me the key of
your closet without murmur or delay. I want to see if I cannot
find wherewithal to corroborate certain hints which have been
communicated to us respecting you.

The son of commerce, aghast at these sounds of melancholy import,
reeled two steps backward, just as if some one had given him a
blow in the breadbasket. Far from smelling a rat in this pleasant
trick of ours, he fancied in good earnest that some secret enemy
had made him an object of suspicion to the holy hue-and-cry; and
it might possibly have happened that, from being rather clumsy at
his new duties as a Christian, he might be conscious of having
laid himself open to serious animadversion. However that might
be, I never saw a man look more foolish. He did as he was ordered
without saying nay; and opened all his lock-up places with the
sheepish acquiescence of a man, who stood in awe of an
ecclesiastical rap on the knuckles. At least, said Ambrose as he
went in, at least you are not a contumacious oppugner of our
resistless mandates. But withdraw into another room, and leave me
to fulfil the duties of my station without profane observers.
Samuel did not set his face against this command any more than
against the first: but kept himself quiet in his shop, while we
went all three of us into his closet, where, without loss of
time, we laid an embargo on his cash. It was no difficult matter
to find it; for it lay in an open coffer, and in much larger
quantity than we could carry away. There were a great many bags
heaped up; but all in silver. Gold would have been more to our
mind; but, as robbers must not be choosers any more than beggars,
we were obliged to yield to the necessity of the case. Not only
did we line our pockets with ducats; but the most unsearchable
parts of our dress were made the receptacles of our filchings.
Yet was there no outward shew of the heavy burden under which we
tottered; thanks to the cunning contrivance of Ambrose and Don
Raphael, who proved that there is nothing like being master of
one's trade.

We marched out of the closet, after having feathered our nests
pretty warmly; and then, for a reason which the reader will have
no great difficulty in guessing, the worshipful inquisitor
produced his padlock, and fixed it on the door with his own
hands: he affixed moreover his own seal, and then said to Simon:
Master Samuel, I forbid you, in the name of the holy inquisition,
to touch either this padlock or this seal, which it is your
bounden duty to hold sacred, since it is the authentic seal of
our holy office. I shall return hither this time to-morrow, then
and here to open my commission, and provisionally to take off the
interdict. With this injunction, he ordered the street door to he
opened, and we made our escape after the processional manner, out
of our wits with joy. As soon as we had marched about fifty
yards, we began to mend our pace into such a quick step,
aggravated by degrees into a leap and a bound, that we were
almost like vaulters and tumblers, in spite of the weight we
carried. We were soon out of town; and mounting our horses once
more, pushed forward towards Segorba, with many a pious
ejaculation to the God Mercury, on the happy issue of so bold an
attempt.



CH. II -- The determination of Don Alphonso and Gil Blas after
this adventure.


We travelled all night, according to our modest and unobtrusive
custom; so that we found ourselves at sunrise near a little
village two leagues from Segorba. As we were all tired to death,
it was agreed unanimously to strike out of the highway, and rest
under the shade of some willows, which we saw at the foot of a
little hill, about ten or twelve hundred yards from the village,
where it did not seem expedient for us to halt. These willows
furnished us with an agreeable retreat, by the side of a little
brook which bubbled as it washed their roots. The place struck
our fancy, and we resolved to pass the day there. We unbridled
our horses, and turned them out to grass, stretching our own
gentle limbs on the soft sod. There we courted the drowsy god of
innocent repose for a while, and then rummaged to the bottom of
our wallet and our wine-skin. After an ecclesiastical breakfast,
we counted up our ten tithes of Samuel Simon's money; and it
mounted to a round three thousand ducats. So that with such a sum
and what we had before, it might be said, without boasting, that
we knew how to make both ends meet.

As it was necessary to go to market, Ambrose and Don Raphael,
throwing off their dresses now the play was over, said that they
would take that office conjointly on themselves: the adventure at
Xelva had only sharpened their wit, and they had a mind to look
about Segorba, just to make the experiment whether any
opportunity might offer of striking another stroke. You have no
thing to do, added the heir of Lucinda's wit and wisdom, but to
wait for us under these willows: we shall not be long before we
are with you again. Signor Don Raphael, exclaimed I with a horse-
laugh, tell us rather to wait for you under a more substantial
tree; the gallows. If you once leave us, we are in a month's mind
that we shall not see you again till the day after the fair. This
suspicion of our honour goes against the grain, replied Signor
Ambrose; but we deserve that our characters should suffer in your
esteem. It is but reason that you should distrust our purity,
after the affair at Valladolid, and should fancy that we shall
make it no more a matter of conscience to play at the devil take
the hindmost with you, than with the party that we left in the
lurch in that town, Yet you deceive yourselves egregiously. The
gang upon whom we turned the tables were people of very bad
character, and their company began to be disreputable to us. Thus
far justice must be done to the members of our profession, that
there is no bond in all civilized life less liable to be broken
by personal and private interest; but when there are no feelings
in common, our good understanding will be the worse for wear, as
it happens among other descriptions of men. Wherefore, Signor Gil
Blas, I entreat you, and Signor Don Alphonso as well as you, to
be somewhat more liberal in your construction of us, and to set
your hearts at respecting Don Raphael's and my whim about going
to Segorba.

It is the easiest thing in the world, observed Lucinda's hopeful
brat, to quash all subject of uneasiness on that score: they have
only to remain treasurers of the exchequer, and they will have a
sufficient pledge in their hands for our re turn. You see, Signor
Gil Blas, that we are all fair and above-board. You shall both
hold security for our re-appearance, and you may rest assured
that for Ambrose and myself, we shall set off without the
slightest misgiving of your taking to your heels with so valuable
a deposit. After so substantial a proof of our good faith, will
you not place implicit confidence in us? Yes, gentle men, said I,
and you may do at once whatever seems good in your own eyes. They
took their departure immediately, carrying the bottle and the
wallet along with them, and left me under the willows with Don
Alphonso, who said to me after they were out of sight: Now is the
time, Signor Gil Blas, now is the time to open my heart to you. I
am angry with myself for having been so easily prevailed on to
herd thus far with these two knaves. You have no idea how many
times I have quarrelled with myself on that score. Yesterday
evening, while I was watching the horses, a thousand mortifying
reflections rushed upon my mind. I thought it did not become a
young man of honourable principles to live among such scurvy
fellows as Don Raphael and Lamela; that if by ill-luck some day
or other, and many a more unlikely thing has happened, the
success of our swindling tricks should throw us into the hands of
justice, I might sustain the shame of being tried with them as a
reputed thief, and under going the disgraceful sentence of the
law. These frightful thoughts present themselves incessantly to
my imagination, and I will own to you that I have determined, as
the only means of escape from the contamination of their bad
actions, to part from them for ever. I can scarcely suppose that
you will disapprove of my design. No, I promise you, answered I:
though you have seen me perform the part of the alguazil in
Samuel Simon's comedy, do not fancy that such pieces as those are
got up to my taste. I take heaven to witness that while acting in
so witty a scene, I said to myself: Faith and troth, master Gil
Blas, if justice should come and lay hold of you by the wezand at
this moment, you would well deserve the penitential wages of your
iniquity. I feel therefore no more disposed than yourself, Don
Alphonso, to tarry longer in such bad company; and if you think
well of it, I will bear you company. When these gentlemen come
back, we will demand a balancing of the accounts, and to-morrow
morning, or even to-night before to-morrow, we will make our bow
to them.

The lovely Seraphina's lover approved my proposal. Let us get to
Valencia, said he, and we will embark for Italy, where we shall
be able to enter into the service of the Venetian republic. Will
it not be far better to take up the profession of arms, than to
lead such a dastardly and disreputable life as we are now engaged
in? We shall even be in a condition to make a very handsome
figure with the money that will be coming to us. Not that I
appropriate to myself without remorse a fund so unfairly
established; but besides that necessity obliges me to it, if ever
I acquire any property in my campaigns, I make a vow to indemnify
Samuel Simon. I gave Don Alphonso to understand that my
sentiments coincided with his own, and we resolved at once to
separate ourselves from our companions on the following morning
before daybreak. We were above the temptation of profiting by
their absence, that is, of marching off in a hurry with the sum
total of the finances: the confidence they had reposed in leaving
us masters of the whole revenue, did not permit such a thought so
much as to pass through our minds.

Ambrose and Don Raphael returned from Segorba just at the close
of day. The first thing they told us was, that their journey had
been propitious; for they had laid the corner-stone of a
rascality which, to all appearance, would turn out still better
than that of the evening before. And thereupon the son of Lucinda
was going to put us in possession of the details; but Don
Alphonse cut him short in his explanation, and declared at once
his intention of parting company. I announced my own wish to do
the same. To no purpose did they employ all their rhetoric, to
prove to us the propriety of our accompanying them in their
professional travels: we took leave of them the next morning,
after having made an equal division of our cash, and pushed on
towards Valencia.


CH III. --  An unfortunate occurrence, which terminated to the
high delight of Don Alphonso. Gil Blas meets with an adventure
which places him all at once in a very superior situation.

We galloped on gaily as far as Bunol, where, as ill-luck would
have it, we were obliged to stop. Don Alphonso was taken ill. His
disorder was a high fever, with such an access of alarming
symptoms, as put me in fear for his life. By the greatest mercy
in the world, the place was not beset by a single physician, and
I got clear off without any harm but my fright. He was quite out
of danger at the end of three days, and with my nursing, his
recovery was rapid and without relapse. He seemed to be very
grateful for my attentions; and as we really and truly felt a
liking for each other, we swore an eternal friendship.

At length we got on our journey again, in the constant
determination, when we arrived at Valencia, of profiting by the
first opportunity which might offer to go over into Italy. But
heaven disposed of us differently. We saw at the gate of a fine
castle some country people of both sexes making merry and dancing
in a ring. We went near to be spectators of their revels; and Don
Alphonso was never less prepared than for the surprise which all
at once came over his senses. He found it was Baron Steinbach,
who was as little backward in recognizing him, but ran up to him
with open arms, and exclaimed, in accents of unbridled joy -- Ah,
Don Alphonso! is it you? What a delightful meeting! While search
was making for you in every direction, chance presents you to my
view.

My fellow-traveller dismounted immediately, and ran to embrace
the baron, whose joy seemed to me of an extravagant nature. Come,
my long-lost son, said the good old man, you shall now be
informed of your own birth, and know the happy destiny that
awaits you. As he uttered these words, he conducted him into the
castle. I went in along with them; for while they were exchanging
salutations, I had alighted and tied our horses to a tree. The
lord of the castle was the first person whom we met. He was about
the age of fifty, and a very well-looking man. Sir, said Baron
Steinbach as he introduced Don Alphonso, behold your son. At
these words, Don Caesar de Leyva, for by that title the lord of
the castle was called, threw his arms round Don Alphonso's neck,
and weeping with joy, muttered indistinctly, My dear son, know in
me the author of your being. If I have for so long left you in
ignorance of your birth and family, rest assured that the self-
denial was mine in the most painful degree. I have a thousand
times been ready to burst with anxiety, but it was impossible to
act otherwise. I had married your mother from sheer attachment,
for her origin was very inferior to mine. I lived under the
control of an austere father, whose severity rendered it
necessary to keep secret a marriage contracted without his
sanction. Baron Steinbach, and he alone, was in my confidence: he
brought you up at my request, and under my directions. At length
my father is laid with his ancestors, and I can own you for my
son and heir. This is not all; I can give you for a bride a young
lady whose rank is on a level with my own. Sir, interrupted Don
Alphonso, make me not pay too dear for the happiness you have
just been throwing in my lap. May I not be told that I have the
honour of being your son without being informed at the same time
that you are determined to make me miserable? Ah, sir! be not
more cruel than your own father. If he did not consent to the
indulgence of your passion, at least he never compelled you to
take another wife. My son, replied Don Caesar, I have no wish to
exercise a tyranny over your inclinations, which I spurned at in
my own case. But have the good manners just to see the lady I
design for you, that is all I require from your filial duty.
Though a lovely creature and a very advantageous match, I promise
never to force you into marriage. She is now in this castle.
Follow me; you will be obliged to acknowledge that you have
rarely seen a more attractive object. So saying, he led Don
Alphonso into a room where I made myself one of the party with
Baron Steinbach.

There was the Count de Polan with his two daughters, Seraphina
and Julia, and Don Ferdinand de Leyva, his son-in-law, who was
Don Caesar's nephew. Don Ferdinand, as was mentioned before, had
eloped with Julia, and it was on the occasion of the marriage
between these two lovers that the peasantry of the neighbourhood
were collected on this day to congratulate the bride and bride
groom. As soon as Don Alphonso made his appearance, and his
father had introduced him to the company, the Count de Polan rose
from his chair and ran to embrace him, saying -- Welcome, my
deliverer! Don Alphonso, added he, addressing his discourse to
him, observe the power of virtue over generous minds. Though you
have killed my son, you have saved my life.  I lay aside my
resentment for ever, and give you that very Seraphina whose
honour you protected from invasion. In so doing, my debt to you
is paid. Don Caesar's son was not wanting in acknowledgments to
the Count de Polan, nor could he be otherwise than deeply
affected by his goodness; and it maybe doubted whether the
discovery of his birth and parentage touched his felicity more
nearly than the intelligence that he was the destined husband of
Seraphina. This marriage was actually solemnized some days
afterwards, to the entire satisfaction of all parties concerned.

As I was one of the Count de Polan's deliverers, this nobleman,
who knew me again immediately, said that he would take upon
himself the care of making my fortune. I thanked him for his
liberality, but would not leave Don Alphonso, who made me steward
of his household, and honoured me with his confidence. A few days
after his marriage, still harping upon the trick which had been
played to Samuel Simon, he sent me to return to that cozened
shopkeeper all the money which had been filched from him. I went
therefore to make restitution. This was setting up the trade of a
steward, but beginning at the wrong end: they ought all of them
to end with restitution; but nine hundred and ninety-nine out of
a thousand think it double trouble, and excuse themselves.



BOOK THE SEVENTH.



CH. I. -- The tender attachment between Gil Blas and Dame Lorenza
Sephora.


AWAY went I to Xelva with three thousand ducats under my charge,
as an equivalent to Samuel Simon for the amount of his loss. I
will have the honesty to own, that my fingers itched as I jogged
along, to transfer these funds to my own account, and begin my
stewardship in character, since everything in this life depends
upon setting out well. There was no risk in preferring instinct
to principle: because it was only to ride about the country for
five or six days, and come home upon a brisk trot as if I had
done my business and made the best of my way. Don Alphonso and
his father would never have believed me capable of a breach of
trust. Yet, strange to tell, I was proof against so tempting a
suggestion: it would scarcely be too much to say, that honour,
not the fear of being found out, was the spring of so
praiseworthy a decision; and as times go, that is saying a great
deal for a lad, whose conscience had been pretty well seasoned by
keeping company with a succession of scoundrels. Many people who
have not that excuse, but frequent worshipful society, will
wonder how such squeamishness should have prevailed over my good
sense: treasurers of charities in particular; persons who have
the wills of relations in their custody, and do not exactly like
the contents; in short, all those whose characters stand higher
than their principles, will find food for reflection in my
overstrained scrupulosity.

After having made restitution to the merchant, who little thought
ever to have seen one farthing of his property again, I returned
to the castle of Lena. The Count de Polan had taken his
departure, and was far on his journey to Toledo with Julia and
Don Ferdinand. I found my new master more wrapped up than ever in
Seraphina; his Seraphina equally wrapped up in my master, and Don
Caesar just as much wrapped up as either in the contemplation of
the happy couple. My object was to gain the goodwill of this
affectionate father, and I succeeded to my wish. The whole house
was placed implicitly under my superintendence -- nothing was
done without my special direction; the tenants paid their rents
into my hands; the disbursements of the family were all under my
revision; and the subordinate situations in the household were at
my disposal without appeal; and yet the power of tyrannizing did
not give me the inclination, as it has always hitherto done to my
equals and superiors. I neither turned away the male servants,
because I did not like the cut of their beards, nor the female
ones because they happened not to like the cut of mine. If they
made up to Don Caesar or his son at once, without currying my
favour as the channel of all good graces, far from taking umbrage
at them on that account, I spoke out officiously in their behalf.
In other respects, too, the marks of confidence my two masters
were incessantly lavishing on me inspired me with a substantial
zeal for their service. Their interest was my real object: there
was no slight of hand in my ministry; I was such a caterer for
the general good, as you rarely meet with in private families or
in political societies.

While I was hugging myself on the well-earned prosperity of my
condition, love, jealous of my dealings with fortune, was bent on
sharing my gratitude by the addition of a higher zest, he
planted, watered, and ripened in the heart of Dame Lorenza
Sephora, Seraphina's confidential woman, an abundant crop of
liking for the happy steward. My Helen, not to sink the fidelity
of the historian in the vanity of the man, could not be many
months short of her fiftieth year. But for all that, a look of
wholesomeness, a face none of the ugliest, and two good-looking
eyes of which she knew the efficient use, might make her still
pass for a decent bit of amusement in a summer evening. I could
only just have been thankful for a little more relief to her
complexion, since it was precisely the colour of chalk; but that
I attributed to maiden concealments, which had eat away all the
damask of her cheek.

The lady ogled me for a long time, with ogles that savoured more
of passion than of chastity; but instead of communing in the
language of the eyes, I made pretence at first not to be sensible
of my own happiness. Thus did my gallantry appear as if arrayed
in its first blushes; a circumstance which was rather tempting
than repulsive to her feelings. Taking it into her head,
therefore, that there was no standing upon dumb eloquence with a
young man who looked more like a novice than he was, at our very
first interview she declared her sentiments in broad, unequivocal
terms, that I might have no plea for misinterpretation. She
played her part like an old stager: affected to be overwhelmed
with confusion while she was speaking to me; and after having
said all she wanted to say in a good audible voice, put her hand
before her face, to hide the shame which was not there, and make
me believe that she was incommoded by the delicacy of her own
feelings. There was no standing such an attack; and though vanity
had a larger share in my surrender than the tender passion, I did
not receive her overtures ungraciously. Nay, more, I presumed to
overlook decorum in my vivacity, and acted the impatient lover so
naturally as to call down a modest rebuke upon my freedoms.
Lorenza chid my fondness, but with so much fondness in her
chidings, that while she prescribed to me the coldness of an
anchorite, it was very evident she would have been miserably
disappointed if I had taken her prescription. I should have
pressed the affair at once to the natural termination of all such
affairs, if the lovely object of my ardent wishes had not been
afraid of giving me a left-handed opinion of her virtue, by
abandoning the works before the siege was regularly formed. This
being so, we parted, but with a promise to meet again: Sephora in
the full persuasion that her reluctant resistance would stamp her
for a vestal in my esteem, and myself full of the sweet hope that
the torments of Tantalus would soon be succeeded by an elysium of
enjoyment.

My affairs were in this happy train, when one of Don Caesar's
under servants brought me such a piece of news, as gave an ague
to my raptures. This lad was one of those inquisitive inmates who
apply either an ear or an eye to every keyhole in a house. As he
paid his court constantly to me, and served up some fresh piece
of scandal every day, he came to tell me one morning that he had
made a pleasant discovery; and that he had no objection to
letting me into the fun, on condition that I would not blab:
because Dame Lorenza Sephora was the theme of the joke, and he
was afraid of becoming obnoxious to her resentment and revenge. I
was too much interested in coming at the story he had to tell,
not to swear myself into discretion through thick and thin; but
it was necessary that my motive should seem curiosity and not
personal concern, so that I asked him, with an air of as much
indifference as I could put on, what was this mighty discovery
about which he made such a piece of work. Lorenza, whispered he,
smuggles the surgeon of the village every evening into her
apartment: he is a tight vessel, well armed and manned; and the
pirate generally stays pretty long upon his cruise. I do not mean
to say, added he, with supercilious candour but that all this may
be perfectly innocent on both sides, but you cannot help
admitting, that where a young man does insinuate himself slily
into a girl's bedchamber he takes better care of his own pleasure
than of her reputation.

Though this tale gave me as much uneasiness as if I had been
verily and romantically in love, I had too much sense to let him
know it; but so far stifled my feelings as to laugh heartily at a
story which struck at the very life of all my hopes. But when no
witnesses were by, I made myself full amends for having gulped
down my rising indignation. I blustered and stormed; muttered
blessings on them the wrong way, and swore outright: but all this
without coming nearer to a decision on my own conduct. At one
time, holding Lorenza in utter contempt, it was my good pleasure
to give her up altogether, without condescending so far as to
come to any explanation with the coquette. At an other time,
laying it down as a principle, that my honour was concerned in
making the surgeon an example to all intriguers, I spirited up my
courage to call him out. Thus dangerous valour prevailed over
safe indifference. At the approach of evening I placed myself in
ambuscade; and sure enough the gentleman did slink into the
temple of my Vesta, with a fear of being found out that spoke
rather unfavourably for the purity of his designs. Nothing short
of this could have kept my rage alive against the chilliness of
the night air. I immediately quitted the precincts of the castle,
and posted myself on the high road, where the gay deceiver was
sure to be intercepted on his return. I waited for him with my
fighting spirits on the full boil: my impatience increased with
the lapse of time, till Mars and Bellona seemed to inhabit my
frame, and enlarge it beyond human dimensions. At length my
antagonist came in sight. I took a few strides, such as bully
Mars or Bellona might have taken; but I do not know how the devil
it came to pass, my courage went further off as my body came
nearer; my frame was contracted within somewhat less than its
human dimensions, and my heart felt exactly like the heart of a
coward. The hearts of Homer's heroes felt exactly the same, when
the dastardly dogs were not backed by a supernatural drawcansir!
In short, I was just as much out of my element as ever Paris was,
when he pitted himself against Menelaus in single combat. I began
taking measure of this operator in love, war, and anatomy. He
appeared to be large limbed and well knit, with a sword by his
side of a most abominable length. All this made me consider, that
the better part of valour is discretion: nevertheless, whether
from the superiority of mind over the nervous system in a case of
honour, or from whatever other cause, though the danger grew
bigger as the distance diminished, and in spite of nature, which
pleaded obstinately that honour is a mere scutcheon, and can
neither set a leg nor take away the grief of a wound, I mustered
up boldness enough to march forward towards the surgeon sword in
hand.

My proceeding seemed to him to be of the drollest. What is the
matter, Signor Gil Blas? exclaimed he. Why all this fire and
fury? You are in a bantering mood, to all appearance. No, good
master shaver, answered I, no such thing; there never was
anything more serious since Cain killed Abel. I am determined to
try the experiment, whether as little preparation serves your
turn in the field of battle as in a lady's chamber. Hope not that
you will be suffered to possess without a rival that heaven of
bliss in which you have been indulging but this moment at the
castle. By all the martyrdoms we phlebotomizers have ever
suffered or inflicted! replied the surgeon, setting up a shout of
laughter, this is a most whimsical adventure. As heaven is my
judge! appearances are very little to be trusted. At this put
off, fancying that he had no keener stomach for cold iron than
myself, I got to be I ten times more over bearing. Teach your
parrot to speak better Spanish, my friend, interrupted I; do you
think we do not know a hawk from a hernshaw? Imagine not that the
simple denial of the fact will settle the business. I see
plainly, replied he, that I shall be obliged to speak out, or
some mischief must happen either to you or me. I shall therefore
disclose a secret to you; though men in our profession cannot be
too much on the reserve. If Dame Lorenza sends for me into her
apartment under suspicious circumstances, it is only to conceal
from the servants the knowledge of her malady. She has an
incurable ulcer in her back, which I come every evening to dress.
This is the real occasion of those visits which disturb your
peace. Henceforward, rest assured that you have her all to
yourself. But if you are not satisfied with this expectation, and
are absolutely bent on a fencing match, you have only to say so;
I am not a man to turn my back upon a game at sword play. With
these words in his mouth he drew his long rapier, which made my
heart jump into my throat, and stood upon his guard. It is
enough, said I, putting my sword up again in its scabbard, I am
not a wild beast, to turn a deaf ear to reason: after what you
have told me, there is no cause of enmity between us. Let us
shake hands. At this proposal, by which he found out that I was
not such a devil of a fellow as he had taken me for, he returned
his weapon with a laugh, met my advances to be reconciled, and we
parted the best friends in the world.

From that time forward Sephora never came into my thoughts but
with the most disgusting associations. I shunned all the
opportunities she gave me of entertaining her in private, and
this with so obvious a study, almost bordering on rudeness, that
she could not but notice it. Astonished at so sudden a reverse,
she was dying to know the cause, and at length, finding the means
of pinning me down to a tête-à-tête, Good Mr Steward, said she,
tell me, if so please you, why you avoid the very sight of me! It
is true that I made the first advances; but then you fed the
consuming fire. Recall to memory, if it is not too great a
favour, the private interview we had together. Then you were a
magazine of combustibles, now you are as frozen as the north sea.
What is the meaning of all this? The question was not a little
difficult of solution, for a man unaccustomed to the violence of
amorous interrogatories. The consequence was, that it puzzled me
most confoundedly. I do not precisely recollect the identical lie
I told the lady, but I recollect perfectly that nothing but the
truth could have affronted her more highly. Sephora, though by
her mincing air and modest outside one might have taken her for a
lamb, was a tigress when the savage was roused in her nature. I
did think, said she, darting a glance at me full of malice and
hideousness, I did think to have conferred such honour as was
never conferred before, on a little scoundrel like you, by
betraying sentiments which the first nobility in the country
would make it their boast to excite. Fitly indeed am I punished
for having preposterously lowered myself to the level of a dirty,
snivelling adventurer.

That was pretty well; but she did not stop there: I should have
come off too cheaply on such terms. Her fury taking a long lease
of her tongue, that brawling instrument of discord rung a bob-
major of invective, each strain more clamorous and confounding
than the former. It certainly was my duty to have received it all
with cool indifference, and to have considered candidly that in
triumphing over female reserve, and then not taking possession of
the conquest, I had committed that sin against the sex, which
would have transformed the most feminine of them into a Sephora.
But I was too irritable to bear abuse, at which a man of sense in
my place would only have laughed; and my patience was at length
exhausted. Madam, said I, let us not rake into each other's
personal misfortunes, If the first nobility in the country had
only looked at your back, they would have forgotten all your
other charms, and have boasted but little of the sentiments they
had excited you to betray. I had no sooner laid in this home
stroke, then the enraged duenna visited me with the hardest box
on the ear that ever yet proceeded from the delicate fingers of a
woman scorned. Such favours might pall on repetition; so I did
not wait for a second, but took shelter in the nimbleness of my
legs from the clatter of castigation she was going to shower down
on me.

I returned thanks to the protecting powers for having brought me
clear off from this unequal encounter, and fancied that I had
nothing further to apprehend, since the lady had taken corporal
vengeance. It was likely, too, that she would be wise and hold
her tongue, for the honour of her own back: and, in point of 
fact, a full fortnight had elapsed without my hearing a word upon
the subject The very tingling in my own cheek began to abate,
when I was told that Sephora was taken ill. With that forgiveness
of injuries so natural to me, I was sincerely afflicted at the
news. I really felt for the poor lady. I concluded that, unable
to contend with a passion so ill repaid, that hapless victim of
her own tenderness was giving up the ghost. It was with exquisite
pain that I turned this subject in my thoughts. I was the cruel
cause that her heart was breaking; and my pity at least was the
duenna's, though love is too wayward to be controlled by advice.
But I was miserably mistaken in her nature. Her tenderness had
all curdled into acrimonious hatred; and at that very moment was
she plotting to be my bane.

One morning while I was with Don Alphonso, that amiable young
master of mine was absent, moody, and out of spirits. I inquired
respectfully what was the matter. I am vexed to the soul, said
he, to find Seraphina weak, unjust, ungrateful. You are not a
little surprised at this, added he, remarking the expression of
astonishment with which I heard him; yet nothing is more strictly
and lamentably true. I know not what reason you have given Dame
Lorenza to be at variance with you; but true it is, you are
become so unbearably hateful to her, that if you do not get out
of this castle as soon as possible, her death, she says, must be
the sure consequence. You cannot but suppose that Seraphina, who
knows your value, used all her influence at first against a
prejudice to which she could not administer without injustice and
ingratitude. But though the best of women, she is still a woman.
Sephora brought her up, and she loves her like a mother. Should
her old nurse die shortly, she would fancy she had her death to
answer for, had she refused herself to any of her whims. For my
own part, with all my affection towards Seraphina, and it is none
of the weakest, I will never be guilty of so mean a compliance as
to side with her on this question. Perish our duennas, perish the
whole system of our Spanish vigilance! but never let me consent
to the banishment of a young man whom I look upon rather as a
brother than a servant!

When Don Alphonso had thus expressed his sentiments, I said to
him: My good sir, I am born to be the mere whipping-top of
fortune. It had been my hope that she would leave off persecuting
me when under your roof, where everything held out to me happy
days and an unruffled life. Now, the part for honour to take is
to tear myself away, whatever hankering I may feel after my
continuance. No, no, exclaimed the generous son of Don Caesar.
Leave me to bring Seraphina to a proper view of things. It shall
never be said that you are sacrificed to the caprices of a
duenna, who, on every occasion, has but too much influence over
the family. All you will get by it, sir, replied I, will only be
to put Seraphina in an ill humour by opposing her wishes. I had
much rather withdraw than run the risk, by a longer abode here,
of sowing division between a married pair, who are a model of
conjugal felicity. Such a consequence of my unhappy quarrel would
make me miserable for the remainder of my days.

Don Alphonso absolutely forbade me to take any hasty step; and I
found him so determined in the intention of standing by me, that
Lorenza must infallibly have been thrown into the background, if
I had chosen to have stood an election against her. There were
moments when, exasperated against the duenna, I was tempted to
keep no measures with her; but when I came to consider that to
unravel this surgical mystery would be to plunge a dagger into
the heart of a poor creature, whose curse had been my fastidious
prejudice against an ulcerated back, and whom a physical and
mental misfortune were conjointly handing down to the grave; I
lost all feeling but that of compassion towards her. It was
evident, since I was so portentous a phenomenon, that it was my
imperious duty to re-establish the tranquillity of the castle by
my absence; and that duty I performed the next morning before
daybreak, without taking any leave of my two masters, for fear
they should oppose my departure from a misplaced partiality
towards me. My only notice was to leave behind in my chamber a
memorial, containing an exact account of my receipts and
disbursements during the time of my stewardship.



CH. II.  --  What happened to Gil Blas after his retreat from the
castle of Leyva; shewing that those who are crossed in love are
not always the most miserable of mankind.


I WAS mounted on a good horse, my own property, and was the
bearer of two hundred pistoles, the greater part of which arose 
from the plunder of the vanquished banditti, and the forfeiture
of Samuel Simon by the Inquisition; for Don Alphonso, without
requiring me to account for any part of the said forfeiture, had
made restitution of the entire sum out of his own funds. Thus,
considering my effects, however obtained, as converted into
lawful property by a sort of vicarious sponsorship, I took them
into my good graces without any remorse of conscience. An estate
like this rendered it absurd to throw away any thought about the
future; and a certain likelihood of doing well, which always
hangs about a young man at my age, held out an additional
security against the caprices of fortune. Besides, Toledo offered
me a retreat exactly to my mind. There could not be a doubt but
the Count de Polan would take a pleasure in giving a kind
reception to one of his deliverers, and would insist on his
accepting an apartment in his own house. But I only looked upon
this nobleman as a very distant resource; and determined, before
laying any tax on his grateful recollection, to spend part of my
ready cash in travelling over the provinces of Murcia and
Grenada, which I had a very particular inclination to see. With
this intention I took the Almanza road, and afterwards, following
the route chalked out, travelled from town to town as far as the
city of Grenada, without stumbling on any sinister occurrence. It
should seem as if fortune, wearied out with the school-girl's
tricks she had been playing me, was contented at last to leave me
as she found me. But she still had her skittish designs upon me,
as will be seen in the sequel.

One of the first persons I met in the streets of Grenada was
Signor Don Ferdinand de Leyva, son-in-law, as well as Don
Alphonso, of the Count de Polan. We were both of us equally
surprised at meeting so far from home. How is this, Gil Blas?
exclaimed he; to find you in this city! What the devil brings you
hither? Sir, said I, if you are astonished at seeing me in this 
country, you will be ten times more so when you shall know why I
have quitted the service of Signor Don Caesar and his son. Then I
recounted to him all that had passed between Sephora and myself,
without garbling the facts in any particular. He laughed heartily
at the recital; then, recovering his gravity, My friend, said he,
my mediation is at your service in this affair. I will write to
my sister-in-law . . . . No, no, sir, interrupted I, do not write
upon the subject, I beseech you. I did not quit the castle of
Leyva to go back again. You may, if you please, make another use
of the kindness you have expressed for me. If any of your friends
should be looking out for a secretary or a steward, I should be
much obliged to you to speak a good word in my favour. I will
take upon me to assure you that you will never be reproached with
recommending an improper object. You have only to command me,
answered he: I will do whatever you desire. My business at
Grenada is to visit an old aunt in an ill state of health. I
shall be here three weeks longer, after which I shall set out on
my return to my castle of Lorqui, where I have left Julia. That
is my lodging, added he, shewing me a house about a hundred yards
from us. Call upon me in a few days; probably I may by that time
have hit upon some eligible appointment.

And, in fact, so it was; for the very first time that we came
together again, he said to me: My Lord Archbishop of Grenada, my
relation and friend, is in want of a young man with some little
tinge of literature, who can write a good hand and make fair
copies of his manuscripts; for he is a great author. He has
composed I know not how many homilies, and still goes on
composing more every day, which he delivers to the high
edification of his audience. As you seem to be just the thing for
him, I have mentioned your name, and he has promised to take you.
Go, and make your bow to him as from me; you will judge, by his
reception of you, whether my recommendation has been couched in
handsome terms.

The situation was, to all appearance, exactly what I should have
picked out for myself. That being the case, with such an
arrangement of my air and person as seemed most likely to square
with the ideas of a reverend prelate, I presented myself one
morning before the archbishop. If this were a gorgeous romance,
and not a grave history, here might we introduce a pompous
description of the episcopal palace, with architectural
digressions on the structure of the building: here would be the
place to expatiate on the costliness of the furniture like an
upholsterer, to criticise the statues and pictures like a
connoisseur; and the pictures themselves would be nothing to the
uninformed reader, without the stories they represent, till
universal history, fabulous and authentic, sacred and profane,
should be pressed into the service. But I shall content myself
with modestly stating, that the royal palace itself is scarcely
superior in magnificence.

Throughout the suite of apartments, there was a complete mob of
ecclesiastics and other officers, consisting of chaplains,
ushers, upper and menial servants. Those of them who were laymen
were most superbly attired; one would sooner have taken them for
temporal nobility than for spiritual understrappers. They were as
proud as the devil; and gave themselves intolerably consequential
airs. I could not help laughing in my sleeve, when I considered
who and what they were, and how they behaved. Set a beggar on
horseback! said I. These gentry are in luck to carry a pack
without feeling the drag of it; for surely if they knew they were
beasts of burden, they would not jingle their bells with so high
a toss of the head. I ventured just to speak to a grave and
portly personage who stood sentinel at the door of the
archbishop's closet, to turn it upon its hinges as occasion might
require. I asked him civilly if there was no possibility of
speaking with my lord archbishop. Stop a little, said he, with a
supercilious demeanour and repulsive tone: his grace will shortly
come forth, to go and hear mass: you may snatch an audience for a
moment as he passes on. I answered not a single syllable.
Patience was all I had for it; and it even seemed advisable to
try and enter into conversation with some of the jacks in office:
but they began conning me over from the sole of my foot to the
crown of my head, without condescending to favour me with a
single interjection; after which they winked at one another,
whispered, and looked out at the corners of their eyes, in
derision of the liberty I had assumed, by intruding upon their
select society.

I felt more fool that I did so, quite out of countenance at such
cavalier treatment from a knot of state footmen. My confusion was
but beginning to subside, when the closet door opened. The
archbishop made his appearance. A profound silence immediately
ensued among his officers, who quitted at once their insolent
behaviour, to adopt a more respectful style before their master.
That prelate was in his sixty-ninth year, formed nearly on the
model of my uncle, Gil Perez the canon, which is as much as to
say, as broad as he was long. But the highest dignitaries should
always be the most amply gifted; accordingly his legs bowed
inwards to the very extremity of the graceful curve, and his bald
head retained but a single lock behind: so that he was obliged to
ensconce his pericranium in a fine woollen cap with long ears. In
spite of all this, I espied the man of quality in his deportment,
doubtless, because I knew that he actually happened to be one. We
common fellows, the fungous growth of the human dunghill, look up
to great lords with a facility of being overawed, which often
furnishes them with a Benjamin's mess of importance, when nature
has denied even the most scanty and trivial gifts.

The archbishop moved towards me in a minuet step, and kindly
inquired what I wanted. I told him I was the young man about whom
Signor Don Ferdinand de Leyva had spoken to him. He did not give
me a moment to go on with my story. Ah! is it you, exclaimed he,
is it you of whom so fine a character has been given me? I take
you into my service at once; you are a mine of literary utility
to me. You have only to take up your abode here. Talking thus
condescendingly, he supported himself between two ushers, and
moved onwards after having given audience to some of his clergy,
who had ecclesiastical business to communicate. He was scarcely
out of the room, when the same officers who had turned upon their
heel, were now cap in hand to court my conversation. Here the
rascals are, pressing round me, currying favour, and expressing
their sincere joy at seeing me become as it were an heir loom of
the archbishopric. They had heard what their master had said, and
were dying with anxiety to know on what footing I was to be about
him; but I had the ill nature not to satisfy their curiosity, in
revenge for their contempt.

My lord archbishop was not long before he returned. He took me
with him into his closet for a little private conference. I could
not but suppose that he meant to fathom the depth of my
understanding. I was accordingly on my guard, and prepared to
measure out my words most methodically. He questioned me first in
the classics. My answers were not amiss; he was convinced that I
had more than a schoolboy's acquaintance with the Greek and Latin
writers. He examined me next in logic; nor could I but suppose
that he would examine me in logic. He found me strong enough
there. Your education, said he, with some degree of surprise, has
not been neglected. Now let us see your hand-writing. I took a
blank piece of paper out of my pocket, which I had brought for
the purpose. My ghostly father was not displeased with my
performance. I am very well satisfied with the mechanical part of
your qualifications, exclaimed he, and still more so with the
powers of your mind. I shall thank my nephew, Don Ferdinand, most
heartily, for having sent me so fine a lad; it is absolutely a
gift from above.

We were interrupted by some of the neighbouring gentry, who were
come to dine with the archbishop. I left them together, and
withdrew to the second table, where the whole household, with one
consent, insisted on giving me the upper hand. Dinner is a busy
time at an episcopal ordinary; and yet we snatched a moment to
make our observations on each other. What a mortified propriety
was painted on the outside of the clergy? They had all the look
of a deputation from a better world: strange to think how place
and circumstance impose on the deluded sense of men! It never
once came into my thoughts that all this sanctity might possibly
be a false coin; just as if there could be nothing but what
appertained to the kingdom above, among the successors of the
apostles on earth.

I was seated by the side of an old valet-de-chambre, by name
Melchior de la Ronda. He took care to help me to all the nice
bits. His attentions were not lost upon me, and my good manners
quite enraptured him. My worthy sir, said he, in a low voice
after dinner, I should like to have a little private talk with
you. At the same time he led the way to a part of the palace
where we could not be overheard, and there addressed me as
follows: My son, from the very first instant that I saw you, I
felt a certain prepossession in your favour. Of this I will give
you a certain proof, by communicating in confidence what will be
of great service to you. You are here in a family where true
believers and painted hypocrites are playing at cross purposes
against each other, It would take an antediluvian age to feel the
ground under your feet. I will spare so long and so disgusting a
study, by letting you into the characters on both sides. After
this, if you do not play your cards, it is your own fault.

I shall begin with his grace. He is a very pious prelate,
employed without ceasing in the instruction of the people, whom
he brings back to virtue, like sheep gone astray, by sermons full
of excellent morality, and written by himself. He has retired
from court these twenty years, to watch over his flock with the
zeal of an affectionate pastor. He is a very learned person, and
a very impressive declaimer: his whole delight is in preaching,
and his congregation take care he should know that their whole
delight is in hearing him. There may possibly be some little
leaven of vanity in all this heavenly-mindedness; but, besides
that it is not for human fallibility to search the heart, it
would ill become me to rake into the faults of a person whose
bread I eat. Were it decent to lay my finger on anything
unbecoming in my master, I should discommend his starchness.
Instead of exercising forbearance towards frail churchmen, he
visits every peccadillo, as if it were a heinous offence. Above
all, he prosecutes those with the utmost rigour of the spiritual
court, who, wrapping themselves up in their innocence, appeal to
the canons for their justification, in bar of his despotic
authority. There is besides another awkward trait in his
character, common to him with many other people of high rank.
Though he is very fond of the people about him, he pays not the
least attention to their services, but lets them sink into years
without a moment's thought about securing them any provision. If
at any time he makes them any little presents, they may thank the
goodness of some one who shall have spoken up in their behalf: he
would never have his wits enough about him to do the slightest
thing for them as a volunteer.

This is just what the old valet-de-chambre told me of his master.
Next, he let me into what he thought of the clergymen with whom
we had dined. His portraits might be likenesses; but they were
too hard-featured to be owned by the originals. It must be
admitted, however, that he did not represent them as honest men,
but only as very scandalous priests. Nevertheless, he made some
exceptions, and was as loud in their praises as in his censure of
the others. I was no longer at any loss how to play my part so as
to put myself on an equal footing with these gentry. That very
evening, at supper, I took a leaf out of their book, and arrayed
myself in the convenient vesture of a wise and prudent outside. A
clothing of humility and sanctification costs nothing. Indeed it
offers such a premium to the wearer, that we are not to wonder if 
this world abounds in a description of people called hypocrites.



CH. III. -- Gil Blas becomes the Archbishop's favourite, and the
channel of all his favours.


I HAD been after dinner to get together my baggage, and take my
horse from the inn where I had put up, and afterwards returned to
supper at the archbishop's palace, where a neatly furnished room
was got ready for me, and such a bed as was more likely to pamper
than to mortify the flesh. The day following, his grace sent for
me quite as soon as I was ready to go to him. It was to give me a
homily to transcribe. He made a point of having it copied with
all possible accuracy. It was done to please him; for I omitted
neither accent, nor comma, nor the minutest tittle of all he had
marked down. His satisfaction at observing this was heightened by
its being unexpected. Eternal Father! exclaimed he in a holy
rapture, when he had glanced his eye over all the folios of my
copy, was ever anything seen so correct? You are too good a
transcriber not to have some little smattering of the grammarian.
Now tell me with the freedom of a friend: in writing it over,
have you been struck with nothing that grated upon your feelings?
Some little careless idiom, or some word used in an improper
sense? Oh! may it please your grace, answered I with a modest
air, it is not for me, with my confined education and coarse
taste, to aim at making critical remarks. And though ever so well
qualified, I am satisfied that your grace's works would come out
pure from the essay. The successor of the apostles smiled at my
answer. He made no observation on it; but it was easy to see,
through all his piety, that he was an arrant author at the
bottom: there is some thing in that dye, that not heaven itself
can wash out.

I seemed to have purchased the fee-simple of his good graces by
my flattery. Day after day did I get a step further in his
esteem; and Don Ferdinand, who came to see him very often, told
me my footing was so firm, that there could not be a doubt but my
fortune was made. Of this my master himself gave me a proof some
little time afterwards: and the occasion was as follows: -- One
evening in his closet be rehearsed before me, with appropriate
emphasis and action, a homily which he was to deliver the next
day in the cathedral. He did not content himself with asking me
what I thought of it in the gross, but insisted on my telling him
what passages struck me most. I had the good fortune to pick out
those which were nearest to his own taste, his favourite common-
places. Thus, as luck would have it, I passed in his estimation
for a man who had a quick and natural relish of the real and less
obvious beauties in a work. This, indeed, exclaimed he, is what
you may call having discernment and feeling in perfection! Well,
well, my friend! it cannot be said of you,

Baeotum in crasso jurares aëre natum.

In a word, he was so highly pleased with me, as to add in a tone
of extraordinary emotion -- Never mind, Gil Blas! henceforward
take no care about hereafter; I shall make it my business to
place you among the favoured children of my bounty. You have my
best wishes; and to prove to you that you have them, I shall take
you into my inmost confidence.

These words were no sooner out of his mouth, than I fell at his
grace's feet, quite overwhelmed with gratitude. I embraced his
elliptical legs with almost pagan idolatry, and considered myself
as a man on the high road to a very handsome fortune. Yes, my
child, resumed the archbishop, whose speech had been cut short by
the rapidity of my prostration, I mean to make you the receiver-
general of all my inmost ruminations. Hearken attentively to what
I am going to say. I have a great pleasure in preaching. The Lord
sheds a blessing on my homilies; they sink deep into the hearts
of sinners; set up a glass in which vice sees its own image, and
bring back many from the paths of error into the high road of
repentance. What a heavenly sight, when a miser, scared at the
hideous picture drawn by my eloquence of his avarice, opens his
coffers to the poor and needy, and dispenses the accumulated
store with a liberal hand! The voluptuary, too, is snatched from
the pleasures of the table; ambition flies at my command to the
wholesome discipline of the monastic cell; while female frailty,
tottering on the brink of ruin, with one ear open to the siren
voice of the seducer, and the other to my saintly correctives, is
restored to domestic happiness and the approving smile of heaven,
by the timely warnings of the pulpit. These miraculous
conversions, which happen almost every Sunday, ought of
themselves to goad me on in the career of saving souls.
Nevertheless, to conceal no part of my weakness from my monitor,
there is another reward on which my heart is intent, a reward
which the seraphic scrupulousness of my virtue to little purpose
condemns as too carnal; a literary reputation for a sublime and
elegant style. The honour of being handed down to posterity as a
perfect pulpit orator has its irresistible attractions. My
compositions are generally thought to be equally powerful and
persuasive; but I could wish of all things to steer clear of the
rock on which good authors split, who are too long before the
public, and to retire from professional life with my reputation
in undiminished lustre.

To this end, my dear Gil Blas, continued the prelate, there is
one thing requisite from your zeal and friendship. Whenever it
shall strike you that my pen begins to contract, as it were, the
ossification of old age, whenever you see my genius in its
climacteric, do not fail to give me a hint. There is no trusting
to one's self in such a case; pride and conceit were the original
sin of man. The probe of criticism must he intrusted to an
impartial stander-by, of fine talents and unshaken probity. Both
those requisites centre in you: you are my choice, and I give
myself up to your direction. Heaven be praised, my lord, said I,
there is no need to trouble yourself with any such thoughts yet.
Besides, an understanding of your grace's mould and calibre will
last out double the time of a common genius; or to speak with
more certainty and truth, it will never be the worse for wear, if
you live to the age of Methusalem. I consider you as a second
Cardinal Ximenes, whose powers, superior to decay, instead of
flagging with years, seemed to derive new vigour from their
approximation with the heavenly regions. No flattery, my friend!
interrupted he. I know myself to be in danger of failing all at
once. At my age one begins to be sensible of infirmities, and
those of the body communicate with the mind. I repeat it to you,
Gil Blas, as soon as you shall be of opinion that my head is not
so clear as usual, give me warning of it instantly. Do not be
afraid of offending by frankness and sincerity, to put me in mind
of my own frailty will be the strongest proof of your affection
for me. Besides, your very interest is concerned in it, for if it
should, by any spite of chance towards you, come to my ears that
the people say in town, "His grace's sermons produce no longer
their accustomed impression, it is time for him to abandon his
pulpit to younger candidates," I do assure you most seriously and
solemnly, you will not only lose my friendship, but the provision
for life that I have promised you. Such will be the result of
your silly tampering with truth.

Here my patron left off to wait for my answer, which was an echo
of his speech, and a promise of obeying him in all things. From
that moment there were no secrets from me; I became the prime
favourite. All the household, except Melchior de la Ronda, looked
at me with an eye of envy. It was curious to observe the manner
in which the whole establishment, from the highest to the lowest,
thought it necessary to demean themselves towards his grace's
confidential secretary; there was no meanness to which they would
not stoop to curry favour with me; I could scarcely believe they
were Spaniards. I left no stone unturned to be of service to
them, without being taken in by their interested assiduities. My
lord archbishop, at my entreaty, took them by the hand. He got a
company for one, and fitted him out so as to make a handsome
figure in the army. Another he sent to Mexico, with a
considerable appointment which he procured him; and I obtained a
good slice of his bounty for my friend Melchior. It was evident
from these facts, that if the prelate was not particularly active
in good works, at least he rarely gave a churlish refusal, when
any one had the courage to importune him for his benevolence.

But what I did for a priest seems to deserve being noticed more
at large. One day a certain licentiate, by name Lewis Garcias, a
well-looking man still in the prime of life, was presented to me
by our steward, who said -- Signor Gil Blas, in this honest
ecclesiastic you behold one of my best friends. He was formerly
chaplain to a nunnery. Scandal has taken a few liberties with his
chastity. Malicious stories have been trumped up to hurt him in
my lord archbishop's opinion, who has suspended him, and
unfortunately is so strongly prejudiced by his enemies, as to be
deaf to any petition in his favour. In vain have we interested
the first people in Grenada to get him re-established; our master
will not hear of it.

These first people in Grenada, said I, have gone the wrong way to
work. It would have been much better if no interest at all had
been made for the reverend licentiate. People have only done him
a mischief by endeavouring to serve him. I know my lord
archbishop thoroughly: entreaties and importunate recommendations
do but aggravate the ill condition of a clergyman who lies under
his displeasure: it is but a very short time ago since I heard
him mutter the following sentiment to himself The more persons a
priest, who has been guilty of any misconduct, engages to speak
to me in his behalf, the more widely is the scandal of the church
disseminated, and the more severe is my treatment of the
offender. That is very unlucky, replied the steward; and my
friend would be put to his last shifts if he did not write a good
hand. But, happily, he has the pen of a ready scribe, and keeps
his head above water by the exercise of that talent. I was
curious to see whether this boasted hand writing was so much
better than my own. The licentiate, who had a specimen in his
pocket, shewed me a sheet which I admired very much: it had all
the regularity of a writing-master's copy. In looking over this
model of penman ship, an idea occurred to me. I begged Garcia to
leave this paper in my hands, saying, that I might be able to do
something with it which should turn out to his advantage; that I
could not explain myself at that moment, but would tell him more
the next day. The licentiate, to whom the steward had evidently
talked big about my capacity to serve him, withdrew in as good
spirits as if he had already been restored to his functions.

I was in earnest in my endeavour that he should be so, and lost
no time in setting to work. Happening to be alone with the
archbishop, I produced the specimen. My patron was delighted with
it. Seizing on this favourable opportunity, May it please your
grace, said I, since you are determined not to put your homilies
to the press, I should very much like them at last to be
transcribed in this masterly manner.

I am very well satisfied with your performance, answered the
prelate, but yet I own that it would be a pleasant thing enough
to have a copy of my works in that hand. Your grace, replied I,
has only to signify your wishes. The man who copies so well is a
licentiate of my acquaintance. It will give him so much the more
pleasure to gratify you, as it may be the means of interesting
your goodness to extricate him from the melancholy situation to
which he has the misfortune at present to be reduced.

The prelate could not do otherwise than inquire the name of this
licentiate. I told him it was Lewis Garcias. He is in despair at
having drawn down your censure upon him. That Garcias,
interrupted he, if I am not mistaken, was chaplain in a convent
of nuns, and has been brought into the ecclesiastical court as a
delinquent. I recollect some very heavy charges which have been
sent me against him. His morals are not the most exemplary. May
it please your grace, interrupted I in my turn, it is not for me
to justify him in all points; but I know that he has enemies. He
maintains that the authors of the informations you have received
are more bent on doing him an ill office than on vindicating the
purity of religion. That very possibly may be the case, replied
the archbishop; there are a great many firebrands in the world.
Besides, though we should take it for granted that his conduct
has not always been above suspicion, he may have repented of his
sins; in short, the mercies of heaven are infinite, however
heinous our transgressions. Bring that licentiate before me, I
take off his suspension.

Thus it is that men of the most austere character descend from
their altitudes, when interest or a favourite whim reduces them
to the level of the frail. The archbishop granted, without a
struggle, to the empty vanity of having his works well copied,
what he had refused to the most respectable applications. I
carried the news with all possible expedition to the steward, who
communicated it to his friend Garcias. That licentiate, on the
following day, came to return me thanks commensurate with the
favour obtained. I presented him to my master, who contented
himself with giving him a slight reprimand, and put the homilies
into his hand, to copy them out fair. Garcias performed the task
so satisfactorily, that he was reinstated in the cure of souls,
and was afterwards preferred to the living of Gabia, a large
market town in the neighbourhood of Grenada.



CH. IV. -- The Archbishop is afflicted with a stroke of apoplexy.
How Gil Blas gets into a dilemma, and how he gets out.


WHILE I was thus rendering myself a blessing first to one and
then to the other, Don Ferdinand de Leyva was making his
arrangements for leaving Grenada. I called on that nobleman
before his departure, to thank him once more for the advantageous
post he had procured me. My expressions of satisfaction were so
lively, that he said -- My dear Gil Blas, I am delighted to find
you in such good humour with my uncle the archbishop. I am
absolutely in love with him, answered I. His goodness to me has
been such as I can never sufficiently acknowledge. Less than my
present happiness could never have made me amends for being at so
great a distance from Don Caesar and his son. I am persuaded,
replied he, that they are both of them equally chagrined at
having lost you. But possibly you are not separated for ever;
fortune may some day bring you together again. I could not hear
such an idea started without being moved by it. My sighs would
find vent; and I felt at that moment so strong an affection for
Don Alphonso, that I could willingly have turned my back on the
archbishop and all the fine prospects that were opening to me,
and have gone back to the castle of Leyva, had but a
mortification taken place in the back of the scarecrow which had
frightened me away. Don Ferdinand was not insensible to the
emotions that agitated me, and felt himself so much obliged by
them, that he took his leave with the assurance of the whole
family always taking an anxious interest in my fate.

Two months after this worthy gentleman had left us, in the
luxuriant harvest of my highest favour, a lowering storm came
suddenly over the episcopal palace; the archbishop had a stroke
of apoplexy. By dint of immediate applications and good nursing,
in a few days there was no bodily appearance of disease
remaining. But his reverend intellects did not so easily recover
from their lethargy. I could not help observing it to myself in
the very first discourse that he composed. Yet there was not such
a wide gap between the merits of the present and the former ones,
as to warrant the inference that the sun of oratory was many
degrees advanced in its post-meridian course. A second homily was
worth waiting for; because that would clearly determine the line
of my conduct. Alas, and well-a-day! when that second homily
came, it was a knock-down argument. Sometimes the good prelate
moved forward, and sometimes he moved backwards; sometimes he
mounted up into the garret; and sometimes dipped down into the
cellar. It was a composition of more sound than meaning,
something like a superannuated schoolmaster's theme, when he
attempts to give his boys more sense than he possesses of his
own, or like a capuchin's sermon, which only scatters a few
artificial flowers of paltry rhetoric over a barren desert of
doctrine.

I was not the only person whom the alteration struck. The
audience at large, when he delivered it, as if they too had been
pledged to watch the advances of dotage, said to one another in a
whisper all round the church -- Here is a sermon, with symptoms
of apoplexy in every paragraph. Come, my good Coryphaeus of the
public taste in homilies, said I then to myself prepare to do
your office. You see that my lord archbishop is going very fast -
- you ought to warn him of it, not only as his bosom friend, on
whose sincerity he relies, but lest some blunt fellow should
anticipate you, and bolt out the truth in an offensive manner. In
that case you know the consequence; you would be struck out of
his will, where no doubt you have a more convertible bequest than
the licentiate Sédillo's library.

But as reason, like Janus, looks at things with two faces, I
began to consider the other side of the question; the hint seemed
difficult to wrap up so as to make it palatable. Authors in
general are stark mad on the subject of their own works, and such
an author might be more testy than the common herd of the
irritable race: but that suspicion seemed illiberal on my part,
for it was impossible that my freedom should he taken amiss, when
it had been forced upon me by so positive an injunction. Add to
this, that I reckoned upon handling the subject skilfully, and
cramming discretion down his throat like a high-seasoned
epicurean dish. After all my pro and con, finding that I risked
more by keeping silence than by breaking it, I determined to
venture on the delicate duty of speaking my mind.

Now there was but one difficulty; a difficulty indeed! how to
open the business. Luckily the orator himself extricated me from
that embarrassment, by asking what they said of him in the world
at large, and whether people were tolerably well pleased with his
last discourse. I answered that there could be but one opinion
about his homilies; but that it should seem as if the last had
not quite struck home to the hearts of the audience, like those
which had gone before. Do you really mean what you say, my
friend? replied he, with a sort of wriggling surprise. Then my
congregation are more in the temper of Aristarchus than of
Longinus! No, may it please your grace, rejoined I, quite the
contrary. Performances of that order are above the reach of
vulgar criticism: there is not a soul but expects to be saved by
their influence. Nevertheless, since you have made it my duty to
be sincere and unreserved, I shall take the liberty of just
stating that your last discourse is not written with quite the
overpowering eloquence and conclusive argument of your former
ones. Does not your grace feel just as I do on the subject?

This ignorant and stupid frankness of mine completely blanched my
master's cheek; but he forced a fretful smile, and said -- Then,
good Master Gil Blas, that piece does not exactly hit your fancy?
I did not mean to say that, your grace, interrupted I, looking
very foolish. It is very far superior to what any one else could
produce, though a little below par with respect to your own works
in general. I know what you mean, replied he. You think I am
going down hill, do not you? Out with it at once. It is your
opinion that it is time for me to think of retiring? I should
never have had the presumption, said I, to deliver myself with so
little reserve, if it had not been your grace's express command.
I act in entire obedience to your grace's orders; and I most
obsequiously implore your grace not to take offence at my
boldness. I were unfit to live in a Christian land! interrupted
he, with stammering impatience; I were unfit to live in a
Christian land if I liked you the less for such a Christian
virtue as sincerity. A man who does not love sincerity sets his
face against the distinguishing mark between a friend and a
flatterer. I should have given you infinite credit for speaking
what you thought, if you had thought anything that deserved to be
spoken. I have been finely taken in by your outside shew of
cleverness, without any solid foundation of sober judgment!

Though completely unhorsed, and at the enemy's mercy, I wanted to
make terms of decent capitulation, and to go unmolested into
winter quarters: but let those who think to appease an
exasperated author, and especially an author whose ear has been
long attuned to the music of his own praises, take warning by my
fate. Let us talk no more on the subject, my very young friend,
said he. You are as yet scarcely in the rudiments of good taste,
and utterly incompetent to distinguish between gold and tinsel.
You are yet to lean that I never in all my life composed a finer
homily than that unfortunate one which had not the honour of your
approbation. The immortal part of me, by the blessing of heaven
on me and my congregation, is less weighed down by human
infirmity than when the flesh was stronger. We all grow wiser as
we grow older, and I shall in future select the people about me
with more caution; nor submit the castigation of my works but to
a much abler critic than yourself. Get about your business!
pursued he, giving me an angry shove by the shoulders out of his
closet; go and tell my treasurer to pay you a hundred ducats, and
take my priestly blessing in addition to that sum. God speed you,
good Master Gil Blas! I heartily pray that you may do well in the
world! There is nothing to stand in your way, but the want of a
little better taste.



CH. V. -- The course which Gil Blas took after the archbishop had
given him his dismissal. His accidental meeting with the
licentiate who was so deeply in his debt, and a picture of
gratitude in the person of a parson.


I MADE the best of my way out of the closet, cursing the caprice,
or more properly the dotage of the archbishop, and more in
dudgeon at his absurdity, than cast down at the loss of his good
graces. For some time it was a moot point whether I should go and
lay claim to my hundred ducats; but after having weighed the
matter dispassionately, I was not such a fool as to quarrel with
my bread and butter. There was no reason why that money, fairly
earned, should deprive me of my natural right to make a joke of
this ridiculous prelate; in which good deed I promised myself not
to be wanting, as often as himself or his homilies were brought
upon the carpet in my hearing.

I went therefore and asked the treasurer for a hundred ducats,
without telling a word about the literary warfare between his
master and me. Afterwards I called on Melchior de la Ronda, to
take a long leave of him. He was too much my friend not to
sympathize with my misfortune. While I was telling my story
vexation was strongly imprinted on my countenance. In spite of
all his respect for the archbishop, he could not help blaming
him; but, when in the fever of my resentment I threatened to be a
match for the prelate, and to entertain the whole city at his
expense, the prudent Melchior gave me a salutary caution: Take my
advice, my dear Gil Blas, and rather pocket the affront. Men of a
lower sphere in life should always be cap in hand to people of
quality, whatever may be their grounds of complaint. It must be
admitted, there are some very coarse specimens of greatness,
which in themselves are scarcely deserving of the least respect
or attention; but even such animals have their weapons of
annoyance, and it is best to keep out of their way.

I thanked the old valet-de-chambre for the good counsel he had
given me, and promised to be guided by it. Pleased with my
deference to his opinion, he said to me: If you go to Madrid, be
sure you call upon my nephew, Joseph Navarro. He is factotum in
the family of Signor Don Balthazar de Zunigna, and I can venture
to recommend him as a lad in every respect worthy of your
friendship. He is just as nature made him, with all the vivacity
of youth, courteous in his manners, and forward to oblige; I
could wish you to get acquainted with him. I answered that I
would not fail to go and see this Joseph Navarro as soon as I
should get to Madrid, whither I meant to return in due time. Then
did I turn my back on the episcopal palace, never to grace it
with my presence again. If I had kept my horse, I should perhaps
have set out for Toledo immediately; but I had sold it during the
period of my administration, supposing that I was in office for
life, and should not henceforward be migratory. My final
resolution was to hire a ready-furnished lodging, as I had made
up my mind to stay another month in Grenada, and then to pay the
Count de Polan a visit.

As dinner-hour was drawing nigh, I asked my landlady if there was
any eating-house in the neighbourhood. She answered that there
was a very good one within a few yards of her house, where the
accommodations were excellent, and the company select and
numerous. I made her shew me where it was, and went thither sharp
set. I was shewn into a large room, resembling the hall of a
monastery in everything but good cheer. There were ten or a dozen
men sitting at a long table, with a cloth spread over it that
fretted in its own grease; but they, with unoffended nostrils,
were engaged in general conversation, though they dined
individually, each having a miserable scrap for his portion. The
people of the house brought me my allowance, which at another
time would have turned my stomach, and have made me sigh after
the luxuries of the table I had just lost. But at this moment I
was so indignant against the archbishop, that the homely fare of
a paltry eating-house seemed more palatable than the dainties of
his sumptuous board. It was a burning shame to see such a waste
of provisions served up in soups and sauces to pamper the
appetite. Arguing like a deep examiner in the economy of the
human frame, and reasoning medically as well as philosophically,
on the disproportion between the simple wants of nature and the
complexity of luxurious indulgence; cursed be they, said I, who
invented those pernicious dinners and suppers, where one must sit
on the tenterhooks of self-denial, for fear of overloading the
storehouse and shop of the whole body! Man wants but little here
below; and provided he can but keep body and soul together, the
less he eats the better. Thus did I, in my surly vein, give
utterance to wise saws; which, however just in theory, had
hitherto been little recommended by my practice.

While I was dispatching my commons, without any danger of a
surfeit from repletion, the licentiate Lewis Garcias, who had got
the living of Gabia in the manner above-mentioned, came into the
room. The moment he recognized me, he ran into my arms with all
the cordiality of friendship, or rather with the extravagant joy
of a lover after a long exile from his mistress. He folded me
repeatedly within his sincere embrace, and I was compelled to
stand the brunt of a long-winded compliment on the unparalleled
disinterestedness of my conduct towards him. Gratitude is a fine
virtue; and yet it is wearisome when carried beyond due bounds!
He took his seat next me, saying: Well! a parson must not swear;
though by the mass, my dear patron, since my good fortune has
thrown me in your way, we will not part without a jovial glass.
But as there is no good wine in this shabby inn, I will take you,
if you please, after our make-shift dinner, to a place where I
will treat you with a couple of bottles, rich, genuine, and old,
in comparison of which the Falernian of Horace was all a farce.
The church will give us absolution, in the cause of gratitude! If
I could but get you for a few days down at my parsonage of Gabia!
Maecenas was never more welcome to the poet's Sabine farm, than
the author of all my ease and comfort to the choicest produce of
a glebe which is mine only by your benevolence.

While he was holding this high-flown language, his little slice
of dinner was set before him. He fell to without the fear of
indigestion before his eyes, still heightening the luxury of the
repast at intervals, by fine speeches addressed to me in the most
fulsome style of flattery. I took the opportunity, when his mouth
was filled with something more substantial, to edge in a word or
two amidst the torrent; and as he had not forgotten to ask after
his friend the steward, I made no bones about acknowledging that
I was no longer a hanger-on of the church. I even went so far as
to particularize the most trivial circumstances attending my
resignation, to all of which he listened with an attentive ear.
After all his fine professions, who would not have expected to
see him moved even to tears with the throes of resentful
gratitude, to hear him thunder bulls and interdicts against the
superannuated archbishop? The devil a bit! he did neither the one
thing nor the other. But his countenance fell, and his whole air
was that of an absent man; the rest of his dinner was bolted down
without the garnish of intermediate talk about Maecenas; as soon
as he had done, he hurried from table without minding grace or
gratitude, wished me good day with a cold and distant air, and
got off as fast as possible. The unfeeling scoundrel, perceiving
that I was no longer in a situation for him to pump anything out
of me, would not even take the trouble to draw a decent veil over
his dirty principles. But such a blackguard could excite no other
sensation than contempt and laughter. Looking at him with
derision, the fittest chastisement for fellows like these, I
called after him loud enough to be heard by the whole room: Stop
there, you nun's priest! Go and put those two bottles in ice
against Maecenas comes to the Sabine farm! Be sure they are rich,
genuine, and old; or they will be a farce to Falernian.



CH. VI. -- Gil Blas goes to the play at Grenada. His surprise at
seeing one of the actresses, and what happened thereupon.

No sooner had Garcias rid the room of his presence, than two
gentlemen came in, extremely well dressed, and took their seats
close by me. They began talking about the players of the Grenada
company, and about a new piece which just then had a great run.
According to their account, it was quite the town talk. Nothing
would do for me, but to go and see it that very day. I had never
been at the play since my residence at Grenada. As I had lived
nearly the whole time in the archbishop's palace, where all such
profane shews were condemned as uncanonical, I had been cut off
from every recreation of that sort. All my knowledge of men and
manners was drawn from homilies!

I repaired therefore to the theatre at the appointed hour, and
found a very full house. All around me, discussions were going on
about the piece before the curtain drew up; and there was not a
soul in the numerous assembly but had some remark to make upon
it. One liked it, another could not bear it. Do not you think the
dialogue is particularly happy? said a candid critic on my right.
Was there ever such miserable stuff! cried a snarling critic on
my left. In good truth, if bad authors abound, it must be
admitted that the public are at variance about what is good and
what is bad: but the bad judges have a right to be pleased for
their money; and as they far outnumber the good ones, their
favourite writers can never want employment. When one only
considers through what an ordeal dramatic poets have to pass, it
is a matter of wonder that any should be found hardy enough at
once to contend against the ignorance of the multitude, and the
random shot of those self-created guides in matters of taste, who
always pretend to lead the blindness of the public judgment, and
too frequently push it into the mire of absurdity.

At length the buffoon of the piece came forward by way of
prologue. As soon as his grotesque countenance was visible, there
was a general clapping of hands; a sure indication of his being
one of those spoiled actors, who are allowed to take any
liberties with the pit, and to be applauded through thick and
thin, in fact, this player neither opened his lips, nor moved a
muscle, without exciting the most extravagant raptures. He would
have performed better, had he been less conscious what a
favourite he was. But he presumed on that circumstance most
abominably. I observed that he sometimes forgot what was set down
for him, and took the licence of adding to his part out of his
own free fancy; a common cause of complaint against low
comedians, which, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but
make the judicious grieve. Would the audience but receive such
mirth with hisses, instead of crying bravo, they might restrain
the absurd practice, and purge the stage from barbarism.

Some of the other performers were greeted with the usual tokens
on their entrance, and particularly an actress who played the
chambermaid. There was something about her which more than
usually attracted my attention; and language must sink under the
labour of expressing my astonishment at tracing the features of
Laura, that fair, that chaste, that inexpressible she, whom I
supposed to be still at Madrid, warbling in one key, with hands,
sides, voice, and mind incorporate with Arsenia. But there could
be no doubt of her identity. The kick in her gallop, the leer in
her eye, and the tripping pertness of her tongue, all conspired
in evidence that there could be no mistake. Yet, as if I had
refused belief to the affidavit of my own eyes and ears, I asked
her name of a gentleman who was sitting beside me. What the
deuce! Why, where do you come from? said he. You must
unquestionably be a new importation, not to have seen or heard of
the divine Estella.

The likeness was too perfect for me to be mistaken. It was easy
to comprehend why Laura, changing her sphere of action, changed
her name also; wherefore from curiosity to know how matters stood
with her, since the public always pry into the most private
concerns of theatrical persons, I inquired of the same man
whether this Estella had any particular affair of gallantry on
her hands. He informed me that for the last two months there had
been a great Portuguese nobleman at Grenada, his name was the
Marquis de Marialva, who had laid out a great deal of money upon
her. He might have told me more, if I had not been afraid of
becoming troublesome with my questions. I was better employed in
musing on the information this good gentleman had given me, than
in attending to the play; and if any one had asked me what it was
all about, when the piece was over, I should have been puzzled
for an answer. I could do nothing but decline Laura and Estella
through all cases and numbers; till at length I boldly made up my
mind to call at her house the next day. Not but there was some 
risk as to the reception she might give me: it might be
suspected, without excess of modesty, that my appearance would
give her no great pleasure in the high tide of her affairs; nor
was it at all improbable that so good an actress, to revenge
herself on a man, with whom certainly she had an account to
settle, might look strange, and swear she had never seen his face
before. Yet did none of these apprehensions deter me from my
venture. After a light supper, for all the meals at my eating-
house were regulated on principles of economy and temperance, I
withdrew to my chamber with an anxious longing for the next day.

My sleep was short and interrupted; so that I got up by daybreak.
But as it was to be recollected that a mistress in high keep was
not likely to be visible early in the morning, I passed three or
four hours in dressing, shaving, powdering, and perfuming. It was
my business to present myself before her in a trim, not to put
her to the blush at acknowledging my acquaintance. I sallied
forth about ten o'clock, and knocked at her door, after having
inquired her address at the theatre. She was living on the first
floor of a large and elegant house. I told a chambermaid who
opened the door to me, that a young man wanted to speak with her
lady. The chambermaid went in to give my message, when all at
once I heard her mistress call out, not in the best-tempered tone
in the world, Who is the young man? What does he want? Shew him
up stairs.

This was a hint to me that my time was ill chosen; that probably
her Portuguese lover was at her toilette, and that she spoke so
loud, with the laudable design of convincing him that she was not
a sort of girl to allow of any impertinent intruders. This
conjecture of mine turned out to be the fact; the Marquis de
Marialva lounged away almost every morning with her: I had made
up my mind to be kicked down-stairs by way of welcome; but that
admirable actress, never forgetting her cue, ran forward with
open arms at the sight of me, exclaiming: Ah! my dear brother, is
it you that I behold? On the strength of so near a kindred, she
was no niggard of her embraces; but recollected her self so far
as to say, turning round to the Portuguese, My lord, you must
excuse me if nature will put in her claim, and trench upon good
breeding. After three years of absence, I cannot see a brother
once again, whom I love so tenderly, without expressing my
feelings in all their warmth. Come! my dear Gil Blas, continued
she, addressing me afresh, tell me some news of the family: in
what circumstances did you leave it?

This whimsical scene disconcerted me at first; but I was not long
in seeing through Laura's intention; and playing up to her with a
spirit scarcely less than her own, answered according to the
plot: Heaven be praised, sister, all our good folks are in
perfect health, and well in the world. I make no doubt, resumed
she, but you must be very much surprised to find me an actress in
Grenada; but hear me first and blame me afterwards. It is three
years, as you may recollect, since my father thought to have
established me advantageously in marriage with Don Antonio
Coello, an officer in the service, who took me from the Asturias
to Madrid, his native place. Six months after our arrival, he got
into an affair of honour in consequence of his violent temper.
Some attentions incautiously paid to me were the cause of the
affray, and his antagonist was killed. This gentle man was of a
family high in rank and interest. My husband, who though well
born, had very few connections, made his escape into Catalonia
with every thing he could get together in jewels and ready money.
He embarked at Barcelona, went over into Italy, enlisted in the 
Venetian service, and finally lost his life in the Morea,
fighting against the Turks. In the mean time, a landed estate
which constituted our whole revenue was confiscated, and I was
left a widow with very little for my support. What was to be done
in so pressing an emergency? There was nothing left to pay my
travelling expenses back into the Asturias. And then what should
I have done there? I should have got nothing from my family but a
long string of condolences, which would have furnished me neither
with food nor with raiment. On the other hand, I had been too
well brought up to fall into those courses, into which too many
poor young women are betrayed for the sake of a scandalous
subsistence. There was but one thing remaining for me to
determine on. I turned actress to preserve my morals.

So tingling a sense of ridicule came over me, when Laura wound up
her romance with this pious motive for turning actress, that I
could scarcely refrain from relieving myself by a fit of
laughter. But gravity was of too much consequence to be dispensed
with; and I said to her with an air the counterpart of her own --
My dear sister, I entirely approve of your conduct, and am
heartily glad to meet with you at Grenada, and moreover settled
on so respectable a footing.

The Marquis de Marialva, who had not lost a word of all these
fine speeches, swallowed down blindfold whatever Don Antonio's
widow thought fit to drench his credulity with. He took part in
the conversation too, and asked me whether I had any fixed
employment in Grenada or elsewhere, I paused for a moment to
consider whether and after what manner I should lie; but as there
seemed no need in this case to draw on my invention, I told the
truth by way of variety. In a plain matter of fact manner did I
rehearse my introduction to the archbishop's palace, and my
discharge therefrom, to the infinite amusement of his Portuguese
lordship. To be sure, in telling the truth, I did not keep my
word, for I could not help launching out a little at the
archbishop's expense, in spite of my solemn promise given to
Melchior. But the best of the joke was, that Laura, taking my
story for a fiction invented after her example, burst out into
peals of laughter: whereas the whimsicality of the circumstance
would have raised a soberer mirth, had she known it to have been
alloyed with the base ingredient of veracity.

After having come to the end of my tale, which closed with just
mentioning the lodging I had taken, dinner was announced. I
instantly motioned to with draw, as if intending to take that
frugal meal at home; but Laura would not hear of it. Do you mean
to affront me, brother! said she. You must dine here. Indeed, I
cannot think of your staying any longer at a paltry inn. You must
positively board and lodge in my house. Send your trunks hither
this very evening; there is a spare bed for you.

His Portuguese lordship, possibly not altogether relishing this
excess of hospitality even to a brother, then interfered between
us, and said to Laura -- No, Estella, you have not sufficient
accommodation to give him a bed without inconvenience. Your
brother seems to be a clever young fellow; and the circumstance
of his being so nearly related to you, gives him a strong claim
on my kindness. He shall be put at once upon my establishment. I
am in want of a secretary, and shall delight in giving him the
appointment: he shall be my right-hand man. Let him be sure to
come and sleep at my house this very night; I will order a room
to be got ready for him. I will fix his regular salary at four
hundred ducats; and if on better acquaintance I have reason as I
trust I shall, to be satisfied with him, I will place him in a
situation to laugh at the consequences of having been a little
too plain-spoken with his patron the archbishop.

My acknowledgments to the marquis for this high honour were
followed by those of Laura, who far exceeded me in powers of
panegyric. Let us drop the subject, interrupted he; it is a
settled point Settled as it was, he confirmed the contract on the
lips of his green-room Dulcinea, and went his way. She
immediately pulled me by the arm into a closet, where, secure
from interruption, she cried out, Cut my laces! I shall burst if
I do not give way at once to the fit of laughter that is coming
over me. And so she probably would; for she threw herself into an
arm-chair, and holding both her sides, shouted out her convulsive
peal of mirth like a mad woman. It was impossible for me to
refrain from following her example. When we had exhausted our
risible propensities, Own, Gil Blas, said she, that we have just
been acting a very humorous farce. But I did not look for the
concluding scene. My only thought was to secure you board and
lodging under my own roof; and there was no other possibility of
making the proposition in a modest way but by passing you off for
my brother. But I am heartily glad that the chapter of accidents
has opened with so good a berth for you. The Marquis de Marialva
is a noble man of liberal and honourable sentiments, who will be
better than his word in what he does for you. But confess now!
There is scarcely a woman in existence except myself would have
given so coming-on a reception to a fellow who shirks his friends
without saying with your leave or by your leave. I however am one
of those simple-hearted girls, who are glad to receive back again
the base man they have once loved, though he should have offended
and repented seven, or even seven thousand times.

The best way for me was to acknowledge the extreme ill-breeding
of which I had been guilty, to blush and beg pardon once for all.
After this explanation, she led the way to a very handsome
dining-room. We placed ourselves at table, where having a
chambermaid and a footboy for eye-witnesses, we kept within the
bounds of brother and sister. When we had done dinner, we went
back again into the same closet where we had been conversing
before. Having our time to ourselves, my paragon of a Laura,
giving herself up to her natural love of merriment, and to her no
less natural curiosity, required from me a faithful and true
narrative of all my pros and cons, my ins and outs, since that
unmannerly separation of ours. I gave her a full and particular
account: nothing extenuating on my own behalf, nor setting down
aught in malice on the other side. When I had quenched her thirst
after a story, she slaked mine, by communicating the particulars
of her eventful life to the following effect.



CH. VII. -- Laura's Story.


I SHALL just run over to you, as briefly as possible, the
circumstances which led me to embrace the theatrical profession.

After you took French leave, so much to your credit, great events
happened. My mistress Arsenia, more surfeited with a glut of
pleasures than scandalized at their immorality, renounced the
stage, and took me with her to a fine estate which she had just
purchased in the neighbourhood of Zenora with the wages of her
sinful life. We soon got acquainted in the town. Our visits there
were very frequent; and sometimes for a day or two together. With
the exception of these little excursions, we were as closely
domesticated as probationers in a nunnery, and almost as piously
employed.

On one of our high days and holidays, Don Felix Moldonado, the
corregidor's only son, saw me by chance, and took a liking to me.
He soon found an opportunity of speaking with me in private; and,
as it is in vain to affect modesty before one who knows me so
well, there was some little contrivance of my own to bring the
interview about. The young gentleman was not twenty years of age;
the very picture of Venus's sweetheart, or Venus's sweetheart the
very picture of him; with a form for a sculptor to work from;
with an address so elegant, and with sentiments so generous, as
to throw even his personal graces into the background. There was
such a winning way with him, so pressing an earnestness to
prevail, when he took a large diamond from his own finger, and
slid it upon mine, that it would have been quite brutal not to
have let it stay there. It was really something like sentiment
that I began to entertain towards a swain of so interesting a
character. But what an absurd thing it is for wenches of a
certain sort to hook themselves upon young men of family, when
their surly fathers hold official situations! The corregidor, who
had scarcely his equal in the whole tribe of corregidors, got
wind of our correspondence, and determined to close it in a
summary manner. He sent a host of alguazils to take me into
custody, who dragged me away, in spite of my cries and tears, to
the house of correction for female penitents.

There, without bill of indictment or form of trial, the lady
abbess ordered me to be stripped of my ring and my clothes, and
to be dressed in the habit of the institution; a long gown of
grey serge tied about the middle with a strap of black leather,
whence depended a rosary with large beads swinging down to my
heels. After this pleasant reception, they took me into a hall,
where there was an old monk, the deuce knows of what order, who
set to work preaching up repentance and resignation, pretty much
in the same strain as Dame Leonarda, when she exhorted you to
patience in the subterraneous cavern. He told me that I was
excessively obliged indeed to those good people who had so kindly
shut me up, and could never thank them sufficiently for their
good deed, in rescuing me from the harpy talons of the world, the
flesh, and the devil. But I must frankly own that all my other
sins were pressed down and heaped high with ingratitude: far from
overflowing with the milk of human kindness towards those who had
conferred such a favour upon me, I abused them in terms that
would have put any dictionary to the blush.

Eight days thus passed in this wilderness of desolation; but on
the ninth, for I had notched the hours and even the minutes on a
stick, my fate seemed be ginning to take another turn. Crossing a
little court, I met the house steward, a personage whose will was
absolute; yes, the lady abbess herself was obedient to his will.
He rendered an account of his stewardship to none but the
corregidor, on whom alone he was dependent, and whose confidence
in him was unbounded. His name was Pedro Zendono, and the town of
Salsedon in Biscay laid claim to the honour of his birth. Figure
to yourself a tall man, with the complexion of a mummy and the
bare anatomy of a dealer in mortification; he might have sat for
the penitent thief in a picture of the crucifixion. He scarcely
ever cast a carnal glance towards us Magdalens. You never saw
such a face of rank hypocrisy in all your life, though you have
spent some part of it under the same roof with the archbishop,
and are not unacquainted with the clergy of his diocese.

But to return from this digression; . . . . I met this Signor
Zendono, who said to me slily as he passed -- Take comfort, my
girl, I am sensibly affected with your wretched case. He said no
more, and went on his way, leaving me to make my own comments on
so concise and general a text As he looked like a good man, and
there was no positive evidence to set against his looks, I was
simpleton enough to fancy that he had taken the trouble of
inquiring why I was shut up; and meant, not finding me so
atrocious a culprit as to deserve such shameful insults, to take
my part with the corregidor. But I was not up to the tricks of
the Biscayan, he had a much longer head. He was turning over in
his mind the scheme of an elopement, and made the proposal to me
in profound privacy some days afterwards. My dear Laura, said he,
your sufferings have taken such deep possession of my mind, that
I have determined to end them. I am perfectly aware that my own
ruin is involved in the measure, but needs must when the tender
passion drives. To-morrow morning do I intend to take you out of
prison, and conduct you in person to Madrid. No sacrifice is too
great for the pleasure of being your deliverer.

I was very near fainting with surprise and joy at this promise of
Zendono, who, concluding from my acknowledgments that my very
life depended on my rescue, had the effrontery to carry me off
next day in the face of the whole town, by the following device:
-- He told the lady abbess that he had orders to take me before
the corregidor, who was at his country box a few miles off; and
without betraying himself by a single change of countenance,
packed me off, with him for my companion, in a post-chaise drawn
by two good mules which he had bought for the occasion. Our only
attendant was the driver, a servant of his own, and entirely
devoted to the steward by stronger ties than those of gratitude.
We began bowling away, not in the direction of Madrid, as I had
taken for granted, but towards the frontiers of Portugal, whither
we got in less time than it took the corregidor of Zamora to
receive the deposition of our flight, and uncouple his pack or
set them barking at our heels.

Before we entered Braganza, the Biscayan made me put on man's
clothes, with which he had taken the precaution of providing
himself. Reckoning on me as being fairly launched in the same
boat with him, he said to me in the inn where we put up, Lovely
Laura, do not take it unkindly of me to have brought you into
Portugal. The corregidor of Zamora will make our own country too 
hot to hold us, for in his eyes we are two criminals, under the
weight of whose enormities it is not for Spain to groan. But we
may set his malice at defiance in this distant realm, though at
the present conjuncture under the dominion of the Spanish
monarchy. At least we shall stand a better chance for safety here
than at home. League your fortunes with those of a man who would
follow you in prosperity or in adversity through the world. Let
us fix our residence at Coimbra. There I will get employed as a
spy for the inquisition; under the cover of that formidable
tribunal, a refreshing shade for us, but Cimmerian darkness to
its victims, our days will glide smoothly on in ease and
pleasure, we shall fatten on the spoil of religious delinquency.

A proposal so much to the point gave me to understand that I had
to do with a knight, who had other motives for officiating as the
guardian of distressed damsels, besides the honour of chivalry. I
saw at once that he reckoned much on my gratitude, and still more
on my distress. Nevertheless, though these two pleas were almost
equally eloquent in his favour, I rejected his addresses with
disdain. The reason was, that there were two advocates still more
eloquent on the side of a refusal; a certainty that he was
disagreeable, and a strong suspicion that he was poor. But when
he returned to the charge, and offered to say the grace of
matrimony before he fell to, proving to me at the same time, by
the undeniable evidence of cash in hand, that his stewardship had
enabled him to live in clover for a long time to come, the truth
must come out in spite of blushes; my heart was softened, and my
ears unstopped. I was dazzled by the gold and jewels which he
laid out in burning row before me, and became a living monument
in my own person, that miraculous transformations are effected by
the power of pelf, as well as by the wand of love. My Biscayan
became, by little and little, quite another sort of man in my
eyes. His tall body and bare bones were plumped up into a shapely
and commanding figure; his cadaverous complexion was improved
into a manly brown: even that look, as if butter would not melt
in his mouth, was no longer hypocrisy, but a staid and decent
aspect. Having made these discoveries, I accepted his hand
without any material abhorrence, and he plighted the usual vows
in all due form. After this, like a good wife, I kept the spirit
of contradiction as much as possible under the hatches. We
resumed our journey, and Coimbra soon received a new family
within its walls

My husband stocked my wardrobe as became my sex and station,
making me a present of several diamonds, among which I fixed my
eye on that of Don Felix Moldonado. There were no further
documents wanting to give a shrewd guess whence came all the
precious stones I had seen, and to be morally certain that I had
not married a troublesomely nice observer of the eighth article
in the decalogue. Yet, considering myself as the main-spring of
all his little deviations from the strict law of propriety, it
was not for me to judge harshly on that point A woman can always
find a palliation for the misdeeds which are set in motion by the
power of her own beauty. But for that, he certainly would have
ranked no higher than one of the wicked in my estimation.

I had no great reason to complain of him for two or three months.
His attentions were always polite and kind, amounting apparently
to a sincere and tender affection. But no such thing! These
proofs of wedded love, this worshipping with the body, and
endowing with the worldly goods, were all but a copy of his
countenance; for the cheating fellow meant, as men serve a
cucumber, to throw me away on the first opportunity. One morning,
at my return from mass, I found nothing at home but the bare
walls; the moveables, not excepting my own apparel, every stick
and every thread, had been carried off. Zendono and his faithful
servant had taken their measures so adroitly, that in less than
an hour the house had been completely gutted; so that with
nothing but the gown upon my back, and Don Felix's ring, as good
luck would have it, on my finger, here stood I, like another
Ariadne, abandoned by the ungrateful rifler of my effects as well
as of my charms. But you may take my word for it, I did not
beguile the sense of my misfortunes in tragedy, elegy, scene
individable, or poem unlimited. I rather fell upon my knees, and
blessed my guardian angel, for having delivered me from a rascal
who must sooner or later fall into the hands of justice. The time
we had passed together I considered in the light of a dead loss,
and my spirits were all on the alert to make up for it. If I had
been inclined to stay in Portugal, as a hanger-on to some woman
of fashion, I should have found no difficulty in suiting myself;
but whether it was patriotism, or some astrological conjunction,
preparing a better fortune for me under the influence of the
planets, my whole heart was bent on getting back into Spain. I
applied to a jeweller, who valued my diamond and gave me cash for
it, and then took my departure with an old Spanish lady who was
going to Seville in a post-chaise.

This lady, whose name was Dorothea, had been to see a relation
settled at Coimbra, and was on her return to Seville, where she
lived. There was such a sympathy between us, as made us fast
friends on the very first day of our acquaintance; and the
attachment grew so close while we travelled together, that the
lady insisted, at our journey's end, on my making her house my
home. I had no reason to repent having formed such a connection.
Never was there a woman of a more charming character. One might
still conclude from the turn of her countenance, and from the
spirit not yet quenched in her eyes, that in her youth the catgut
of many a guitar must have been fretted under her window. As a
proof of this, she had many trials what a state of widowhood was;
her husbands had all been of noble birth, and her finances were
flourishing on the accumulation of her several jointures.

Among other admirable qualities, she had that of not visiting
severely the frailties of her own sex. When I let her into the
secret of mine, she entered so warmly into my interests, as to
speak of Zendono with more sincerity than good manners. What
graceless fellows these men are! said she in a tone from which
one might infer that she had met with some light-fingered steward
in the passing of her accounts. They would not be worth picking
off a dunghill, if one could do without them! There is a large
fraternity of sorry scoundrels in the world, who make it their
sport to gain the hearts of women, and then desert them. There
is, however, one consoling circumstance, my dear child. According
to your account, you are by no means bound fast to that faithless
Biscayan. If your marriage with him was sufficiently formal to
save your credit with the world, on the other hand, it was
contracted loosely enough to admit of your trying your luck at a
better match, whenever an opportunity may fall in your way.

I went out every day with Dorothea, either to church, or to visit
among her friends; both likely occasions of picking up an
adventure; so that I attracted the notice of several gentlemen.
There were some of them who had a mind to feel how the land lay.
They made their proposals to my venerable protectress; but these
had not wherewithal to defray the expenses of an establishment,
and those were mere unfledged boys under age; an insuperable
objection, which left me very little merit in turning a deaf ear
to them. One day a whim seized Dorothea and me, to go and see a
play at Seville. The bills announced a favourite and standard
piece: El Embaxador de Si-mismo, written by Lope de Vega.

Among the actresses who came upon the stage, I discovered one of
my old cronies. It was impossible to have forgotten Phenicia,
that bouncing good humoured girl whom you have seen as
Florimonde's waiting-maid, and have supped with more than once at
Arsenia's. I was aware that Phenicia had left Madrid above two
years ago, but had never heard of her turning actress. I longed
so earnestly to embrace her, that the piece appeared quite
tedious. Perhaps, too, there might be some fault in those who
played it, as being neither good enough nor bad enough to afford
me entertainment. For as to my own temper, which is that of
seeking diversion wherever I can find it, I must confess that an
actor supremely ridiculous answers my purpose just as well as the
most finished performer of the age.

At last, the moment I had been waiting for being arrived, namely
the dropping of the curtain on this favourite and standard piece,
we went, for my widow would go with me, behind the scenes, where
we caught a glimpse of Phenicia, who was playing off the amiable
and unaffected simpleton, and listening with all the primness of
studied simplicity to the soft chirping of a young stagefinch,
who had evidently suffered himself to be caught in the birdlime
of her professional or meretricious talents. No sooner did her
eye meet mine, than she quitted him with a genteel apology, ran
up to me with open arms, and lavished upon me all the
demonstrations of strong attachment imaginable. Our expressions
of joy at this unexpected meeting were indeed reciprocal; but
neither time nor place admitting of any very copious indulgence
in the privilege of asking questions, we adjourned till the
following day, with a promise of renewing our mutual inquiries
thick and threefold, under the shelter of her friendly roof.

The pleasure of talking is the inextinguishable passion of woman,
coeval with the act of breathing. I could not get a wink of sleep
all night, for the burning desire of having a grapple with
Phenicia, and closing in upon her in the conflict of curiosity.
Witness all the powers who preside over tattling, whether the
love of lying in bed, another passion of woman, prevented me from
getting up and flying to my appointment as early as good manners
would allow. She lived with the rest of the company in a large
ready-furnished lodging. A female attendant who met me at
entrance, on being requested to shew me Phenicia's apartment, led
the way up-stairs to a gallery, along which were ranged ten or
twelve small rooms, divided only by partitions of deal boards,
and inhabited by this merry band. My conductress knocked at a
door which Phenicia opened; for her tongue was cruelly on the
fidget to be let loose, as well as my own. We allowed ourselves
no time for the impertinent ceremonies which usually usher in a
visit, but plunged at once into a most furious career of
loquacity. It seemed as if we should have a tight bout together.
There were so many interrogatories to be bandied backwards and
forwards, that question and answer rebounded like tennis-balls,
only with tenfold velocity.

After having related our adventures each to other, and inquired
into the actual condition of affairs, Phenicia asked me how I
meant to provide for myself. My reply was, that I purposed, while
waiting for something better, to get a situation with some young
lady of quality. For shame, exclaimed my other self, you shall
not think of such a thing. Is it possible, my darling, that you
should not yet be disgusted with menial service? Are you not
heartily sick of knocking under to the good or ill pleasure of
others, of being cap-in-hand to all their caprices, and after all
to be entertained with that unchangeable tune called a scolding,
in a word, to be a downright slave? Why do not you follow my
example, and turn your thoughts towards the stage? Nothing can be
better suited to people of parts, when they happen not to be
equally favoured in the articles of wealth and birth. It is a
sphere of life which holds a middle rank between the nobility and
mere tradespeople; a profession exempted from all troublesome
restraint, and raised far above the common prejudices of humble
and decent Society. The public are our bankers, and we draw upon
them at sight. We live in a continual round of ecstacy, and spend
our money to the full as fast as we earn it.

The theatre (for she went on at a great rate) is favourable above
all to women. When I lived with Florimonde, it is a misery to
think of it, I was reduced to take up with the supernumeraries of
the prince's company; not a single man of fashion paid the least
attention to my figure. How came that about? Because they never
got a glimpse of it The finest picture in the world may escape
the admiration of the connoisseurs, if it is not placed in a
proper light. But since I have been suitably framed and
varnished, which could only happen in consequence of a theatrical
finish, what a revolution! The finest young fellows of all the
towns we pass through are shuffling at my heels. An actress
therefore has all her little comforts about her, without
deviating from the line of her duty. If she is discreet, by which
we mean that she should not admit more than one lover into her
good graces at a time, her exemplary conduct is cried up as
without a parallel. She is called a very Niobe for her coldness;
and when she changes her favourite, she is reprimanded as
slightly by the world, as a lawful widow who marries a few weeks
too soon after the death of her first husband. If, however, the
widow should look for luck in odd numbers, and take to herself a
third, the contempt of all mankind is poured down on her devoted
head; she is considered as a monster of indelicacy; whereas we
happier women are so much the more in vogue, as we add to the
list of our favourites. After having been served up to a hundred
different lovers, some battered nobleman finds us a dainty dish
for himself.

Do you mean that by way of news? interrupted I as she uttered the
last sentiment. Do you imagine me to be ignorant of these
advantages? I have often conned them over in my mind, and they
are but too alluring to a girl of my character. The attractions
of the stage would be irresistible, were inclination all. But
some little talent is indispensable; and I have not a spark. I
have sometimes attempted to rehearse passages from plays before
Arsenia. She was never satisfied with my performance; and that
disgusted me with the profession. You are easily put out of
conceit with yourself, replied Phenicia. Do not you know that
these great actresses are very apt to be jealous? With all their
vanity, they are afraid lest some newer face should put them out
of countenance. In short, I would not be guided by Arsenia on
that subject; she did not give her real opinion. In my judgment,
and without meaning to flatter you, the theatre is your natural
element. You have admirable powers, free and graceful action, a
fine-toned voice, volubility of declamation, and such a turn of
countenance! Ah! you little rogue! you will bring all the young
fellows behind the scenes, if once you take to the boards!

She plied me with many flattering compliments besides; and made
me recite some lines, only by way of enabling me to form my own
judgment as to my theatrical genius. Now that she was my censor,
it seemed quite another thing. She praised me up to the skies,
and held all the actresses in Madrid as mere makeweights in the
scale. After such a testimony, it would have been inexcusable to
hesitate about my own merit. Arsenia stood attainted, nay,
convicted of jealousy and treachery. There could be no question
about my being everything that was delightful. Two players
happened to drop in by accident, and Phenicia prevailed on me to
repeat the lines I had already spouted; they fell into a sort of
enthusiastic trance, whence they were roused only to launch out
fervently in admiration of me. Literally, had they all three been
flattering me up for a wager, they could not have adopted a more
extravagant scale of panegyric. My modesty was not proof against
such praise from those who were themselves praised. I began to
think myself really worthy of something; and now was my whole
heart and soul turned towards a theatrical life.

Since this is the case, said I to Phenicia, the affair is
determined. I will follow your advice and engage in your company,
if they will accept me. My friend, transported with joy at this
proposal, clasped me in her arms; and her two companions seemed
no less delighted than herself at finding me in that humour. It
was settled that I should attend the theatre on the following day
in the morning, and exhibit before the collected body the same
sample of my talent as I had just displayed. If I had bought
golden opinions from Phenicia and her friends, the actors in
general were still more complimentary in their judgment, after I
had recited but twenty lines before them. They gave me an
engagement with the utmost willingness. Then there was nothing
thought of but my first appearance. To make it as striking as
possible, I laid out all the money remaining from the sale of my
ring; and though my funds would not allow of being splendid in my
dress, I discovered the art of substituting taste for glitter,
and converting my poverty into a new grace.

At length I came out. What clapping of hands! what general
admiration! It would be speaking faintly, my friend, to tell you
downright that the spectators were all in an ecstacy. You must
have heard with your own ears what a noise I made at Seville, to
believe it. The whole talk of the town was about me, and the
house was crowded for three weeks successively; so that this
novelty restored the theatre to its popularity, when it was
evidently beginning to decline. Thus did I come upon the stage,
and step into public favour at once. But to come upon the stage
with such distinction, is generally a prelude to coming upon the
town; or at least to putting one's self up at auction to the best
bidder. Twenty sparks of all ages, from seventeen to seventy,
were on the list of candidates, and would have worn me in my
newest gloss. Had I followed my own inclination, I should have
chosen the youngest, and the most of a lady's man; but in our
profession, interest and ambition must bear the sway, till we
have feathered our nest; that is as invariable a rule as any in
the prompt book. On this principle, Don Ambrosio de Nisana, a man
in whom age and ugliness had done their worst, but rich,
generous, and one of the most powerful noblemen in Andalusia, had
the refusal of the bargain. It is true that he paid handsomely
for it. He took a fine house for me, furnished in the extreme of
magnificence, allowed me a man cook of the first eminence, two
footmen, a lady's maid, and a thousand ducats a month for my
personal expenses. Add to all this a rich wardrobe, and an
elegant assortment of jewels.

What a revolution in my affairs! My poor brain was completely
turned. I could not believe myself to be the same person. No
wonder if girls soon forget the meanness and misery whence some
man of quality has rescued them in a fit of caprice. My
confession shall be without reserve: public applause, flattering
speeches buzzed about on every side, and Don Ambrosio's passion
kindled such a flame of self-conceit as kept me in a continual
ferment of extravagance. I considered my talents as a patent of
nobility. I put on the woman of fashion; and becoming as chary as
I had hitherto been lavish of my amorous challengers, determined
to look no lower than dukes, counts, or marquises.

My lord of Nisana brought some of his friends to sup with me
every evening It was my care to invite the best companions among
our actresses, and we wore away a good part of the night in
laughing and drinking. I fell in very kindly with so delicious a
life; but it lasted only six months. Men of rank are apt to be
whimsical; but for that fault, they would be too heavenly. Don
Ambrosio deserted me for a young coquette from Grenada, who had
just brought a pretty person to the Seville market, and knew how
to set off her wares to the best advantage. But I did not fret
after him more than four-and twenty hours, His place was supplied
by a young fellow of two-and-twenty, Don Lewis d' Alcacer, with
whom few Spaniards could vie in point of face and figure.

You will ask me, doubtless, and it is natural to do so, why I
selected so green a sprig of nobility for my paramour, when my
own experience so strongly dissuaded from such a choice. But,
besides that Don Lewis had neither father nor mother, and was
already in possession of his fortune, you are to know that there
is no danger of disagreeable consequences attaching to any but
girls in a servile condition of life, or those unfortunate loose
fish who are game for every sportsman. Ladies of our profession
are privileged persons; we let off our charms like a rocket, and
are not answerable for the damage where they fall; so much the
worse for those families whose heirs we set in a blaze.

As for Alcacer and myself, we were so strongly attached to one
another, that I verily believe, love never yet did such execution
as when he took aim at us two. Our passion was of such a violent
nature, that we seemed to be under the influence of some spell.
Those who knew how well we were together, thought us the happiest
pair in the world; but we, who knew best, found ourselves the
most miserable. Though Don Lewis had as fine an outside as ever
fell to the lot of man, he was at the same time so jealous, that
there was no living for vexation at his unfounded surmises. It
was of no use, knowing his weakness and humouring it, to lay an
embargo on my looks, if ever a male creature peeped into harbour;
his suspicious temper, seldom at a loss for some crime to impute,
rendered my armed neutrality of no avail. Our most tender moments
had always a spice of wrangling. There was no standing the brunt
of it; patience could hold out no longer on either side, and we
quarrelled more peaceably than we had loved. Could you believe
that the last day of our being together was the happiest? both
equally wearied out by the perpetual recurrence of unpleasant
circumstances, we gave a loose to our transports when we embraced
for the last time. We were like two wretched captives, breathing
the fresh air of liberty after all the horrors of our prison-
house.

Since that adventure, I have worn a breastplate against the
little archer. No more amorous nonsense for me, at least to a
troublesome excess! It is quite out of our line, to sigh and
complain like Arcadian shepherdesses. Those should never give way
to a passion in private, who hold it up to ridicule before the
public.

While these events were passing in my domestic establishment,
Fame had not hung her trumpet breathless on the willows; she
spread it about universally that I was an inimitable actress.
That celestial tattler, though bankrupt times out of number,
still contrives to revive her credit; the comedians of Grenada
therefore wrote to offer me an engagement in their company; and
by way of evidence that the proposal was not to be scorned, they
sent me a statement of their daily receipts and disbursements,
with their terms, which seemed to be advantageous. That being the
case, I closed, though grieved in my heart to part with Phenicia
and Dorothea, whom I loved as well as woman is capable of loving
woman. I left the first laudably employed in melting the plate of
a little haggling goldsmith, whose vanity so far got the better
of his avarice that he must needs have a theatrical heroine for
his mistress. I forgot to tell you that on my translation to the
stage, from mere whim, I changed the name of Laura to that of
Estella; and it was under the latter name that I took this 
engagement at Grenada.

My first appearance was no less successful here than at Seville;
and I soon felt myself wafted along by the sighs of my admirers.
But resolving not to favour any except on honourable terms, I
kept a guard of modesty in my intercourse with them, which threw
dust in their eyes. Nevertheless, not to be the dupe of virtues
which pay very indifferently, and were not exactly at home in
their new mansion, I was balancing whether or not to take up with
a young fellow of mean extraction, who had a place under
government, and assumed the style of a gentleman in virtue of his
office, with a good table and handsome equipage, when I saw the
Marquis de Marialva for the first time. This Portuguese nobleman,
travelling over Spain from mere curiosity, stopped at Grenada as
he passed through it. He came to the play. I did not perform that
evening. His examination of the actresses was very particular,
and he found one to his liking. Their acquaintance commenced on
the very next day; and the definitive treaty was very nearly
concluded when I appeared upon the stage. What with some personal
graces, and no little affectation in setting them off, the
weather-cock veered about all on a sudden; my Portuguese was mine
and mine only till death do us part. Yet, since the truth must be
told, I knew perfectly that my sister of the sock and buskin had
entrapped this nobleman, and spared no pains to chouse her out of
her prize; to my success you are yourself a witness. She bears me
no small grudge on that account; but the thing could not be
avoided. She ought to reflect that it is the way of all female
flesh; that the dearest friends play off the same trick upon one
another, and put a good face upon it into the bargain.



CH. VIII.  --  The reception of Gil Blas among the players at
Grenada; and another old acquaintance picked up in the green-
room.


JUST as Laura was finishing her story, there came in an old
actress who lived in her neighbourhood, and was come to take her
to the theatre as she passed by. This venerable tutelary of the
stage was admirably fitted to play some superannuated strumpet
among the heathen goddesses in a pantomime. My sister was not
remiss in introducing her brother to that stale old harridan,
whereupon a profusion of compliments were bandied about on both
sides.

I left them together, telling the steward's relict that I would
join her again at the playhouse, as soon as I had sent my baggage
to the Marquis de Marialva's, to whose residence she directed me.
First I went to the room I had hired, whence, after having
settled with my landlady, I repaired with a porter who carried my
luggage to a large ready-furnished house, where my new master was
quartered. At the door I met his steward, who asked me if I was
not the lady Estella's brother. I answered in the affirmative.
Then you are welcome, Signor cavalier, replied he. The Marquis de
Marialva, whose steward I have the honour to be, has commissioned
me to receive you properly. There is a room got ready for you; I
will shew you the way to it, if you please, that you may be quite
at home. He took me up to the top of the house, and thrust me
into so small a room, that a very narrow bed, a chest of drawers,
and two chairs completely filled it. This was my apartment. You
will not have much spare room, said my conductor, but as a set-
off, I promise you that you shall be superbly lodged at Lisbon. I
locked up my portmanteau in the wardrobe and put the key in my
pocket, asking at the same time what was the hour of supper. The
answer was, that his lordship seldom supped at home, but allowed
each servant a monthly sum for board wages. I put several other
questions, and learnt that the Marquis's people were a happy set
of idle fellows. After a conversation short and sweet, I left the
steward to go and look for Laura, reflecting much to my own
satisfaction on the happy omens I drew from the opening of my new
situation.

As soon as I got to the playhouse door, and mentioned my name as
Estella's brother, there was free admission at once. You might
have observed the forwardness of the guards to make way for me,
just as if I had been one of the most considerable noblemen in
Grenada. All the supernumeraries, door-keepers, and receivers of
checks whom I encountered in my progress, made me their very best
bows. But what I should like best to give the reader an idea of,
is the serious reception which the merry vagrants gave me in the
green-room, where I found the whole dramatis persona ready
dressed, and on the point of drawing up the curtain. The actors
and actresses, to whom Laura introduced me, fell upon me without
mercy. The men were quite troublesome with their greetings; and
the women, not to be outdone, laid their plastered faces
alongside of mine, till they covered it with a villanous compound
of red and white. No one choosing to be the last in making me
welcome, they all paid their compliments in a breath. AEolus
himself, answering from all the points of the compass at once,
would not have been a match for them: but my sister was; for the
loan of her tongue was always at the service of a friend, and she
brought me completely out of debt.

But I did not get clear off with the squeezes of the principal
performers. The civilities of the scene-painters, the band, the
prompter, the candle-snuffer, and the call-boy were to be endured
with patience; all the understrappers in the theatre came to see
me run the gauntlet. One would have supposed one's self in a
foundling hospital, and that they had none of them ever known
what sort of animals brothers and sisters were.

In the mean time the play began. Some gentlemen who were behind
the scenes, then ran to get seats in the front of the house; for
my part, feeling myself quite at home, I continued in
conversation with those of the actors who were waiting to go on.
Among the number there was one whom they called Melchior. The
name struck me. I looked hard at the person who answered to it,
and thought I had seen him somewhere. At last I recollected that
it was Melchior Zapata, a poor strolling player, who has been
described in the first volume of this true history, as soaking
his crusts in the pure element.

I immediately took him aside, and said: I am much mistaken if you
are not that Signor Melchior with whom I had the honour of
breakfasting one day by the margin of a clear fountain, between
Valladolid and Segovia. I was with a journeyman barber. We had
some provisions with us which we clubbed with yours, and all
three partook of a little rural feast, to which wit and anecdote
gave additional relish. Zapata bethought him for a minute or two,
and then answered: You tell me of a circumstance which often
since came across my mind. I had then just been trying my fortune
at Madrid, and was returning to Zamora. I recollect perfectly
that my affairs were a little out at elbows. I recollect it too,
replied I, by the token of a doublet which you wore, lined with
play-bills. Neither have I forgotten that you complained of
having a wife cursed with incorruptible chastity. Oh! that
misfortune has found its remedy long ago, said Zapata, shaking
his ears. By all the powers of womanhood, the jade has
effectually reformed that virtue, and given me a warmer lining to
my doublet.

I was going to congratulate him on his wife's having shewn so
much sense, when he was obliged to leave me and go on the stage.
Being curious to know what sort of an animal his wife was, I went
up to an actor and desired him to point her out. He did so,
saying at the same time: There she is, it is Narcissa; the
prettiest of all our women except your sister. I concluded that
this must be the actress in whose favour the Marquis de Marialva
had declared before meeting with his Estella; and my conjecture
was but too correct. After the play I attended Laura home, where
I saw several cooks preparing a handsome entertainment. You may
sup here, said she. I will do no such thing, answered I; the
marquis perhaps will like to be alone with you. Not at all,
replied she; he is coming with two of his own friends and one of
our gentlemen; you will just make the sixth, You know that in our
free and easy way there is no impropriety in secretaries sitting
down at table with their masters. Very true, said I: but it is
rather too soon to assume the privilege of a favourite. I must
first get employed in some confidential commission, and then lay
in my claim to that honourable distinction. Judging it to be so
best, I went out of Laura's house, and got back to my inn,
whither I reckoned on repairing every day, since my master had no
regular establishment.



CH. IX. -- An extraordinary companion at supper; and an account
of their conversation.


I REMARKED in the coffee-room a sort of an old monk, habited in
coarse grey cloth, at supper quite alone in a corner. I went and
sat opposite to him out of curiosity; we exchanged a civil bow,
and he shewed himself to be quite as well bred as I was,
notwithstanding my lay education. My commons were brought me, and
I fell to with a very catholic appetite. While I was eating, my
tongue was mute, but my eyes glanced by snatches towards this
singular character, and always caught his at the same employment.
Liking better to stare than be stared at, I addressed my speech
to him thus: Pray, father, have we ever by any chance met
anywhere but here? You peer at me as if you scarcely knew whether
I was an acquaintance or a stranger. He answered gravely: If I
look at you with fixed attention, it is only to admire the
prodigious variety of adventures which are chronicled in the
features of your face. It should seem, said I in a joking tone,
as if your reverence was something of a physiognomist. Far more
deeply imbued in science than a mere physiognomist, answered the
monk, I found prophecies on my observations which have never been
belied by the event. My skill in palmistry is no less, and I will
set my oracles against the surest of antiquity, after comparing
the inspection of the hand with that of the face.

Though this old man had all the appearance of profound wisdom,
his talk was so like that of a madman, that I could not help
laughing at him out-right. So far from being offended at my want
of manners, he smiled at it, and went on to the following effect,
after running his eye round the coffee-room, to be assured that
there were no listeners: I am not surprised at finding you so
prejudiced against two sciences which pass at this time of day
for mere frivolity; the long and painful study they require
disheartens the learned, who turn their backs upon them, and then
swear that they are fables out of disgust at having missed their
attainment. For my part, I am not to be frightened by the
darkness which envelopes them, any more than by the difficulties
which are perpetual stumbling-blocks in the pursuit of chemical
discoveries, and in the marvellous art of transmuting baser
metals into gold.

But I do flatter myself, pursued he, looking steadfastly at me,
that I am addressing a young gentleman of good sense, to whom my
systems will not appear altogether in the light of idle dreams. A
sample of my skill will dispose you better than the most subtle
arguments to pass a favourable judgment on my pretensions. After
talking in this manner he drew from his pocket a phial full of a
lively-looking red liquor, on which he expatiated thus: Here is
an elixir which I have distilled this morning from the juices of
certain plants; for I have employed almost my whole life, like
Democritus, in finding out the properties of simples and
minerals. You shall make trial of its virtue. The wine we are
drinking with our supper is very bad; henceforth it will become
excellent. At the same time he put two drops of his elixir into
my bottle, which made my wine more delicious than the choicest
vintages of Spain.

The marvellous strikes the imagination; and when once that
faculty is enlisted, judgment is turned adrift. Delighted with so
glorious a secret, and persuaded that he must have out-devilled
the devil before he could have got at it, I cried out in a
paroxysm of admiration: O reverend father! prythee forgive your
servant if he took you at first for an old blockhead. I now
abjure my error. There is no need to look further to be assured
that it depends only on your own will to turn an iron bar into a
wedge of gold in the twinkling of an eye. How happy should I be
were I master of that admirable science! Heaven preserve you from
ever acquiring it, interrupted the old man with a deep sigh. You
know not, my son, what a fatal possession you covet. Instead of
envying, rather pity me, for having taken such infinite pains to
be made unhappy. I am always disturbed in mind. I fear a
discovery; and then perpetual imprisonment would be the reward of
all my labours. In this apprehension, I lead a vagabond life, 
sometimes disguised as a priest or monk, sometimes as a gentle
man or a peasant. Where is the benefit of knowing how to
manufacture gold on such terms? Are not the goods of this world
downright misery to those who cannot enjoy them in tranquillity?

What you say appears to me very sensible, said I to the
philosopher. There is nothing like living at one's ease. You have
rid me of all hankering after the philosopher's stone. I will
rest satisfied with learning from you my future destiny. With all
my heart, my good lad, answered he. I have already made my
remarks upon your features; now let me see your hand. I gave it
him with a confidence which will do my penetration but little
credit in the esteem of some readers. He examined it very
attentively, and then pronounced, as in a rapture of inspiration:
Ah! what transitions from pain to pleasure, and from pleasure to
pain! What a whimsical alternation of good and evil chances! But
you have already experienced the largest share of your allotted
reverses. You have but few more tides of misfortune to stem, and
then a great lord will contrive for you an eligible fate, which
shall not be subject to change.

After having assured me that I might depend on his prediction, he
bade me farewell and went out of the inn, leaving me in deep
meditation on the things I had just heard. There could be no
doubt of the Marquis de Marialva being the great lord in
question; and consequently nothing appeared more within the verge
of possibility than the accomplishment of the oracle. But though
there had not been the slightest likelihood, that would have been
no hindrance to giving the impostor monk unbounded credit, since
his elixir had transmuted my sour incredulity into the most
tractable digestion of his falsehoods. That nothing might be
wanting on my side to play into the hands of my foreboded luck, I
determined to attach myself more closely to the marquis than I
had ever done to any of my masters. Having taken this resolution,
I went home in unusually high spirits; never did foolish woman
descend in better humour from the garret of another foolish woman
who had told her fortune.



CH. X. -- The Marquis de Marialva gives a commission to Gil Blas.
That faithful secretary acquits himself of it as shall be
related.


THE marquis was not yet returned from his theatrical party, and I
found his upper servants playing at cards in his apartment while
they were waiting for his arrival. I got to be sociable with
them; and we amused ourselves with jocular conversation till two
o'clock in the morning, when our master arrived. He was a little
surprised at seeing me, and said with an air of kindness which
made me conclude that he came home very well satisfied with his
evening: How is this, Gil Blas? Are you not gone to bed yet? I
answered that I wished to know first whether he had any commands
for me. Probably, replied he, I may have a commission to give you
to-morrow morning; but it will be time enough then to acquaint
you with my wishes. Go to your own room; and henceforward
remember that I dispense with your attendance at bed-time; my
other servants are sufficient for that occasion.

After this hint, which was much to my satisfaction in the main,
since it spared me a slavery which I should have felt very
unpleasantly at times, I left the marquis in his apartment, and
withdrew to my garret. I went to bed. Not being able to sleep, it
seemed good to follow the counsel of Pythagoras, and to examine
all the actions of the day by the test of reason; to reprimand
severely what had been done amiss, and if anything had been done
well, to rejoice in it.

On looking into the day-book of my conscience, the balance was
not sufficiently in my favour to keep me in good humour with
myself. I felt remorse at having lent myself to Laura's
imposition. It was in vain to urge, in self defence, that I could
not, with any decency, give the lie to a girl who had no object
in view but to do me a pleasure, and that I was in some sort
under the necessity of becoming an accomplice in the fraud. This
was a paltry excuse in the darkness of the night, for I pleaded
against myself that at all events the matter should be pushed no
further, and that it was the summit of impudence to remain upon
the establishment of a nobleman whose confidence I so ill repaid.
In short, after a severe trial, it was agreed in my own breast,
that I was very little short of an arrant knave.

But to have done with the morality of the act, and pass on to the
probable issue, it was evidently playing a desperate game, to
cozen a man of consequence who might be enabled, as an instrument
for the visitation of my sins perhaps, to detect the imposture in
its very infancy. A reflection at once so prudent and so virtuous
acted as a refrigerator on my spirits; but visions of pleasure
and of interest soon raised them again above the freezing point.
Besides, the prophecy of the man with the elixir would have been 
enough to put me in heart once more. I therefore gave myself up
to the indulgence of the most agreeable fancies. All the rules of
arithmetic from simple addition to compound interest were set in
array, to cast up what sum my salary would amount to at the end
of ten years' service. Then there was a large allowance for
presents and gratuities from my master, whose liberal disposition
according admirably with my liberal desires, my imagination grew
quite fantastical, and extended the landmarks of my fortune over
innumerable acres of unsubstantial territory. Sleep overtook me
in the calculation, and raised a magnificent aerial mansion on
the estate where a new race of grandees was to originate.

I got up the next morning about eight o'clock to go and receive
my patron's orders; but as I was opening my door to go out, what
was my surprise at meeting him in his wrapping-gown and night-
cap. He was quite alone. Gil Blas, said he, on parting with your
sister last night, I promised to pass this morning with her; but
an affair of consequence will not admit of my keeping my word. Go
and assure her from me that I am deeply mortified at the
disappointment, but that I shall certainly sup with her to-night.
That is not all, added he, putting a purse into my hands and a
little shagreen case set round with diamonds; carry her my
portrait, and keep this purse of fifty pistoles, which I give you
as a mark of my early-conceived friendship. I took the picture in
one hand, and in the other the purse to which I was so little
entitled. I put my best leg foremost in my way to Laura,
muttering to myself in the transports of excessive joy: Good! the
prophecy is accomplished in the twinkling of an eye. What a
windfall to be the brother of a girl so full of beauty and
attraction! It is a pity the credit attached to the relationship
is not commensurate with the lucre and the comfort.

Laura, unlike most women in her profession, had a habit of early
rising. I caught her at her toilette, where, while waiting for
her illustrious foreigner, she was engrafting on her natural
beauty all the adventitious charms which the cosmetic art could
supply. Lovely Estella, said I, on accosting her, thou absolute
lodestone of the tramontanes, I may now sit down at table with my
master, since he has honoured me with a commission which gives me
that prerogative, and which I am just come to fulfil. He cannot
have the pleasure of waiting on you this morning, as he had
purposed; but to make you amends for the disappointment, he will
sup here this evening, and sends you his picture; which to all
appearance is enclosed in something more valuable than itself.

I put the box into her hand at once; and the lively sparkling of
the brilliants which encompassed it made her eyes sparkle and her
mouth water. She opened it out of mere curiosity, looked
carelessly at the painting as people perform a duty for which
they have little relish, then shut it, and once more fell
greedily on the jewellery. Their beauty made her eloquent; and
she said to me with the smile of a satirist -- These are copies
which those mercenary things called actresses value much more
highly than originals.

I next acquainted her that the generous Portuguese, when giving
me charge of the portrait, recommended it to my care by a purse
of fifty pistoles. I beg you will accept of my congratulations,
said she; this nobleman begins where it is even uncommon for
others to leave off. It is to you, my divine creature, answered
I, that this present is owing; the marquis only made it on the
score of natural affection. I could be well pleased, replied she,
that he were to make you a score such presents every day. I
cannot express in what extravagance you are dear to me. From the
first moment of our meeting, I became attached to you by so
strong a tie, as time has not been able to dissolve. When I lost
you at Madrid, I did not despair of finding you again; and
yesterday, on your sudden appearance, I received you like a
deodand. In a word, my friend, heaven has created us for one
another. You shall be my husband, but we must get plenty of money
in the first instance. I shall just lend myself out to three or
four silly fellows more, and then you may live like a gentleman
on your means.

I thanked her in the most appropriate terms for such an instance
of extreme condescension on my behalf, and we got insensibly into
a conversation which lasted till noon. At that hour I withdrew,
to go and give my master an account of the manner in which his
present was received. Though Laura had given me no instructions
thereupon, I was not remiss in composing a fine compliment on my
way, with which I meant to launch out on her pan; but it was just 
so much flash in the pan. For, when I got home the marquis was
gone out; and the fates had decreed that I should never see him
more, for reasons which will be methodically stated in the
succeeding chapter.



CH. XI. -- A thunderbolt to Gil Blas.


I REPAIRED to my inn, where meeting with two men of companionable
talents, I dined and sat at table with them till the play began.
We parted; they as their business and desire pointed them; and,
for my own part, my bent was towards the theatre. It may be
proper to observe by the way, that I had all possible reason to
be in a good humour. The conversation with my chance companions
had been joyous in the extreme; the colour of my fortune was gay
and animating; yet for all that I could not help giving way to
melancholy, without either knowing why, or being able to reason
myself out of it. It was doubtless a prophetic warning of the
misfortune which threatened me.

As I entered the green-room, Melchior Zapata came up, and told me
in a low voice to follow him. He led me to an unfrequented part
of the house, and opened his business thus -- Worthy sir, I make
it a point of conscience to give you a very serious warning. You
are aware that the Marquis de Marialva had at first taken a fancy
to Narcissa, my wife; he had even gone so far as to fix a day for
trying the relish of my rib, when that cockatrice Estella
contrived to flyblow the bill of fare, and transfer the banquet
to her own untainted charms. Judge then, whether an actress can
be gulled instead of gulling, and preserve the sweetness of her
temper. My wife has taken it deeply to heart, and there is no
species of revenge to which she would not have recourse. A fine
opportunity has offered. Yesterday, if you recollect, all our
supernumeraries were crowding together to see you. The deputy
candle-snuffer told some of the inferior comedians that he
recollected you perfectly well, and that you might be anything
but Estella's brother.

This report, added Melchior, came to Narcissa's ears to-day: she
lost no time in questioning the author; and that grub of the
interior stood to the whole story. He says that he knew you as
Arsenia's servant, when Estella waited on her at Madrid under the
name of Laura. My wife, full of glee at this discovery, means to
acquaint the Marquis de Marialva with it, when he comes to the
play this evening; so take your measures accordingly. If you are
not Estella's brother in good earnest, I would advise you as a
friend, and on the score of old acquaintance, to make your escape
while your skin is whole. Narcissa, satisfied in her tender mercy
with only one victim, and that of her own sex, has allowed me to
give you this notice, that you may outrun your ill luck.

It would have been waste of words to press the subject farther. I
returned thanks for the caution to this fretter of his hour, who
saw by my terrified aspect that I was not the man to give the
deputy candle-snuffer the lie. I did not feel the least
temptation to carry my dangerous valour such a length. I had not
even the heart to go and bid farewell to Laura, for fear she
should insist on me keeping up the farce. I could easily conceive
that so excellent an actress might get out of the scrape with
flying colours; but there seemed to be nothing for me short of a
swingeing castigation; and I was not so far gone in love as to
stand by my sweetheart at the risk of my own person. I thought of
nothing but a precipitate retreat with my household gods, or
rather goods, if such a trumpery collection of individual
property might be called so. I disappeared from the playhouse in
the twinkling of an eye; and in less time than it would have
taken to confess my sins, was my portmanteau carried off and
safely lodged with a muleteer who was to set out for Toledo at
three o'clock next morning. I could have wished myself already
with the Count de Polan, whose hospitable roof seemed my only
safe asylum. But I was not there yet; and it was impossible to
think without dread of the time remaining to be passed in a town
where I was afraid they would hunt me out without giving me a
night's law.

The smell of supper drew me to my inn notwithstanding; though I
was as uneasy as a debtor who knows that a writ is out against
him. My stomach, I believe, was not sufficiently well knit that
evening for my supper to play its part as it should do. The
miserable sport of fear, I watched all the people who came into
the coffee-room, and whenever by chance they carried a gallows in
their physiognomy, which is no uncommon ensign in such places of
resort, I shuddered with horrid forebodings. After having supped
the supper of the damned, I got up from table and returned to my
carrier's house, where I threw myself on some clean straw till it
was time to set out.

My patience was well tried during that interval; for a thousand
unpleasant thoughts attacked me in all directions. If I dozed now
and then, the enraged marquis stood before me, pounding Laura's
fair face to a jelly with his fist, and turning her whole house
out at window; or to come nearer home, I heard him giving
directions for my death under the operation of a cudgel. At such
a vision I started out of my sleep, and waking, which is usually
so pleasant after a frightful dream, inspired me with more horror
than even the fictions of my entranced fancy.

Happily the muleteer delivered me from so dire a purgatory, by
coming to acquaint me that his mules were ready. I was
immediately on my legs, and set out radically cured, for which
heaven has my best thanks, of Laura and the occult sciences. As
we got farther from Grenada, my mind recovered its tone. I began
chatting with the muleteer, laughed at his droll stories, and
insensibly lost all my apprehensions. I slept undisturbed at
Ubeda, where we lay the first night, and on the fourth day we got
to Toledo. My first care was to inform myself of the Count de
Polan's residence, whither I repaired under the full persuasion
that he would not suffer me to lodge elsewhere. But I reckoned
without my host. There was no one at home but a person to take
care of the house, who told me that his master was just gone to
the castle of Leyva, having been sent for on account of
Seraphina's dangerous illness.

The count's absence was altogether unexpected: here was no longer
any inducement to stay at Toledo, and all my plans were changed
at once. Finding myself so near Madrid, I resolved to go thither.
It came into my head that I might make my way at court, where
talents of the first order, as I had heard, were not absolutely
necessary to fill situations of the first consequence. On the
very next morning I took advantage of back carriage, to be set
down in the renowned capital of Spain. Fortune took me kindly by
the hand, and introduced me to a higher cast of parts than those
I had hitherto filled.



CH. XII. -- Gil Blas takes lodgings in a ready-furnished house.
He gets acquainted with Captain Chinchilla. That officer's
character and business at Madrid.


ON my first arrival at Madrid, I fixed my head-quarters in a
lodging-house, where resided, among other persons, an old
captain, who was come from the distant part of New Castile, to
solicit a pension at court, and he thought his claims but too
well founded. His name was Don Annibal de Chinchilla. It was not
without much staring that I saw him for the first time. He was a
man about sixty, of gigantic stature, and of anatomical leanness.
His whiskers were like brushwood, fencing off the two sides of
his face as high as his temples. Besides that, he was short in
his reckoning by an arm and a leg, there was a vacancy for an
eye, which Polypheme would have supplied as he did, had patches
of green silk been then in the fashion; and his features were
hacked sufficiently to illustrate a treatise of geometry. With
these exceptions, his configuration was much like that of another
man. As to his mental qualities, he was not altogether without
understanding; and what he wanted in quickness he made up by
gravity. His principles were rigid in the extreme; and it was his
particular boast to be delicate on the point of honour.

After two or three interviews, he distinguished me by his
confidence. I soon got into all his personal history: he related
on what occasions he had left an eye at Naples, an arm in
Lombardy, and a leg in the Low Countries. The most admirable
circumstance in all his narratives of battles and sieges, was,
that not a single feature of the swaggerer peeped out; not a word
escaped him to his own honour and glory; though one could readily
have forgiven him for making some little display of the half
which was still extant of himself, as a set-off against the
dilapidations which had deducted so largely from the usual
contexture of a man. Officers who return from their campaigns
without a scratch upon their skin or a love-lock out of place,
are not always so humble in their pretensions.

But he told me that what gave him most uneasiness was, the having
wasted a considerable portion of his private fortune on military
objects, so that he had not more than a hundred ducats a year
left; a poor establishment for such a pair of whiskers, a
gentleman's lodging, and an amanuensis to multiply memorials by
wholesale. For in point of fact, my worthy friend, added he,
shrugging his shoulders, I present one, with a blessing on my
endeavours, every day, and the last meets with the same attention
as the first. You would say that it was an even bet between the
prime minister and me, which of us two shall be fired first; the
memorialist or the receiver of the memorials. I have often had
the honour, too, of addressing the king on the same subject; but
the rector and his curate say grace in the same key; and in the
mean time, my castle of Chinchilla is falling to ruin for want of
necessary repairs.

Faint heart never won fair lady, said I most wisely to the
captain; you are perhaps on the eve of finding all your marches
and countermarches repaid with usury. I must not flatter myself
with that pleasing expectation, answered Don Annibal. It is but
three days since I spoke to one of the minister's secretaries;
and if I am to trust his representations, I have only to hold up
my head and look big. What then did he say to you? replied I. Had
those poor dumb mouths your wounds no eloquence, to wring a
hireling pittance for their profuse expense of blood? You shall
judge for yourself, resumed Chinchilla. This secretary told me in
good plain terms: My honest friend, you need not boast so much of
your zeal and your fidelity; you have only done your duty in
exposing yourself to danger for your country. Naked glory is the
true and honourable recompense of gallant actions, and as such is
the prize at which a Spaniard aims. You therefore argue on false
principles, if you consider the bounty you solicit as a debt. In
case it should be granted, you will owe that favour exclusively
to the royal goodness, which in its extreme condescension
requites those of its subjects who have served the state
valiantly. Thus you see, pursued the captain, that if I had a
hundred lives they are all pledged, and that I am likely to go
back as hungry as I came.

A brave man in distress is the most touching object in this
world. I exhorted him to stick close, and offered to write his
memorials out fair for nothing. I even went so far as to open my
purse to him, and to beg it as a favour that he would draw upon
me for whatever he wanted. But he was not one of those folks who
never wait to be asked twice on such occasions. So much the
reverse, that with a commendable delicacy on the subject, he
thanked me for my kindness, but refused it peremptorily. He
afterwards told me that, for fear of spunging upon any one, he
had accustomed himself, by little and little, to live with such
sobriety, that the smallest quantity of food was sufficient for
his subsistence; which was but too true. His daily fare was
confined to vegetables, by dint whereof his component parts were
confined to skin and bone. That he might have no witnesses how
ill he dined, he usually shut himself up in his chamber at that
meal. I prevailed so far with him, however, by repeated
entreaties, as to obtain that we should dine and sup together:
then, undermining his pride by little indirect artifices of
compassion, I ordered more provision and wine than I could
consume to my own share. I pressed him to eat and drink. At first
he made difficulties about it; but in the end there was no
resisting my hospitality. After a time, his modesty becoming
fainter as his diet was more flush, he helped me off with my
dinner and lightened my bottle almost without asking.

One day, after four or five glasses, when his stomach had renewed
its intimacy with a more generous system of feeding, he said to
me with an air of gaiety: Upon my word, Signor Gil Blas, you have
very winning ways with you; you make me do just whatever you
please. There is something so hearty in your welcome as to
relieve me from all fear of trespassing on your generous temper.
My captain seemed at that moment so entirely to have got rid of
his bashfulness, that if I had been in the humour to have seized
the lucky moment, and to have pressed my purse once more on his
acceptance, I am much mistaken if he would have refused it. I did
not put him to the trial; but rested satisfied with having made
him my messmate, and taken the trouble not only to copy out his
memorials, but to assist him in their composition. By dint of
having written homilies out fair, I had learnt the knack of
phraseology, and was become a sort of author. The old officer on
his side had some little vanity about writing well. Both of us
thus contending for the prize, the bursts of eloquence would have
done honour to the most celebrated professors of Salamanca. But
it was in vain that we sat on opposite sides of the table, and
drained our genius to the very dregs, to nourish the flowers of
rhetoric in these memorials; you might as well have planted an
orange-grove on the sea-beach. In whatever new light we placed
Don Annibal's services, it was all the same at court, the
connoisseurs were decided about their merit; so that the battered
veteran had no reason to sing the praises of that spirit which
leads officers on to spend their family estates in the service.
In the virulence of his spleen he cursed the planet under which
he was born, and sent Naples, Lombardy, and the Low Countries to
the devil.

That his mortification might be pressed down and running over, it
happened to his face one day that a poet, introduced by the Duke
of Alva, having recited a sonnet before the king on the birth of
an infant; was gratified with a pension of five hundred ducats. I
believe the lop-limbed captain would have gone raving mad at it,
if I had not taken some pains to recompense his spirit. What is
the matter with you? said I, seeing him quite beside himself.
There is nothing in all this which ought to go so terribly
agaiust the grain. Ever since Mount Parnassus swelled above the
subject plain, have not poets pleaded the privilege of laying
princes under contribution to their muse? There is not a crowned
head in Christendom that has not substituted a pensioned laureate
for the household fool of less refined times. And between
ourselves, this species of patronage, for the most part galloping
down full drive to posterity on the saddle of Pegasus, raises a
hue and cry in honour of royal munificence; but bounty to persons
who are lost in a crowd, however deserving, adds nothing to the
bulk or stature of posthumous renown. Augustus must have drained
his treasury by gratuities, and yet how few of the names on his
pension-list have come down to us! But distant ages shall be
informed, as we are, in all the hyperbole of poetic diction, that
his benefits descended on Virgil like the rain from heaven, whose
drops arithmetic has no combinations to count, no principles by
which to reason on their number.

But let me talk ever so classically to Don Annibal, there was a
confounded acidity in that sonnet which curdled all the milky
ingredients of his moral composition; it was impossible to chew,
swallow, and digest such food with human organs; and he was fully
determined to give the matter up at once. It seemed right,
nevertheless, by way of playing for his last stake, to present
one more memorial to the Duke of Lerma, and if that failed there
was an end of the game. For this purpose we went together to the
prime minister's. There we met a young man who, after saluting
the captain, said to him in a tone of affection: My old and dear
master, is it your own self that I see? What business brings you
to this mart of favour? If you have occasion for any one to speak
a good word for you, do not spare my lungs; they are entirely at
your service. How is this, Pedrillo? answered the officer; to
hear you talk it should seem as if you held some important post
in this house. At least, replied the young man, I have influence
enough here to put an honest rustic like you into the right
train. That being the case, resumed the captain with a smile, I
place myself under your protection. I accept the pledge, rejoined
Pedrillo. You have only to acquaint me with your particular
taste, and I engage to give you a savoury slice out of the
ministerial pasty.

We had no sooner opened our minds to this young fellow, so full
of kind assurances, than he inquired where Don Annibal resided;
then, promising that we should hear from him on the following
day, he vanished without informing us what he meant to do, or
even telling us whether he belonged to the Duke of Lerma's
household. I was curious to know what this Pedrillo was, whose
turn of mind appeared to be so brisk and active. He is a brave
lad, said the captain, who waited on me some years ago, but
finding me out at elbows, went away in search of a better
service. There was no offence to me in all that; it is very
natural to change when one cannot be worse off. The creature is
pleasant enough, not deficient in parts, and happy in a spirit of
intrigue which would wheedle with the devil. But notwithstanding
all his fine pretence, I am not sanguine in my reckoning on the
zeal he has just testified for me. Perhaps, said I, there may be
some plausibility in his designs. Should he be a retainer, for
example, to any of the duke's principal officers, it will be in
his power to serve you. You have lived too long in the world not
to know that in great houses everything is done by party and
cabal; that the masters are governed by two or three upper
servants about their persons, who, in their turn, are governed by
that multitude of menials attendant upon them.

On the next morning we saw Pedrillo at our breakfast table.
Gentlemen, said he, if I did not explain myself yesterday as to
my means of serving Captain Chinchilla, it was because we were
not in a place where such a communication could be made with
safety. Besides, I was disposed to ascertain whether the thing
was feasible, before you were made parties in it. Understand,
then, that I am the confidential servant of Signor Don Rodrigo de
Calderona, the Duke of Lerma's first secretary. My master, who is
much addicted to women, goes almost every evening to sup with a
little Arragonian nightingale, whom he keeps in a cage near the
purlieus of the court. She is quite a young girl from Albarazin,
a most lovely creature. She has some wit as well as beauty, and
sings enchantingly; they call her the Spanish Syren. I am the
bearer of some tender inquiries every morning, and am just come
from her. I have proposed to her to pass off Signor Don Annibal
for her uncle, and the object of the forgery is to engage her
lover in his interests. She is very willing to lend her aid in
the business. Besides some little commission to which she looks
forward on the profits, it will tickle her vanity to be taken for
the niece of a military man.

Signor de Chinchilla looked very grim at this suggestion. He
declared his extreme abhorrence of becoming a party concerned in
a mere swindling trick, and still more of adopting a female
adventurer, no better than she should be, into his family, and
thus casting a stain upon its immaculate purity. It was not only
for himself that he felt all this soreness; there was a recoil of
ignominy on his ancestors, which would lay their honours level
with the dust. This morbid delicacy seemed out of season to
Pedrillo, who could not help expressing his contempt of it thus.
You must surely be out of your wits to take the matter up on that
footing. A fine market you bring your morals to, you dictators
from the plough, with your ridiculous squeamishness! Now you seem
a good sensible man, appealing to me as he spoke these last
words. Can you believe your ears when you hear such scruples
advanced? Heaven defend us! At court, of all the places in the
world, to look at morals through a microscope! Let fortune come
under what haggard form she may, they hug her in their arms, and
swear she is a beauty.

My way of thinking was precisely with Pedrillo; and we dinned it
so stoutly into both the captain's ear; as to make him the
Spanish Syren's uncle against nature and inclination. When we had
so far prevailed over his pride, we all three set about drawing
up a new memorial for the minister, which was revised, with a
copious interlacing of additions and corrections. I then wrote it
out fair, and Pedrillo carried it to the Arragonian chauntress,
who that very evening put it into the hands of Signor Don
Rodrigo, telling her story so artlessly that the secretary,
really supposing her the captain s niece, promised to take up his
case. A few days afterwards we reaped the fruits of our little
project. Pedrillo came back to our house with the lofty air of a
benefactor. Good news, said he to Chinchilla. The king is going
to make a new grant of officers, places, and pensions; nor will
your name be forgotten in the list. But I am specially
commissioned to inquire what present you purpose making to the
Spanish Syren, for the piper must be paid. As to myself, I vow
and protest that I will not take a farthing; the pleasure of
having contributed to patch up my old master's broken fortunes,
is more to me than all the ingots of the Indies. But it is not
precisely so with our nymph of Albarazin. she has a little Jewish
blood to plead, when the Christian precept of loving your
neighbour as herself is preached up to her. She would pick her
own natural father's pocket; so judge you whether she would be
above making a bargain with a travelling uncle.

She has only to name her own terms, answered Don Annibal.
Whatever my pension may be, she shall have the third of it
annually if she pleases; I will pledge my word for it; and that
proportion ought to satisfy her craving, if his Catholic Majesty
had settled his whole exchequer on me. I would as soon take your
word as your bond, for my own part, replied the nimble-footed
messenger of Don Rodrigo; I know that it will stand the assay;
but you have to deal with a little creature who knows herself,
and naturally supposes that she knows all the rest of the world
by the same token. Besides, she would like better to take it in
the lump; two-thirds to be paid down now in ready money. Why, how
the devil does she mean that I should get the wherewithal? bawled
the captain in a quandary. Does she take me for an auditor of
public accounts, or treasurer to a charity? You cannot have made
her acquainted with my circumstances. Yes, but I have, replied
Pedrillo; she knows very well that you are poorer than Job; after
what she has heard from me she could think no otherwise. But do
not make yourself uneasy, my brain is never at a loss for an
expedient. I know an old scoundrel of an usurer, who will take
ten per cent, if he can get no more. You must assign your first
year's pension to him, in acknowledgment for a like valuable
consideration from him, which you will in point of fact receive,
only deducting the above-mentioned interest. As to security, the
lender will take your castle at Chinchilla, for want of better;
there will be no dispute about that.

The captain declared his readiness to accept the terms, in case
of his being so fortunate as to possess any beneficial interest
in the good things to be given away the next morning. It happened
accordingly. He got a government with a pension of three hundred
pistoles. As soon as the news came, he signed and sealed as
required, settled his little concerns in town, and went off again
for New Castile with a balance of some few pistoles in his
favour.



CH. XIII. -- Gil Blas comes across his dear friend Fabricio at
court. Great ecstacy on both sides. They adjourn together, and
compare notes; but their conversation is too curious to be
anticipated.


I HAD contracted a habit of going to the royal palace every
morning, where I lounged away two or three good hours in seeing
the good people pass to and fro; but their aspect was less
imposing there than in other places, as the lesser stars turn
pale in the presence of the sun.  One day as I was walking back
and fore, and strutting about the apartments, making about as
wise a figure there as my neighbours, I spied out Fabricio, whom
I had left at Valladolid in the service of a hospital director.
It surprised me not a little that he was chatting familiarly with
the Duke of Medina Sidonia and the Marquis of Santa Cruz, Those
two noblemen, if my senses did not deceive me, were listening
with admiration to his prattle. To crown the whole, he was as
handsomely dressed as a grandee.

Surely I must be mistaken! thought I. Can this possibly be the
son of Nunez the barber? More likely it is some young courtier
who bears a strong resemblance to him. But my suspense was of no
long duration. The party broke up, and I accosted Fabricio. He
knew me at once; took me by the hand, and after pressing through
the crowd to get out of the precincts, said with a hearty
greeting, My dear Gil Blas, I am delighted to see you again. What
are you doing at Madrid? Are you still at service? Some place
about the court perhaps? How do matters stand with you? Let me
into the history of all that has happened to you since your
precipitate flight from Valladolid. You ask a great many 
questions in a breath, replied I; and we are not in a fit place
for story-telling. You are in the right, answered he; we shall be
better at home Come, I will shew you the way; it is not far hence
I am quite my own master, with all my comforts about me;
perfectly easy as to the main chance, with a light heart and a
happy temper; because I am determined to see everything on the
bright side.

I accepted the proposal, and Fabricio escorted me. We stopped at
a house of magnificent appearance, where he told me that he
lived. There was a court to cross; on one side it had a grand
staircase leading to a suite of state apartments, and on the
other a small flight, dark and narrow, whither we betook
ourselves to a residence elevated in a different sense from what
he had boasted. It consisted of a single room, which my
contriving friend had divided into four by deal partitions. The
first served as an ante-chamber to the second, where he lay: of
the third he made his closet, of the last his kitchen, The
chamber and antechamber were papered with maps, and many a sheet
of philosophical discussion; nor was the furniture by any means
unsuitable to the hangings. There was a large brocade bed much
the worse for wear; tawdry old chairs with coarse yellow
coverings, fringed with Grenada silk of the same colour, a table
with gilt feet, and a cloth over it that once aspired to be red,
bordered with tinsel and embroidery tarnished by that old
corroder, time; with an ebony cabinet, ornamented with figures in
a clumsy taste of sculpture. Instead of a convenient desk, he had
a small table in his closet; and his library was made up with
some few books, and a great many bundles of paper arranged on
shelves one above the other the whole length of the wall. His
kitchen, too modest to put the rest of the establishment out of
countenance, exhibited a frugal assortment of earthenware and
other necessary implements of cookery.

Fabricio, when he had allowed me leisure to philosophize on his
domestic arrangements, begged to know my opinion of his
apartments and his housekeeping, and whether I was not enchanted
with them: Yes, beyond all manner of doubt, answered I with a
roguish smile. You must have applied your wits to a good purpose
at Madrid, to have got so well accoutred. Of course you have some
post. Heaven preserve me from anything of the sort! replied he.
My line of life is far above all political situations. A man of
rank, to whom this house belongs, has given me a room in it,
whence I have contrived to piece out a suite of four, fitted up
in such taste as you may see. I devote my time to no employments
but what are just to my fancy, and never feel what it is to want.
Explain yourself more intelligibly, said I, interrupting him. You
set me all agog to be let into your little arrangements. Well,
then! said he, I will rid you of that devil curiosity at once. I
have commenced author, have plunged head long into the ocean of
literature; verse and prose run equally glib; in short I am a
jack of all trades to the muses.

What! you bound in solemn league and covenant to Apollo?
exclaimed I with most intolerable laughter. Nothing under a
prophet could ever have anticipated this. I should have been less
surprised at any other transformation. What possible delights
have you had the ingenuity to detect in the rugged landscape of
Parnassus? It should seem as if the labourers there have a very
poor taking in civil life, and feed on a coarse diet without
sauce. Out upon you! cried he, in dudgeon at the hint. You are
talking of those paltry authors, whose works and even their
persons are under the thumb of booksellers and players. Is it any
wonder that writers under such circumstances should be held
cheap? But the good ones, my friend, are on a better footing in
the world; and I think it may he affirmed, vanity apart, that my
name is to be found in their list. Questionless, said I, talents
like yours are convertible to every purpose; compositions from
such a pen are not likely to be insipid. But I am on the rack to
know how this rage for fencing with inky weapons could have
seized thee.

Your wonder and alarm has mind in it, replied Nunez. I was so
well pleased with my situation in the service of Signor Manuel
Ordonnez, that I had no hankering after any other. But my genius,
like that of Plautus, being too high. minded to contract itself
within the sphere of menial occupations, I wrote a play and got
it acted by a company then performing at Valladolid. Though it
was not worth the paper it was scrawled upon, it had more success
than many better pieces. Hence concluded I that the public was a
silly bird, and would hatch any eggs that were put under it. That
modest discovery, with the consequent madness of incessant
composition, alienated my affections from the hospital. The love
of poetry being stronger than the desire of accumulation, I
determined on repairing to Madrid, as the centre of everything
distinguished, to form my taste in that school. The first thing
was to give the governor warning, who parted with me to his own
great sorrow, from a sort of affection the result of similar
propensities. Fabricio, said he, what possible ground can you
have for discontent? None at all, sir, I replied; you are the
best of all possible masters, and I am deeply impressed with your
kind treatment; but you know one must follow whithersoever the
stars ordain. I feel the sacred fire within me, on whose aspiring
element my name is to be wafted to posterity. What confounded
nonsense! rejoined the old fellow, whose ideas were all
pecuniary. You are already become a fixture in the hospital, and
are made of a metal which may easily be manufactured into a
steward, or by good-luck even into a governor. You are going to
give up the great object of life, and to flutter about its
frippery. So much the worse for you, honest friend!

The governor, seeing how fruitless it was to struggle with my
fixed resolve, paid me my wages, and made me a present of fifty
ducats as an acknowledgment of my services. Thus, between this
supply and what I have been able to scrape together out of some
little commissions, which were assigned to me from an opinion of
my disinterestedness, I was in circumstances to make a very
pretty appearance on my arrival at Madrid; which I was not
negligent in doing, though the literary tribe in our country are
not over-punctilious about decency or cleanliness. I soon got
acquainted with Lope de Vega, Cervantes, and the whole set of
them; but though they were fine fellows, and thought so by the
public, I chose for my model in preference, Don Lewis de Gongora,
the incomparable, a young bachelor of Cordova, decidedly the
first genius that ever Spain produced. He will not suffer his
works to be printed during his lifetime; but confines himself to
a private communication among his friends. What is very
remarkable, nature has gifted him with the uncommon talent of
succeeding in every department of poetry. His principal
excellence is in satire; there he outshines himself. He does not
resemble, like Lucilius, a muddy stream with a slimy bottom; but
is rather like the Tagus, rolling its transparent waters over a
golden sand.

You give a fine description of this bachelor, said I to Fabricio;
and questionless a character of such merit must have attracted an
infinite deal of envy. The whole gang of authors, answered he,
good and bad equally, are open mouthed against him. He deals in
bombast, says one; aims at double meanings, luxuriates in
metaphor and affects transposition. His verses, says another,
have all the obscurity of those which the Salian priests used to
chaunt in their processions, and which nobody was the wiser for
hearing. There are others who impute it to him as a fault, to
have exercised his genius at one time in sonnets or ballads, at
another in play-writing, in heroic stanzas, and in minor efforts
of wit alternately, as if he had madly taken upon himself to
eclipse the best writers each in their own favourite walk. But
all these thrusts of jealousy are successfully parried, where the
muse, which is their mark, becomes the idol of the great and of
the multitude at once.

Under so able a master did I serve my apprenticeship; and, vanity
apart, the preceptor was reflected in the disciple. So happily
did I catch his spirit, that by this time he would not be ashamed
to own some of my detached pieces. After his example, I carry my
goods to market at great houses where the bidding is eager, and
the sagacity of the bidders not difficult to match. It is true
that I have a very insinuating talent at recitation; which places
my compositions in no disadvantageous light. In short, I am the
dear delight of the nobility, and live in the most particular
intimacy with the Duke of Medina Sidonia, just as Horace used to
live with his jolly companion Maecenas. By such conjuration and
mighty magic have I won the name of author. You see the method
lies within a narrow compass. Now, Gil Blas, it is your turn to
deliver a round unvarnished tale of your exploits.

On this hint I spake; and unlike most narrators, gave all the
important particulars, passing lightly over minute and tiresome
circumstances. The action of talking, long continued, puts one in
mind of dining. His ebony cabinet, which served for larder,
pantry, and all possible uses, was ransacked for napkins, bread,
a shoulder of mutton far gone in a decline, with its last and
best contents, a bottle of excellent wine; so that we sat down to
table in high spirits, as friends are wont to do after a long
separation. You observe, said he, this free and independent
manner of life. I might find a plate laid for me every day, if I
chose it, in the very first houses; but, besides that the muse
often pays me a visit and detains me within doors, I have a
little of Aristippus in my nature. I can pass with equal relish
from the great and busy world to my re treat, from all the
researches of luxury to the simplicity of my own frugal board.

The wine was so good, that we encroached upon a second bottle. As
a relish to our fruit and cheese, I begged to be favoured with
the sight of something, the offspring of his inspired moments. He
immediately rummaged among his papers, and read me a sonnet with
much energy of tone. Yet, with all the advantage of accent and
expression, there was something so uncouth in the arrangement, as
to baffle all conjecture about the meaning. He saw how it puzzled
me. This sonnet then, said he, is not quite level to your
comprehension! Is not that the fact! I owned that I should have
preferred a construction somewhat less forced. He began laughing
at my rusticity. Well, then! replied he; we will say that this
sonnet would confuse clearer heads than thine: it is all the
better for that Sonnets, odes, in short all compositions which
partake of the sublime, are of course the reverse of the simple
and natural: they are enveloped in clouds, and their darkness
constitutes their grandeur. Let the poet only fancy that be
understands himself no matter whether his readers understand him
or not. You are laughing at me, my friend, said I, interrupting
him. Let poetry be of what species it may, good sense and
intelligible diction are essential to its powers of pleasing. If
your peerless Gongora is not a little more lucid than yourself, I
protest that his merit will never pass current with me. Such
poets may entrap their own age into applause, but will never live
beyond it. Now let me have a taste of your prose.

Nunez shewed me a preface which he meant to prefix to a dramatic
miscellany then in the press. He insisted on having my opinion. I
like not your prose one atom better than your verse, said I. Your
sonnet is a roaring deluge of emptiness; and as for your preface,
it is disfigured by a phraseology stolen from languages yet in
embryo, by words not stamped in the mint of general use, by all
the perplexity of a style that does not know what to make of
itself. In a word, the composition is altogether a thing of your
own. Our classical and standard books are written in a very
different manner. Poor tasteless wretch! exclaimed Fabricio. You
are not aware that every prose writer who aspires to the
reputation of sentiment and delicacy in these days, affects this
style of his own, these perplexities and innovations which are a
stumbling-block to you. There are five or six of us determined
reformers of our language, who have undertaken to turn the
Spanish idiom topsy-turvy; and with a blessing on our endeavours,
we will pull it down and build it up again in defiance of Lope de
Vega, Cervantes, and all the host of wits who cavil at our new
modes of speech. Our party is strongly supported in the
fashionable world, and we have laid violent hands upon the
pulpit.

After all, continued he, our project is commendable; for, to
speak without prejudice, we have ten times the merit of those
natural writers, who express themselves just like the mob. I
cannot conceive why so many sensible men are taken with them. It
is all very well at Athens and at Rome, in a wild and
undistinguishing democracy; and on that principle only could
Socrates tell Alcibiades, that the last appeal was to the people
in all disputes about language. But at Madrid there is a polite
and a vulgar usage; so that our courtiers talk in a different
tongue from their tradesmen. You may assure yourself that it is
so; in fine, this newly invented style is carrying everything
before it, and turning old nature out of doors. Now I will
explain to you by a single instance the difference between the
elegance of our diction and the flatness of theirs. They would
say, for example, in plain terms, "Ballets incidental to the
piece are an ornament to a play;" but in our mode of expression,
we say more exquisitely, "Ballets incidental to the piece are the
very life and soul of the play." Now observe the phrase; life and
soul. Are you sensible how glowing it is, at the same time how
descriptive, setting before you all the motions of the dancers,
as on an intellectual stage?

I broke in upon my reformer of language with a burst of laughter.
Get along with you, Fabricio, said I, you are a coxcomb of your
own manufacture, with your affected finery of phrase. And you,
answered he, are a blockhead of nature's clumsy moulding, with
your starch simplicity. He then went on taunting me with the
archbishop of Grenada's angry banter on my dismission. "Get about
your business! Go and tell my treasurer to pay you a hundred
ducats, and take my blessing in addition to that sum. God speed
you, good master Gil Blas! I heartily pray that you may do well
in the world! There is no thing to stand in your way, but a
little better taste." I roared out in a still louder explosion of
laughter at this lucky hit; and Fabricio, easily appeased on the
score of impiety, as manifested in the opinion expressed
concerning his writings, lost nothing of his pleasant and
propitious temper. We got to the bottom of our second bottle; and
then rose from the table in fine order for an adventure. Our
first intention was to see what was to be seen upon the Prado;
but passing in front of a liquor-shop, it came into our heads
that we might as well go in.

The company was in general tolerably select at this house of
call. There were two distinct apartments; and the pastime in each
was of a very opposite nature. One was devoted to games of chance
or skill; the other to literary and scientific discussion: and
there were at that moment two clever men by profession handling
an argument most pertinaciously, before ten or twelve auditors
deeply interested in the discussion. There was no occasion to
join the circle, because the metaphysical thunder of their logic
made itself heard at a more respectful distance: the heat and
passion with which this abstract controversy was managed made the
two philosophers look little better than madmen. A certain
Eleazar used to cast out devils, by tying a ring to the nose of
the possessed; had these learned swine been ringed in the same
manner, how many little imps would have taken wing out of their
nostrils? Angels and ministers of grace defend us, said I to my
companion: what contortions of gesture, what extravagance of
elocution! One might as well argue with the town crier. How
little do we know our natural calling in society! Very true
indeed, answered he: you have read of Novius, the Roman
pawnbroker, whose lungs went as far beyond the rattle of chariot-
wheels, as his conscience beyond the rate of legal interest; the
Novii must certainly have been transplanted into Spain, and these 
fellows are lineal descendants. But the hopeless part of the case
is, that though our organs of sense are deafened, our
understandings are not invigorated at their expense. We thought
it best to make our escape from these braying metaphysicians, and
by that prudent motion to avoid a headache which was just
beginning to annoy us. We went and seated ourselves in a corner
of the other room, whence, as we sipped our refreshing beverage,
all comers and goers were obnoxious to our criticism. Nunez was
acquainted with almost the whole set. Heaven and earth! exclaimed
he, the clash of philosophy is as yet but in its beginning; fresh
reinforcements are coming in on both sides. Those three men just
on the threshold, mean to let slip the dogs of war. But do you
see those two queer fellows going out? That little swarthy,
leather-complexioned Adonis, with long lank hair parted in the
middle with mathematical exactness, is Don Juliano de Villanuno.
He is a young barrister, with more of the prig than the lawyer
about him. A party of us went to dine with him the other day. The
occupation we caught him in was singular enough. He was amusing
himself in his office with making a tall grey-hound fetch and
carry the briefs in the causes which were so unfortunate as to
have him retained; and of course the canine amicus curiae set his
fangs indifferently into the flesh of plaintiff or defendant,
tearing law, equity, precedent, and principle into shreds. That
licentiate at his elbow, with jolly, pimple-spangled nose and
cheeks, goes by the name of Don Cherubino Tonto. He is a canon of
Toledo, and the greatest fool that was ever suffered to walk the
earth without a keeper. And yet, he arrays his features in that
sort of not quite unmeaning smile, that you would give him credit
for good sense as well as good humour. His eye has the look of
cunning if not of wisdom, and his laugh too much of sarcasm for
an absolute idiot. One would conclude that he had a turn for
mischief, but kept it down from principle and feeling. If you
wish to take his opinion upon a work of genius, he will hear it
read with so grave and wrapt a silence, as nothing but deep
thought and acute mental criticism could justify; but the truth
is, that he comprehends not one word, and therefore can have
nothing to say. He was of the barrister party. There were a
thousand good things said, as there always must be in a
professional company. Don Cherubino added nothing to the mass of
merriment; but looked such perfect approbation at those who did,
was so tractable and complimentary a listener, that every man at
table placed him second in the comparative estimate of merit.

Do you know, said I to Nunez, who those two fellows are with
dirty clothes and matted hair, their elbows on that table in the
corner, and their cheeks upon their hands, whiffing foul breath
into each other's nostrils as they lay their heads together? He
told me that by their faces they were strangers to him; but that
by physical and moral tokens they could only be coffee-house
politicians, venting their spleen against the measures of
government. But do look at that spruce spark, whistling as he
paces up and down the other room, and balancing himself
alternately on one toe and on the other. That is Don Augustino
Moreto, a young poet sufficiently of nature's mint and coinage to
pass current, if flatterers and sciolists had not debased him
into a mere coxcomb by their misplaced admiration. The man to
whom he is going up with that familiar shake by the hand, is one
of the set who write verses and then call themselves poets; who
claim a speaking acquaintance with the muses, but never were of
their private parties.

Authors upon authors, nothing but authors! exclaimed he, pointing
out two dashing blades. One would think they had made an
appointment on purpose to pass in review before you. Don Bernardo
Deslenguado and Don Sebastian of Villa Viciosa! The first is a
vinegar-flavoured vintage of Parnassus, a satirist by trade and
company; he hates all the world, and is not liked the better for
his taste. As for Don Sebastian, he is the milk and honey of
criticism; he would not have the guilt of ill-nature on his
conscience for the universe. He has just brought out a comedy
without a single idea, which has succeeded with an audience of
tantamount ideas; and he has just now published it to vindicate
his innocence.

Gongora's candid pupil was running on in his career of benevolent
explanation, when one of the Duke de Medina Sidonia's household
came up and said: Signor Don Fabricio, my lord duke wishes to
speak with you. You will find him at home. Nunez, who knew that
the wishes of a great lord could not be too soon gratified, left
me without ceremony; but he left me in the utmost consternation,
to hear him called Don, and thus ennobled, in spite of master
Chrysostom the barber's escutcheon, who had the honour to call
him father.



CH. XIV. -- Fabricio finds a situation for Gil Blas in the
establishment of Count Galiano, a Sicilian nobleman.


I WAS too happy in Fabricio's society, not to bunt him out again
early the next morning. Good day to you, Signor Don Fabricio,
said I on my first approach; it seems you are the picked and
chosen flower, or rather, saving your presence, the nondescript
excrescence of the Asturian nobility. This sarcasm had no other
effect than to set him laughing heartily. Then the title of Don
was not lost upon you! exclaimed he. No, indeed, my noble lord,
answered I; and you will give me leave to tell you that when you
were recounting your transformations to me yesterday, you forgot
the most extraordinary. Exactly so, replied he; but to speak
sincerely, if I have taken up that prefix of dignity, it is less
to tickle my own vanity, than in tenderness to that of others.
You know what stuff the Spaniards are made of; an honest man is
no honest man to them, if his honour is not bolstered up with
escutcheons, pedigree, and patrimony. I may tell you, moreover,
that there are so many gentry, and very queer soft of gentry too,
dubbed Don Francisco, Don Pedro, Don What-do-you-call-him, or Don
Devil, that if they owe their coats of arms to any herald but
their own impudence, modern nobility is a mere drug in the
market, so that a plebeian of nature's ennobling confers infinite
honour on the upstarts of nn artificial creation, by herding with
their order.

But let us change the subject, added he. Last night, supping at
the Duke de Medina Sidonia's, with among other company we had
Count Galiano, a great Sicilian nobleman, the conversation turned
upon the ridiculous effects of self-love. Delighted at having a
case in point by way of illustration, I treated them with the
story of the homilies. You may well suppose that there was a
hearty laugh, and that the archbishop's dignity was not saved in
the concussion; but the effect was not amiss for you, since the
company felt for your situation; and Count Galiano, after a long
string of questions, which of course I answered to your
advantage, commissioned me to introduce you. I was just now going
to look after you for that purpose. In all probability he means
to offer you a situation as one of his secretaries. I advise you
not to hang back. The count is rich, and lives away at Madrid, on
the scale of an ambassador. He is said to have come to court on a
negotiation with the Duke of Lerma, respecting some crown lands
which that minister thinks of alienating in Sicily. In one word,
Count Galiano, though a Sicilian, has every feature of
generosity, fair dealing, and gentlemanly conduct. You cannot do
better than get upon that noble man's establishment. In all
probability, the flattering prophecy respecting you at Grenada is
to be fulfilled in his person.

It was my full determination, said I to Nunez, to take my swing
about town and look at men and manners a little, before the
harness was buckled on my back again; but you paint your Sicilian
nobleman in colours which fascinate my imagination and change my
purpose. I should like to close with him at once. You will do so
very soon, replied he, or I am much deceived. We sallied forth
together immediately, and went to the count's, who resided in the
house of his friend, Don Sancho d'Avila, the latter being then in
the country.

The court-yard was overrun with pages and footmen in rich and
elegant liveries, while the ante-chamber was blockaded by
esquires, gentlemen, and various officers of the household. They
were all as fine as possible, but with so whimsical an assortment
of features, that you might have taken them for a cluster of
monkeys dressed up to satirize the Spanish fashions. Do what you
will, there is a certain class of men and women in nature, whom
no art can trick out into anything human.

At the very name of Don Fabricio, a lane was formed for my
patron, and I followed in the rear. The count was in his
dressing-gown, sitting on a sofa and taking his chocolate. We
made our obeisance in the most respectful manner; while an
inclination of the head on his part, accompanied with a
condescending smile, won my heart at once. It is very wonderful,
and yet very common, how the most trifling notice from the great
penetrates the very soul of those who are not accustomed to it!
They must have behaved like fiends, before their behaviour will
be complained of.

After taking his chocolate, he recreated himself with the humours
of a large ape, which underwent the name of Cupid: why the ape
was made a god, or the god likened to an ape, the parties
concerned can best answer; the only point of resemblance seemed
to be mischief. At all events, this hairy brat of the sylvan
Venus had so gambolled himself into his master's good graces, had
established such a character for wit and humour, that the life of
society was extinguished in his absence. As for Nunez and myself,
though we had a better turn for drollery, we were cunning enough
to chime in with the prevailing taste. The Sicilian was highly
delighted with this, and tore himself away for a moment from his
favourite pastime, just to tell me: My friend, you have only to
say whether you choose to be one of my secretaries. If the
situation suits you, the salary is two hundred pistoles a year.
If Don Fabricio gives you a character, that is enough. Yes, my
lord, cried Nunez, I am not such a cowardly fellow as Plato, who
introduced one of his friends to Dionysius the tyrant, and then
was afraid to back his own recommendation. But I have no anxiety
about being reproached on that head.

I thanked the poet of the Asturias with a low bow, for having so
much better an opinion of me than Plato had of his friend. Then
addressing my patron, I assured him of my zeal and fidelity. No
sooner did this good nobleman perceive his proposal to be
acceptable, then he rang for his steward, and after talking to
him apart, said to me: Gil Blas, I will explain the nature of
your post hereafter. Meanwhile, you have only to follow that
right-hand man of mine; he has his orders how to bestow you. I
immediately retreated, leaving Fabricio behind with the Count and
Cupid.

The steward, who came from Messina, and proved by all his actions 
that he came thence, led the way to his own room, overwhelming me
all the while with the kindness of his reception. He sent the
tailor who lived upon the skirts of the household, and ordered
him to make me out of hand a suit of equal magnificence with
those of the principal officers. The tailor took my measure and
withdrew. As to lodging, said the native of Messina, I know a
room which will just suit you. But stay! Have you breakfasted? I
answered in the negative. Oh! poor shamefaced youth, replied he,
why did not you say so? Come this way: I will introduce you
where, thank heaven, you have only to ask and have.

So saying, he led me down into the buttery, where we found the
clerk of the kitchen, who was a Neapolitan, and of course a 
complete match for his neighbour on the other side of the water.
It might be said of this pair that they were formed to meet by
nature. This honest clerk of the kitchen was doing justice to his
trade by cramming himself and five or six hangers-on with ham,
tongue, sausages, and other savoury compositions, which, besides
their own relish, possess the merit of engendering thirst: we
made common cause with these jolly fellows, and helped them to
toss off some of my lord the count's best wines. While these
things were going on in the buttery, kindred exploits were
performing in the kitchen. The cook too was regaling three or
four tradesmen of his acquaintance, who liked good wine as well
as ourselves, nor disdained to stuff their craws with meat
pasties and game: the very scullions were at free quarters, and
filched whatever they pleased. I fancied myself in a house given
up to plunder; and yet what I saw was comparatively fair and
honest. These little festivities were laughing matters; but the
private transactions of the family were very serious.



CH. XV. -- The employment of Gil Blas in Don Galiano's household.


I WENT away to fetch my moveables to my new residence. On my
return the count was at table with several noblemen and the poet
Nunez, who called about him as if perfectly at home, and took a
principal share in the conversation. Indeed, he never opened his
lips without applause. So much for wit! with that commodity at
market, a man may pay his way in any company.

It was my lot to dine with the gentlemen of the household, who
were served nearly as well as their employer. After meal-time I
withdrew to ruminate on my lot. So far so good, Gil Blas! said I
to myself: here you are in the family of a Sicilian count, of
whose character you know nothing. To judge by appearances, you
will be as much in your element as a duck upon the water. But do
not make too sure! you ought to look askew at your horoscope,
whose unkindly position you have too often experienced with a
vengeance. Independent of that, it is not easy to conjecture what
he means you to do. There are secretaries and a steward already:
where can your post be? In all likelihood you are intended to
manage his little private affairs. Well and good! There is no
better luck about the house of a great nobleman, if you would
travel post haste to make your fortune. In the performance of
more honourable services, a man gets on only step by step, and
even at that pace often sticks by the way.

While these philosophical reflections were revolving in my mind,
a servant came to tell me that all the company was gone home, and
that my lord the count was inquiring for me. I flew immediately
to his apartment, where I found him lolling on the sofa, ready to
take his afternoon's nap, with his monkey by his side.

Come nearer, Gil Blas, said he; take a chair, and hear me
attentively. I placed myself in an attitude of profound
listening, when he addressed me as follows. Don Fabricio has
informed me that, among other good qualities, you have that of
sincere attachment to your masters, and incorruptible integrity.
These are my inducements for proposing to take you into my
service. I stand in need of a friend in a domestic, to espouse my
interests and apply his whole heart and soul to the reform of my
establishment. My fortune is large, it must be confessed, but my
expenditure far exceeds my income every year. And how happens
that? Because they rob, ransack, and devour me. I might as well
be in a forest infested by banditti, as an inhabitant of my own
house. I suspect the clerk of the kitchen and my steward of
playing into one another's hands; and unless my thoughts are
unjust as well as uncharitable, they are pushing forward as fast
as they can to ruin me beyond redemption. You will ask me what I
have to do but send them packing, if I think them scoundrels. But
then where are others to be got of a better breed? It will be
sufficient to place them under the eye of a man who shall be
invested with the right of control over their conduct; and you
have I chosen to execute this commission. If you discharge it
well, be assured that your services will not be repaid with
ingratitude. I shall take care to provide you with a very
comfortable settlement in Sicily.

With this he dismissed me; and that very evening, in the presence
of the whole household, I was proclaimed principal manager and
surveyor-general of the family. Our gentlemen of Messina and 
Naples expressed no particular chagrin at first, because they
considered me as a spark of mettle like their own, and took it
for granted, that though the loaf was to be shared with a third,
there would always be cut and come again for the triumvirate. But
they looked inexpressibly foolish the next day, when I declared
myself in serious terms a decided enemy to all peculation and
underhand dealing. From the clerk of the kitchen I required the
buttery accounts without varnish or concealment. I went down into
the cellar. The furniture of the butler's pantry underwent a
strict examination, particularly in the articles of plate and
linen. Next I read them a serious lecture on the duty of acting
for their employer as they would for themselves; exhorted them to
adopt a system of economy in their expenditure; and wound up my
harangue with a protestation, that his lordship should be
acquainted with the very first instance of any unfair tricks that
I should discover in the exercise of my office.

But I had not yet got to the length of my tether. There was still
wanting a scout to ascertain whether they had any private
understanding. I fixed upon a scullion, who, won over by my
promises, told me that I could not have applied to a better
person to be informed of all that was passing in the family; that
the clerk of the kitchen and the steward were one as good as the
other, and agreed to burn the candle at both ends; that half the
provisions bought for the table were made perquisites by these
gentlemen; that the Neapolitan kept a lady who lives opposite St.
Thomas's college, and his colleague, not to be outdone, provided
another next door to the Sungate; that these two nymphs had their
larder regularly supplied every morning, while the cook,
following a good example, sent a few little nice things to a
widow of his acquaintance in the neighbourhood: but as he winked
at the table arrangements of his dear and confidential friends,
it was but fair that he should draw whenever he pleased upon the
wine-cellar: in short, by the practices of these three
bloodsuckers, a most horrible system of extravagance had found
its way into my lord the count's establishment. If you doubt my
veracity, added the scullion, only take the trouble of going to-
morrow morning about seven o'clock into the neighbourhood of St
Thomas's college, and you will see me with a load upon my back,
which will convert your suspicions into certainty. Then you, said
I, are in the confidence of these honest purveyors! I am factor
to the clerk of the kitchen, answered he; and one of my comrades
runs on errands for the steward.

I had the curiosity the next day to loiter about St. Thomas's
college at the appointed hour. My informer was punctual to time
and place. He brought with him a large tray full of butcher's
meat, poultry, and game. I took an account of every article; and
drew out the bill of fare in my memorandum book, for the purpose
of shewing it to my master: at the same time telling my little
turnspit to execute his commission as usual.

His Sicilian lordship, naturally warm in his temper, would have
turned his countryman and the Italian out of doors together, in
the first fury of his anger; but after cooling upon it, he got
rid of the former only, and gave me his vacant place. Thus my
office of supervisor was suppressed very shortly after its
creation; nor did I relinquish it with any reluctance. To define
it strictly and properly, it was nothing better than that of a
spy with a sounding title; there was nothing substantial in the
nature of the appointment: whereas to the stewardship was tied
the key of the strong box, and with that goes the mastery of the
whole family. There are so many little perquisites and so much
patronage attached to that department of administration, that a
man must inevitably get rich, almost in spite of his own honesty.

But our Neapolitan was not so easily to be driven from his
strongholds. Observing to what a pitch of savage zeal I carried
my integrity, and that I was up every morning time enough to
enter in my books the exact quantity of meat that came from
market, he abandoned the practice of sending it off by wholesale:
yet the plunderer did not therefore contract the scale of his
demands on the animal creation. He was cunning enough to make it
as broad as it was long, by arranging the services with so much
the more profusion. Thus, what was sent down again untouched
being his property by culinary common law, he had nothing to do
but to pamper up his pet with victuals ready dressed, instead of
giving her the trouble of cooking for herself. The devil will
levy his due out of every transaction; so that the count was very
little the better for his paragon of a steward. The unbounded
prodigality in our style of setting out a table, even to a
surfeiting degree, was a plain hint to me of what was going
forward; I therefore took upon myself to retrench the
superfluities of every course. This, however, was done with so
judicious a hand, that there was no thing like parsimony to be
discovered. No one would ever have missed what was taken away;
and yet the expense was reduced very considerably by a well-
regulated economy. That was just what my employer wanted; good
housewifery, but a magnificent establishment. There was a love of
saving at the bottom; but a taste for grandeur was the ostensible
passion.

Abuses seldom exist alone. The wine flowed too freely. If, for
instance, there were a dozen gentlemen at his lordship's table,
the consumption was seldom less than fifty, sometimes sixty
bottles, This was strange; and looked as if there was more in it
than met the lips of the guests. Hereupon I consulted my oracle
of the scullery, whence I derived most of my wisdom: for he
brought me a faithful account of all that was said and done in
the kitchen, where they had not the least suspicion of him. It
seemed that the havoc of which I complained proceeded from a new
confederacy between the clerk of the kitchen, the cook, and the
under butler. The latter carried off the bottles half full, and
shared their contents with his allies, I spoke to him on the
subject, threatening to turn him and all the footmen under him
out of doors at a minute's warning, if ever they did the like
again. The hint was understood, and the evil remedied. I took
especial care lest the slightest of my services should be lost
upon my master, who overwhelmed me with commendations, and took a
greater liking to me every day. On my part, as a reward to the
scullion, he was promoted to the situation next under the cook.

The Neapolitan was furious at encountering me in every direction.
The most aggravating circumstance of the whole was the
overhauling of his accounts; for, to pare his nails the closer, I
had gone into the market, and informed myself of the prices. I
followed him through all his doublings, and always took off the
market penny which he wanted to add. He must have cursed me a
hundred times a day; but the curses of the wicked fall in
blessings on the good. I wonder how he could stay in his place
under such discipline; but probably something still stuck by the
fingers.

Fabricio, whom I saw occasionally, rather blamed my conduct than
otherwise. Heaven grant, said he, one day, that all this virtue
may meet with its reward! But between ourselves you might as well
be a little more practicable with the clerk of the kitchen. What!
answered I, shall this freebooter put a bold face upon the
matter, and charge a fish at ten pistoles in his bill, which
costs only four, and would you have me pass the articles in my
accounts? Why not? replied he, coolly. He has only to let you go
snacks in the commission, and the books will be balanced in your
favour by the customary rule of stewardship arithmetic. Upon my
word, my friend, you are enough to overturn all regular systems
of housekeeping; and you are likely to end your days in a livery,
if you let the eel slip through your fingers without skinning it.
You are to learn that fortune is a very woman; ready and eager to
surrender, but expecting the formality of a summons.

I only laughed at this doctrine; and Nunez laughed at it too,
when he found that bad advice was thrown away upon an
incorrigibly honest subject. He then wished to make me believe it
was all a mere joke. At all events, nothing could shake my
resolution to act for my employer as for myself. Indeed my
actions corresponded with my words on that subject; for I may
venture to say that in four months my master saved at least three
thousand ducats by my thrift.



CH. XVI. -- An accident happens to the Count de Galiano's monkey;
his lordship's affliction on that occasion. The illness of Gil
Blas, and its consequences.


AT the expiration of the before-mentioned time; the repose of the
family was marvellously troubled by an accident, which will
appear but a trifle to the reader; and yet it was a very serious
matter to the household, especially to me. Cupid, the monkey of
whom I was speaking, that animal, so much the idol of our lord
and master, attempting to leap from one window to another,
performed so ill as to fall into the court and put his leg out of
joint. No sooner were the fatal tidings carried to the count,
than he sung a dirge which pealed through all the neighbourhood.
In the extremity of his sufferings, every inmate without
exception was taken to task, and we were all within an inch of
being packed off about our business. But the storm only rumbled
without falling; he gave us and our negligence to the devil,
without being by any means select in the terms of the bequest.
The most notorious of the faculty in the line of fractures and
dislocations were sent for. They examined the poor dear leg, set,
and bound it up. But though they all gave it as their opinion
that there was no danger, my master could not be satisfied
without retaining the most eminent about the person of the
animal, till he could be pronounced to be in a state of
convalescence.

It would be a manifest injustice to the family affections of his
Sicilian lordship, not to commemorate all the agonizing
sensations of his soul during this period of painful suspense.
Would it be thought possible that this tender nurse did not stir
from his darling Cupid's bedside all the live-long day? The
bandages were never altered or adjusted but in his presence, and
he got up two or three times in the night to inquire after his
patient. The most provoking part of the business was, that all
the servants, and myself in particular, were required to be
eternally on the alert, to anticipate the slightest wishes of
this ridiculous baboon. In short, there was no peace in the
house, till the cursed beast, having recovered from the effects
of its fall, got back again to his old tricks and whirligigs.
After this shall we be mealy-mouthed about believing Suetonius,
when he tells us that Caligula cared more for his horse than for
all the world besides, that he gave him more than the
establishment and attendance of a senator, and that he even
wanted to make him consul? Our wise master stopped little short
of the emperor in his partiality to the monkey; and had serious
thoughts of purchasing for him the place of corregidor.

Mine was the worst luck of any in the family; for I had so topped
my part above all the other servants, by way of paying my court
to his lordship, and had nursed poor dear Cupid with such
assiduity, as to throw myself into a fit of illness. A violent
fever seized me, so that I was almost at death's door. They did
what they pleased with me for a whole fortnight, without my
consciousness; for the physicians and the fates were both
conspiring against me. But my youth was more than a match for the
fever and the prescriptions united. When I recovered my senses,
the first use I made of them was to observe myself removed to
another room. I wanted to know why; and asked an old woman who
nursed me: but she told me that I must not talk, as the physician
had expressly forbidden it. When we are well, we turn up our
noses at the doctors; but when we are sick, we are as much like
old women as themselves.

It seemed best therefore to keep silence, though with an
inveterate longing to hold converse with my attendant I was
debating the point in my own mind, when there came in two
foppish-looking fellows, dressed in the very extreme of fashion.
Nothing less than velvet would serve their turn, with linen and
lace to correspond. They looked like men of rank; and I could
have sworn that they were some of my master's friends come to see
me out of regard for him. Under that impression I attempted to
sit up, and flung away my nightcap to look genteel; but the nurse
forced me under the bedclothes again, and tucked me up,
announcing these gentlemen at the same time, as my physician and
apothecary.

The doctor came up to my bedside, felt my pulse, looked in my
face; and discovering undeniable symptoms of approaching
convalescence, assumed an air of triumph, as if it was all his
handiwork; and said there was nothing wanting but to keep the
bowels open, and then he flattered himself he might boast of
having performed an extraordinary cure. Speaking after this
manner, he dictated a prescription to the apothecary, looking in
the glass all the time, adjusting the dress of his hair, and
twisting his visage into shapes which set me laughing in spite of
my debility. At length he took his leave with a slight
inclination of the head, and went his way, more taken with the
contemplation of his own pretty person, than anxious about the
success of his remedies.

After his departure, the apothecary, not to have the trouble of a
visit for nothing, made ready to proceed as it is prescribed in
certain cases. Whether he was afraid that the old woman's skill
was not equal to the exigency, or whether he meant to enhance his
own services by assiduity, he chose to operate in person; but in
spite of practice and experience, accidents will happen. Haste to
return benefits is among the most amiable propensities of our
nature; and such was my eagerness not to be behindhand with my
benefactor, that his velvet dress bore immediate testimony to the
profuseness of my gratitude. This he considered merely as one of
those little occurrences which chequer the fortunes of the
pharmaceutical profession. A napkin is a resource for everything
in a sick room, and least said was soonest mended; so he wiped
himself quietly, vowing indemnity and vengeance to himself for
the necessity under which he unquestionably laboured of sending
his clothes to the scourer.

On the following morning he returned to the attack more modestly
equipped, though there was then no risk of my springing a
countermine, as he had only to administer the potion which the
doctor had prescribed the evening before. Besides that I felt
myself getting better every moment, I had taken such a dislike,
since the day before, to the pill-dispensing tribe, as to curse
the very universities where these graduated cut-throats kept
their exercises in the faculty of slaying. In this temper of
mind, I declared, with a round oath, that I would not accept of
health through such a medium, but would willingly make over
Hippocrates and his myrmidons to the devil. The apothecary, who
did not care a doit what became of his compound, if it was but
paid for, left the phial on the table, and stalked away in
Telamonian silence.

I immediately ordered that bitch of a medicine to be thrown out
of window, having set myself so doggedly against it, that I would
as soon have swallowed arsenic. Having once drawn the sword, I
threw away the scabbard; and erecting my tongue into an
independent potentate, told my nurse in a determined tone, that
she must absolutely inform me what was become of my master. The
old lady, fearing lest the development of the mystery might
completely overset me, or thinking possibly that her prey might
escape out of her clutches for want of a little irritating
contradiction, was most provokingly mute; but I was so pressing
in my demand to be obeyed, that she at length gave me a decisive
answer: Worthy sir, you have no longer any master but your own
will. Count Galiano is gone back into Sicily.

I could not believe my ears; and yet it was fatally the fact.
That nobleman, on the second day of my indisposition, being
afraid of harbouring death under the same roof with him, had the
benevolence to send me packing with my little effects to a ready-
furnished room, where providence was left to cure, or a nurse to
kill me, as it happened. While the alternative was tottering on
the balance, he was ordered back into Sicily, and in the headlong
haste of his obedience, never thought about me; whether it was
that he numbered me already among the death, or that great lords,
like great wits, have short memories.

My nurse gave me these particulars, and informed me that it was
she who had called in a physician and an apothecary, that I might
not die without professional honours. I fell into profound musing
at this fine story. Farewell my brilliant establishment in
Sicily! Farewell my budding hopes and blushing honours! When any
great misfortune shall have befallen you, says a certain pope,
look well to your own conduct, and you will find that there is
always some thing wrong at the bottom of it. With all reverent
submission to his holiness, I cannot help thinking myself in this
instance an exception to the infallibility of his maxim. How the
deuce was I to blame for being visited by a fever? There was more
reason for remorse in the monkey or his master than in me.

When I beheld the flattering chimeras with which my head was
filled, all vanishing into air, into thin air, the first thing
that worried my poor brain was my portmanteau, which I ordered to
be laid upon my bed to examine it. I groaned heavily on
discovering that it had been opened. Alas! my dear portmanteau,
exclaimed I, my only hope, consolation, and refuge! You have
been, to all appearance, a prisoner in an enemy's country. No,
no, Signor Gil Blas, said the old woman, make yourself easy on
that head; you have not fallen among thieves. Your baggage is as
immaculate as my honour.

I found the dress I had on at my first entrance into the count's
service; but it was in vain to look for that which my friend from
Messina had ordered for me as a member of the household. My
master had not thought fit to leave me in possession of it, or
else some one had made free with it. All my other little matters
were safe, and even a large leather purse with my coin in it,
which I counted over twice, not being able to believe at first
that there could be only fifty pistoles remaining out of two
hundred and sixty, which was the balance of the account before my
illness. What is the meaning of all this, my good lady? said I to
the nurse. Here is a leak in the vessel. No living soul but
myself has touched a farthing, answered the old woman, and I have
been as good an economist for you as possible. But illness is
very expensive; one must always have one's money in one's hand.
Here! added this excellent economist, taking a bundle of papers
out of her pocket, this is a statement of debtor and creditor, as
exact as a banker's book, and you will see that I have not laid
out the veriest trifle in need-nots.

I ran over the account with a hasty glance; for it extended to
fifteen or twenty pages. Mercy on us! The poulterers' shops must
have been exhausted, while I was in too weak a state to take
sustenance! There must have been at least twelve pistoles stewed
down into broths. Other articles were much to the same tune. It
was incredible what a sum had been lavished in firing, candles,
water, brooms, and innumerable articles of housekeeping and house
cleaning. After all, extortionate as the bill was, the utmost
ingenuity could not raise it above thirty pistoles, and
consequently there was a deficiency of a hundred and eighty to
make the account even. I just ventured to point that out; but the
old woman, with a shew of simplicity and candour, put all the
saints in the calendar into requisition to attest that there were
no more than eighty pistoles in the purse when the count's
steward gave her charge of the wallet. What say you, my good
woman, interrupted I with precipitation: was it the steward who
placed my effects in your hands? To be sure it was, answered she,
the very man, and with this piece of advice: Here, good mother,
when Gil Blas shall be numbered with the dead, do not fail to
treat him with a handsome funeral; there is in this wallet
wherewithal to defray the expenses.

Ah! most pestiferous Neapolitan! exelaimed I in the bitterness of
my heart. I am no longer at a loss to conjecture what is become
of the deficiency. You have swept it off as an indemnity for a
part of the plunder which I have prevented you from making free
with. After relieving my mind by exclamations, I returned thanks
to heaven that the scoundrel had been so modest as not to take
the whole. Yet whatever reason I had for believing the action to
be perfectly in character for the person to whom it was imputed,
the nurse had not altogether cleared herself from my suspicions.
They hovered sometimes over one and sometimes over the other; but
let them light where they would, it was all the same to me. I
said nothing about the matter to the old woman; not even so much
as to haggle about the items of her fine bill. I should not have
been an atom the richer for doing so; and we must all live by our
trades. The utmost of my malice was to pay her and send her
packing three days afterwards.

I am inclined to think that at her departure she gave the
apothecary notice of her quitting the premises, and having left
me sufficiently in possession of myself to take French leave
without acknowledging my obligations to him; for she had not been
gone many minutes before he came in puffing and blowing, with his
bill in his hand. There, under names which had escaped my
conscription, though as arrant a physician as the worst of them,
he had set down all the hypothetical remedies which he insisted
that I had taken during the time when I could take nothing. This
bill might truly be called the epitome of an apothecary's
conscience. Such being the case, we had a bustle about the
payment. I pleaded for an abatement of one-half. He swore that he
would not take a doit less than his just demand. He kept his oath
and yet relaxed; for considering that he had to do with a young
man who might run away from Madrid within four-and-twenty hours,
he preferred my offer of three hundred per cent, on the prime
cost of his drugs, though a pitiful profit for an apothecary, to
the risk of losing all. I counted out the money with an aching
heart, and he withdrew, chuckling over his revenge for the scurvy
trick I had played him on the day of evacuation.

The physician made his appearance next; for beasts of prey
inhabit the same latitudes. I fee'd him for his visits, which had
been quite as frequent as necessary, and his object was answered.
But he would not leave me without proving how hardly he had
earned his money, for that he had not only expelled the enemy
from the interior, but had defended the frontiers from the attack
of all the disorders on the army list of the materia medica. He
talked very learnedly, with good emphasis and discretion; so much
so, that I did not comprehend one word he said. When I had got
rid of him, I flattered myself that the destinies had now done
their worst. But I was mistaken; for there came a surgeon whose
face I had never seen in the whole course of my life. He accosted
me very politely, and congratulated me on the imminent danger I
had escaped; attributing the happy issue of my complaints to
those which he had himself cut, with the profuse application of
bleeding, cupping, blistering, and all sorts of torments,
consequent and inconsequent. Another feather out of my poor wing!
I was obliged to pay toll to the surgeon also. After so many
purgatives, my purse was brought to such a state of debility,
that it might be considered as dead and gone; a mere skeleton,
drained of all its vital juices.

My spirits began to flag, on the contemplation of my wretched
case. In the service of my two last masters I had wedded myself
to the pomps and vanities of this wicked world; and could no
longer, as heretofore, look poverty in the face with the
sternness of a cynic. It must be owned, however, that I was in
the wrong to give way to melancholy, after experiencing so often
that fortune had never cast me down, but for the purpose of
raising me up again; so that my pitiful plight at the present
moment, if rightly considered, was only to be hailed as the
harbinger of approaching prosperity.



BOOK THE EIGHTH.



CH. I. -- Gil Blas scrapes an acquaintance of some value, and
finds wherewithal to make him amends for the Count de Galiano's
ingratitude. Don Valerio de Luna's story.


IT seemed so strange to have heard not a syllable from Nunez
during this long interval, that I concluded he must be in the
country. I went to look after him as soon as I could walk, and
found the fact to be, that he had gone into Andalusia three weeks
ago, with the Duke of Medina Sidonia.

One morning when rubbing my eyes after a sound sleep, Melchior de
la Ronda started into my recollection; and that bringing to mind
my promise at Grenada, of going to see his nephew, if ever I
should return to Madrid, it seemed advisable not to defer
fulfilling my promise for a single day. I inquired where Don
Balthazar de Zuniga lived, and went thither straightway. On
asking if Signor Joseph Navarro was at home, he made his
appearance immediately. We exchanged bows with a well-bred
coolness on his part, though I had taken care to announce my name
audibly. There was no reconciling such a frosty reception with
the glowing portrait ascribed to this paragon of the buttery. I
was just going to withdraw in the full determination of not
coming again, when assuming all at once an open and smiling
aspect, he said with considerable earnestness: Ah! Signor Gil
Blas de Santillane, pray forgive the formality of your welcome.
My memory ill seconded the warmth of my disposition towards you.
Your name had escaped me, and was not at the moment identified
with the gentleman, of whom mention was made in a letter from
Grenada more than four months ago.

How happy I am to see you! added he, shaking hands with me most
cordially. My uncle Melchior, whom I love and honour like my
natural father, charges me, if by chance I should have the honour
of seeing you, to entertain you as his own son, and in case of
need, to stretch my own credit and that of my friends to the
utmost in your behalf. He extols the qualities of your heart and
mind in terms sufficient of themselves to engage me in your
service, though his recommendation had not been added to the
other motives. Consider me, therefore, I entreat you, as
participating in all my uncle's sentiments. You may depend on my
friendship; let me hope for an equal share in yours.

I replied to Joseph's polite assurances in suitable terms of
acknowledgment; so that being both of us warm-headed and sincere,
a close intimacy sprung up without waiting for common forms. I
felt no embarassment about laying open the state of my affairs.
This I had no sooner done, than he said: I take upon myself the
care of finding you a situation; meanwhile, there is a knife and
fork for you here every day. You will live rather better than at
an ordinary. This offer was sure to be well relished by an
invalid just recovering with a fastidious palate and an empty
pocket. It could not but be accepted; and I picked up my crumbs
so fast that at the end of a fortnight I began to look like a
rosy-gilled son of the church. It struck me that Melchior's
nephew larded his lean sides to some purpose. But how could it be
otherwise? he had three strings to his bow, as holding the
undermentioned pluralities: the butler's place, the clerkship of
the kitchen, and the stewardship. Furthermore, without meaning to
question my friend's honesty, they do say that the comptroller of
the household and he looked over each other's hands.

My recovery was entirely confirmed, when my friend Joseph, on my
coming in to dinner as usual one day, said with an air of
congratulation: Signor Gil Blas, I have a very tolerable
situation in view for you. You must know that the Duke of Lerma,
first minister of the crown in Spain, giving himself up entirely
to state affairs, throws the burden of his own on two
confidential persons. Don Diego de Monteser takes the charge of
collecting his rents, and Don Rodrigo de Calderona superintends
the finances of his household. These two officers are paramount
in their departments, having nothing to do with one another. Don
Diego has generally two deputies to transact the business; and
finding just now that one of them had been discharged, I have
been canvassing for you. Signor Monteser having the greatest
possible regard for me, granted my request at once, on the
strength of my testimony to your morals and capacity. We will pay
our respects to him after dinner.

We did not miss our appointment. I was received with every mark
of favour, and promoted in the room of the dismissed deputy. My
business consisted in visiting the farms, in giving orders for
the necessary repairs, in dunning the farmers, and keeping them
to time in their payments; in a word, the tenants were all under
my thumb, and Don Diego checked my accounts every month with a
minuteness which few receivers could have borne. But this was
exactly what I wanted. Though my uprightness had been so ill
requited by my late master, it was my only inheritance, and I was
determined not to sell the reversion.

One day news came that the castle of Lerma had taken fire, and
was more than half burnt down. I immediately went thither to
estimate the loss. In forming myself to a nicety, and on the
spot, respecting all the particulars of the unlucky accident, I
drew up a detailed narrative, which Monteser shewed to the Duke
of Lerma. That minister, though vexed at the circumstance, was
struck with the memorial, and inquired who was the author. Don
Diego thought it not enough to answer the question, but spoke of
me in such high terms, that his excellency recollected it six
months afterwards, on occasion of an incident I shall now relate,
had it not been for which I might never, perhaps, have been
employed at court. It was as follows: --

There lived at that time in Princes Street an elderly lady, by
name Inésilla de Cantarilla. Her birth was a matter of mystery.
Some said she was the daughter of a musical instrument-maker, and
others gave her a high military extraction. However that might
be, she was a very extraordinary personage. Nature had gifted her
with the singular talent of winning men's hearts in defiance of
time, and in contradiction to her own laws; for she was now
entering upon the fourth quarter of her century. She had been the
reigning toast of the old court, and levied tribute on the
passions of the new. Age, though at daggers drawn with beauty,
was completely foiled in its assault upon her charms; they might
be somewhat faded, but the touch of sympathy they excited in
their decline was more pleasing that the vivid glow of their
meridian lustre. An air of dignity, a transporting wit and
humour, an unborrowed grace in her deportment, perpetuated the
reign of passion, and silenced the suggestions of reason.

Don Valerio de Luna, one of the Duke of Lerma's secretaries, a
young fellow of five-and-twenty, meeting with Inésilla, fell
violently in love with her. He made his sentiments known, enacted
all the mummery of despair, and followed up the usual catastrophe
of every amorous drama so much according to the unities and
rules, that it was difficult, in the very torrent and whirlwind
of his passion, to beget a temperance that might give it
smoothness. The lady, who had her reason for not choosing to fall
in with his humour, was at a loss how to get out of the
difficulty. One day she was in hopes to have found the means by
calling the young man into her closet, and there pointing to a
clock upon the table. Mark the precise hour, said she; just
seventy-five years ago was I brought upon the stage of this
fantastical world. In good earnest, would it sit well upon my
time of life to be engaged in affairs of gallantry? Betake
yourself to reflection, my good child; stifle sentiments so
unsuitable to your own circumstances and mine. Sensible as this
language was, the spark, no longer bowing to the authority of
reason, answered the lady with all the impetuosity of a man
racked by the most excruciating torments: Cruel Inésilla, why
have you recourse to such frivolous remonstrances? Do you think
they can change your charms or my desires? Delude not yourself
with so false a hope. As long as your loveliness or my delusion
lasts, I shall never cease to adore you. Well, then, rejoined
she, since you are obstinate enough to persist in the resolution
of wearying me with your importunities, my doors shall henceforth
be shut against you. You are banished, and I beg to be no longer
troubled with your company.

It may be supposed, perhaps, that after this, Don Valerio,
baffled, made good his retreat like a prudent general. Quite the
reverse! He became more troublesome than ever. Love is to lovers
just what wine is to drunkards. The swain intreated, sighed,
looked, and sighed again; when all at once, changing his note
from childish treble to the big manly voice of bluster and
ravishment, he swore that he would have by foul means what he
could not obtain by fair. But the lady, repulsing him
courageously, said with a piercing look of strong resentment,
Hold, imprudent wretch! I shall put a curb on your mad career.
Learn that you are my own son.

Don Valerio was thunderstruck at these words; the tempest of his
rage subsided. But, conjecturing that Inesilla had only started
this device to rid herself of his solicitations, he answered,
That is a mere romance of the moment to steal away from my ardent
desires. No, no, said she, interrupting him, I disclose a mystery
which should have been for ever buried, had you not reduced me to
so painful a necessity. It is six-and-twenty years since I was in
love with your father, Don Pedro de Luna, then governor of
Segovia; you were the fruit of our mutual passion: he owned you,
brought you up with care and tenderness, and having no children
born in wedlock, he had nothing to hinder him from distinguishing
your good qualities by the gifts of fortune. On my part, I have
not forsaken you; as soon as you were of an age to be introduced
into the world, I drew you into the circle of my acquaintance, to
form your manners to that polish of good company, so necessary
for a gentleman, which is only to be gained in female society. I
have done more: I have employed all my credit to introduce you to
the prime minister. In short, I have interested myself for you as
I should have done for my own son. After this confession, take
your measures accordingly. If you can purge your affections from
their dross, and look on me as a mother, you are not banished
from my presence, and I shall treat you with my accustomed
tenderness. But if you are not equal to an effort, which nature
and reason demand from you, fly instantly, and release me from
the horror of beholding you.

Inesilla spoke to this effect. Meanwhile Don Valerio preserved a
sudden silence: it might have been interpreted into a virtuous
struggle, a conquest over the weakness of his heart. But his
purposes were far different; he had another scene to act before
his mother. Unable to withstand the total overthrow of all his
wild projects, he basely yielded to despair. Drawing his sword,
he plunged it in his own bosom. His fate resembled that of
Oedipus, with this distinction; that the Theban put out his own
eyes from remorse for the crime he had perpetrated, while the
Castilian, on the contrary, committed suicide from disappointment
at the frustration of his purposes.

The unhappy Don Valerio was not released from his sufferings
immediately. He had leisure left for recollection, and for making
his peace with heaven, be fore he rushed into the presence of his
Maker. As his death vacated one of the secretaryships on the Duke
of Lerma's establishment, that minister, not having forgotten my
memoir on the subject of the fire, nor the high character he had
heard of me, nominated me to succeed to the post in question.



CH. II. -- Gil Blas is introduced to the Duke of Lerma, who
admits him among the number of his secretaries, and requires a
specimen of his talents, with which he is well satisfied.


MONTESER was the person to inform me of this agreeable
circumstance, which he did in the following terms: My friend Gil
Blas, though I do not lose you without regret, I am too much your
well-wisher not to be delighted at your promotion in the room of
Don Valerio. You cannot fail to make a princely fortune, provided
you act upon two hints which I have to give you: the first, to
affect so total a devotion to his excellency's good pleasure, as
to leave no room to conceive it possible that you have any other
object or interest in life  -- the second, to pay your court
assiduously to Signor Don Rodrigo de Calderona; for that
personage models and remodels, fashions and touches upon the mind
of his master, just as if it was clay under the hands of the
designer. If you are fortunate enough to chime in with that
favourite secretary, you will travel post to wealth and honour,
and find relays upon the road.

Sir, said I to Don Diego, returning him thanks at the same time
for his good advice, be pleased to give some little opening to
Don Rodrigo's character. I have heard a few anecdotes of him. One
would suppose him, from some accounts, not to be the best
creature in the world; but the people at large are inveterate
caricaturists when they draw courtiers at full length; though,
after all, the likeness will strike, in spite of the aggravation.
Tell me, therefore, I beseech you, what is your own sincere
opinion of Signor Calderona. That is rather an awkward question,
answered my principal with an ironical smile. I should tell any
one but yourself, without flinching, that he was a gentleman of
the strictest honour, upon whose fair fame the breath of calumny
had never dared to blow; but I really cannot put off such a copy
of my countenance upon you. Relying as I do on your discretion,
it becomes a duty to deal candidly in the delineation of Don
Rodrigo; for without that, it would be playing fast and loose
with you to recommend the cultivation of his good-will.

You are to know then, that when his excellency was no more than
plain Don Francisco de Sandoval, this man had the humility to
serve him as his lackey; since which time he has risen by degrees
to the post of principal secretary. A prouder excrescence of the
dunghill never sprung into vegetation on a summer's day. He
considers himself as the Duke of Lerma's colleague; and in point
of fact, he may truly be said to parcel out the loaves and fishes
of administration, since he gives away offices and governments at
the suggestions of his own caprice. The public grumbles and
growls upon occasion; but who cares for the grumbling and
growling of the public? Let him steal a pair of gloves from the
prostitution of political honour, and the bronze upon his
forehead will be proof against the peltings of scandal. What I
have said will decide your dealings towards so supercilious a
compound of dust and ashes. Yes, to be sure, said I; leave me
alone for that It will be strange indeed if I cannot wriggle
myself into his good graces. If one can but get on the blind side
of a man who is to be made a property, it must be want of skill
in the player if the game is lost. Exactly so, replied Monteser;
and now I will introduce you to the Duke of Lerma.

We went at once to the minister, whom we found in his audience-
chamber. His levee was more crowded than the king's. There were
commanders and knights of St James and of Calatrava, making
interest for governments and viceroyalties; bishops who,
labouring under oppression of the breath and tightness of the
chest in their own dioceses, had been recommended the air of an
archbishopric by their physicians; while the sounder lungs of
lower dignitaries were strong enough to inhale the Theban
atmosphere of a suffragan see. I observed besides some reduced
officers dancing attendance to Captain Chinchilla's tune, and
catching cold in fishing for a pension, which was never likely to
pay the doctor for their cure. If the duke did not satisfy their
wants, he put a pleasant face upon their importunities; and it
struck me that he returned a civil answer to all applicants.

We waited patiently till the routine of ceremony was despatched.
Then said Don Diego: My lord, this is Gil Blas de Santillane, the
young man appointed by your excellency to succeed Don Valerio.
The duke now took more particular notice of me, saying
obligingly, that I had already earned my promotion by my
services. He then took me to a private conference in his closet,
or rather to an examination. My birth, parentage, and course of
life were the objects of his inquiry; nor would he be satisfied
without the particulars, and those in the spirit of sincerity.
What a career to run over before a patron! Yet it was impossible
to lie, in the presence of a prime minister. On the other hand,
my vanity was concerned in suppressing so many circumstances,
that there was no venturing on an unqualified confession. What
cunning scene had Roscius then to act? A little painting and
tattooing might decently be employed to disguise the nakedness of
truth, and spare her unsophisticated blushes. But he had studied
her complexion, as well as the beauties of her natural form.
Monsieur de Santillane, said he with a smile on the close of my
narrative, I perceive that hitherto you have had your principles
to choose. My lord, answered I, colouring up to the eyes, your
excellency enjoined me to deal sincerely; and I have complied 
with your orders. I take your doing so in good part, replied he.
It is all very well, my good fellow: you have escaped from the
snares of this wicked world more by luck than management: it is
wonderful that bad example should not have corrupted you
irreparably. There are many men of strict virtue and exemplary
piety, who would have turned out the greatest rogues in
existence, if their destinies had exposed them to but half your
trials.

Friend Santillane, continued the minister, ponder no longer on
the past; consider yourself as to the very bone and marrow the
king's; live henceforth but for his service. Come this way; I
will instruct you in the nature of your business. He carried me
into a little closet adjoining his own, which contained a score
of thick folio registers. This is your workshop, said he. All
these registers compose an alphabetical peerage, giving the
heraldry and history of all the nobility and gentry in the
several kingdoms and principalities of the Spanish monarchy. In
these volumes are recorded the services rendered to the state by
the present possessors and their ancestors, descending even to
the personal animosities and rencounters of the individuals and
their houses. Their fortunes, their manners, in a word, all the
pros and cons of their character are set down according to the
letter of ministerial scrutiny; so that they no sooner enter on
the list of court candidates, that my eye catches up the very
chapter and verse of their pretensions. To furnish this necessary
information, I have pensioned scouts everywhere on the look-out,
who send me private notices of their discoveries; but as these
documents are for the most part drawn up in a gossiping and
provincial style, they require to be translated into gentlemanly
language, or the king would not be able to support the perusal of
the registers. This task demands the pen of a polite and
perspicuous writer; I doubt not but you will justify your claim
to the appointment.

After this introduction, he put a memorial into my hand, taken
from a large portfolio full of papers, and then withdrew from my
closet, that my first specimen might be manufactured in all the
freedom of solitude. I read the memorial, which was not only
stuffed with a most uncouth jargon, but breathed a brimstone
spirit of rancour and personal revenge. This was most foul,
strange, and unnatural! for the homily was written by a monk. He
hacked and hewed a Catalan family of some note most unmercifully;
with what reason or truth, it must be reserved for a more
penetrating inquirer to decide. It read for all the world like an
infamous libel, and I had some scruples about becoming the
publisher of the calumny; nevertheless, young as I was at court,
I plunged head foremost, at the risk of sinking and destroying
his reverence's soul. The wickedness, if there was any, would be
put down to his running account with the recording angel; I
therefore had nothing to do but to vilify, in the purest Spanish
phraseology, some two or three generations of honest men and
loyal subjects.

I had already blackened four or five pages, when the duke,
impatient to know how I got on, came back and said -- Santillane,
shew me what you have done; I am curious to see it. At the same
time, casting his eye over the transcript, he read the beginning
with much attention. It seemed to please him; strange that he
could be so pleased! Prepossessed as I have been in your favour,
observed he, I must own that you have surpassed my expectations.
It is not merely the elegance and distinctness of the
handwriting! There is something animated and glowing in the
composition. You will do ample credit to my choice, and fully
make up for the loss of your predecessor. He would not have cut
my panegyric so short, if his nephew the Count de Lemos had not
interrupted him in the middle of it. By the warmth and frequency
of his excellency's welcome, it was evident that they were the
best friends in the world. They were immediately closeted
together on some family business, of which I shall speak in the
sequel. The king's affairs at this time were obliged to play
second to those of the minister.

While they were caballing it struck twelve. As I knew that the
secretaries and their clerks quitted office at that hour to go
and dine wherever their business and desire should point them, I
left my prize performance behind me, and went to the gayest
tavern at the court end of the town, for I had nothing further to
do with Monteser, who had paid my salary, and taken his leave of
me. But a common eating-house would have been a very improper
place for me to be seen in. "Consider yourself as to the very
bone and marrow the king's." This metaphorical expression of the
duke had given birth to a real and tangible ambition in my soul,
which put forth shoots like a plantation in a fat and unvexed
soil.



CH. III. -- All is not gold that glitters. Some uneasiness
resulting from the discovery of that principle in philosophy, and
its practical application to existing circumstances.


I TOOK especial care, on my first entrance, to instil into the
tavern-keeper's conception that I was secretary to the prime
minister; nor was it easy, in that view of my rank and
consequence, to order anything sufficiently sumptuous for dinner.
To have selected from the bill of fare, might have looked as if I
descended to the meanness of calculation; I therefore told him to
send up the best the house afforded. My orders were punctually
obeyed; and the anxious assiduity of the attendance pampered my
fancy as much as the dishes did my palate. As to the bill, I had
nothing to do with it but to pay it. Down went a pistole upon the
table, and the waiters pocketed the difference, which was
somewhat more than a quarter. After this display of grandeur I
strutted out, practising those obstreperous clearings of the
throat which announce, by empty sound, the approach of a
substantial coxcomb.

There was at the distance of twenty yards a large house with
lodgings to let, principally frequented by foreign nobility. I
rented at once a suite of apartments, consisting of five or six
rooms elegantly furnished. From my style of living, any one would
have thought I had two or three thousand ducats of yearly income.
The first month was paid in advance. Afterwards I returned to
business, and employed the whole afternoon in going on with what
I had begun in the morning. In a closet adjoining mine there were
two other secretaries; but their office was only to copy out
fair. I got acquainted with them as we were shutting up for the
evening; and, by way of smoothing the first overtures towards
friendship, invited them home with me to my tavern, where I
ordered the choicest delicacies of the season, with a profusion
of the most exquisite wines.

We sat down to table, and began bandying about more merriment
than wit; for with all due deference to my guests, it was but too
visible that they owed their official situations to any
circumstance rather than to their abilities. They were adepts, it
must be confessed, in all the history and mystery of scrivening
and clerkship; but as for polite literature and university
education, there was not even a suspicion of it in all their
talk.

To make amends for that defect, they had a keen eye to the main
chance; and though sensible how high an honour it was to be on
the prime minister's establishment, there were some dashes of
acid in the cup of good fortune. It is now full five months, said
one of them, that we have been serving at our own cost. We do not
touch one farthing of salary; and, what is worst of all, our very
board wages are shamefully in arrear. There is no knowing what
footing we are upon. As for me, said the other, I would willingly
be tied up to the halbert, and receive a percentage in lashes,
for the liberty of changing my berth; but I dare not either take
myself off or petition for my discharge, after having transcribed
such state secrets as have passed under my inspection. I might
chance to become too well acquainted with the tower of Segovia or
the castle of Alicant.

How do you manage for a subsistence, then? said I. You must of
course have means of your own. These they represented as very
slender; but that, fortunately for them, they lodged with a kind-
hearted widow, who boarded them on tick, at the rate of a hundred
pistoles a year for each These anecdotes of a court life, not one
of which escaped me, completely ventilated all the rising fumes
of pride. It could not be supposed that more consideration would
be shewn to me than to others, and consequently there was nothing
to be so puffed up with in my post; there seemed to be much cry
and little wool, a discovery which rendered it expedient to
husband my finances with a narrower economy. A picture like this
was enough to cure my taste for treating. I repented not having
left these secretaries to find their own supper; for they played
a most cruel knife and fork at mine! and, when the bill was
brought, I squabbled with the landlord about the charges.

We parted at midnight; and the early breaking up was to be laid
at my door; for I did not propose another bottle. They went home
to their widow, and I withdrew to my magnificent lodgings, which
I was now mad with myself for having taken, and was fully
determined to give up at the month's end. My bed of down was now
converted into a couch of thorns; sleep had abandoned his
narcotic tenement, and sold the fee-simple of my repose to the
demon of eternal wakefulness. The remainder of the night was
passed in contriving not to serve the state too patriotically.
For that purpose I bethought me of Monteser's good counsel. I got
up with the intention of making my bow to Don Rodrigo de
Calderona. My present temper was just pat to the purpose of
ingratiating myself with so high and mighty a gentleman; whose
patronage was indispensable to my existence. I therefore
presented my person in that secretary's ante-chamber.

His apartments communicated with the duke's, and rivalled them in
the lustre of their decorations. The field officer could scarcely
be distinguished from the subaltern by any outward distinction in
his paraphernalia. I sent in my name as Don Valerio's successor;
but that did not hinder me from being kept kicking my heels for a
good hour. Trusty, but novice officer of the king, said I, while
ruminating on court manners, lean a lesson of patience, if so
please you. You must begin with shewing paces yourself, and
afterwards make others bite the bridle.

At length the door of the inner room opened. I went in, and
advanced towards Don Rodrigo, who had just been writing an
amorous epistle to his charming Siren, and was giving it to
Pedrillo at that very moment. I had never manufactured my face
and air into such a counterfeit of reverence before the
Archbishop of Grenada, nor on my introduction to the Count de
Galiano, nor even in presence of the prime minister himself: the
crisis of my fawning was reserved for Signor de Calderona. I paid
my respects to him with my body bent down to the very ground, as
if crouching under the ken of a superior intelligence; and
solicited his protection in strains of humble hypocrisy, at which
my cheek now burns with shame, to think that man can so debase
himself before his fellow-man. My servility would have recoiled
to my own undoing, had it been practised towards a compound of
any manly and independent ingredients. As for this fellow, he
swallowed flattery by the lump without mastication; and assured
me, just as if he meant what he said, that he would leave no
stone unturned to do me service.

Hereupon, thanking him with unlimited expressions of attachment
for his kind and generous sentiments, I sold my very soul and all
my little stock of conscience to his free disposal. But as this
farce might be tiresome if prolonged, I took my leave,
apologizing for having broken in upon his more serious
avocations. As soon as I had finished this abominable scene, I
slunk back to my desk, where I finished my prescribed task. The
duke was at my elbow the next morning. The end of my performance
was not less to his mind than the beginning; and he praised it
accordingly: This is extremely well indeed! Copy this abridgment
in your best hand into the register of Catalonia. You shall not
want employment of this kind. I had a very long conversation with
his excellency, and was delighted at his mild and familiar
deportment. What a contrast to Calderona! They might have sat to
a painter for Pan and Apollo.

To-day I dined at a cheap ordinary, and sunk the secretary upon
my messmates, till I should ascertain what solid profit might
accrue from all my bows and scrapes. I had funds for three
months, or thereabouts. That interval I allowed myself for
casting my bread upon the waters. But as the shortest
speculations are the safest, if my salary was not paid by that
time, a long farewell to the court, its frippery, and its
falsehood! Thus were my plans arranged. For two months I laboured
hard and fast to stand well with Calderona: but his senses were
so callous to all my assiduity, that it seemed labour in vain to
build on so hopeless a foundation. This idea produced a change in
my conduct. I left some greener fool to fumigate the nostrils of
this idol; and placed all my own dependence on making my ground
sure with the duke, by the benefit of our frequent conferences.



CH. IV. -- Gil Blas becomes a favourite with the Duke of Lerma,
and the confidant of an important secret.


THOUGH his grace's interviews with me were short as the fleeting
visions of supernatural communication, my turn and character won
its way gradually into his excellency's good liking. One day
after dinner, he said: Attend to me, Gil Blas. I really like you
very muck You are a zealous, confidential lad, full of
understanding and discretion. My trust cannot be misplaced in
such hands. I threw myself at his feet, at the music of these
words; and kissing his outstretched hand, answered thus: Is it
possible that your excellency can think so favourably of your
servant? What a host of enemies will such a preference conjure up
against me! But Don Rodrigo is the only man whose privy grudge is
formidable enough to alarm me.

You have nothing to fear from that quarter, replied the duke. I
know Calderona. He has loved me from his cradle. Every movement
of his heart is in unison with mine. He cherishes whatever I
love, and hates in exact proportion to my dislike. So far from
being alarmed at his ill-will, you ought, on the contrary, to hug
yourself on his peculiar partiality. This let me at once into the
abysses of Don Rodrigo's character. He shuffled and cut the cards
to his own deal, and paid his debts of honour out of his
excellency's pool. One could not be too wary with this gentleman.

To begin, pursued the duke, with a proof my thorough reliance on
your faith, I will open to you a long-projected design. It is
necessary for you to be informed of it, to qualify you for the
commissions with which I shall hereafter have occasion to intrust
to you. For a great length of time have I beheld my authority
universally respected, my decisions implicitly adopted, places,
pensions, governments, vice-royalties, and church preferments all
awaiting my disposal. Without umbrage to my royal master, I may
be said to be absolute in Spain. My individual fortunes can be
pushed no higher. But I would willingly fix firm the structure I
have raised; for the storms are already beginning to beat about
the citadel of my peace. My only safety must consist in
nominating my nephew, the Count de Lemos, as my successor in the
ministry.

This profound courtier, observing my astonishment, went on thus.
I see plainly, Santillane, I see plainly what surprises you. It
seems strange and unaccountable that I should prefer my nephew to
my own son, the Duke d'Uzeda. But you are to learn that this last
has too narrow a genius to fill up my place in politics; and
there are other reasons why I set my face against him. He has
found out the secret of making himself agreeable to the king, who
wants him for his interior cabinet; and back-stairs influence is
what I cannot bear. Royal favour is a sort of political mistress;
exclusive possession is its only charm. The very existence of the
passion is identified with inextinguishable jealousy; nor can we
the better endure to share the bliss, because our rival has been
nursed in our own bosom.

Thus do I lay bare the very recesses of my soul. I have already
tried to ruin the Duke d'Uzeda with the king; but having failed,
am pointing my artillery towards another object. I am determined
that the Count de Lemos shall stand first with the Prince of
Spain. Being gentleman of his bedchamber, he has opportunities of
talking with him continually; and, besides that he has a winning
manner with him, I know a sure method of enabling him to succeed
in his enterprise. By this device, my nephew will be pitted
against my son. The cousins harbouring unfavourable suspicions of
each other, will both be forced to place themselves under my
protection; and the necessity of the case will render them
submissive to my will. This is my project; nor will your
assistance be of slender avail to its success. It is you whom I
shall make the private channel of communication between the Count
de Lemos and myself.

After this confidence, which sounded for all the world like the
clink of current coin, my mind was easy about the future. At
length, said I, behold me taking shelter under Plutus's gutter;
the golden shower may drench me to the skin, before I shall cry
hold, enough! It is impossible that the bosom friend of a man, by
whom the whole music of the political machine is tempered, should
be left to thrum upon the discord of poverty. Full of these
harmonious visions, my fifths and octaves were but little untuned
by the sensible declension of my purse.



CH. V. -- The joys, the honours, and the miseries of a court
life, in the person of Gil Blas.


THE minister's growing partiality towards me was soon noticed. He
displayed it ostentatiously, by committing his portfolio to my
custody, which it was his habit to carry in his own hand when he
went to council. This novelty causing me to be looked upon as a
rising favourite, excited the envy of certain persons, so that I
was preciously sprinkled with the hellish dew of court
malevolence. My two neighbours the secretaries were not the last
to compliment me on my budding honours, and invited me to supper
at the widow's, not so much by way of returning my hospitality,
as with an eye to business in the cultivation of my acquaintance.
Parties were made for me everywhere. Even the haughty Don Rodrigo
was cap-in-hand to me. He now called me nothing less than Signor
de Santillane, though the moon had scarcely changed her face
since he thee'd and thou'd me, without ever bethinking him that
he was talking to something above a pauper. He heaped me up and
pressed me down with civilities, especially within eyeshot of our
common patron. But the fool was wiser than to be caught with
chaff. The good breeding of my returns was nicely proportioned to
my thorough detestation of my humble servant: a rascal who had
lived in court all his life could not have played the rascal
better than I did.

I likewise accompanied my lord duke when he had an audience of
the king, which was usually three times a day. In the morning he
went into his majesty's chamber as soon as he was awake. There he
dropped down on his marrow bones by the bed-side, talked over
what was to be done in the course of the day, and put into the
royal mouth the speeches the royal tongue was to make. He then
withdrew. After dinner he came back again; not for state affairs,
but for what, what? and a little gossip. He was well instructed
in all the tittle-tattle of Madrid, which was sold to him at the
earliest of the season. Lastly, in the evening he saw the king
again for the third time, put whatever colour he pleased on the
transactions of the day, and, as a matter of course, requested
his instructions for the morrow. While he was with the king, I
kept in the ante-chamber, where people of the first quality,
sinking that they might rise, threw themselves in the way of my
observation, and thought the day not lost if I had deigned to 
exchange a few words of common civility with them. Was it to be
wondered at, if myself-importance fattened upon such food? There
are many folks at court, who stalk about on stilts of much
frailer materials.

One day my vanity was still more highly pampered. The king, to
whom the duke had puffed off my style, was curious to see a
sample of it. His excellency made me bring the register of
Catalonia and myself into the royal presence; telling me to read
the first memorial I had digested. If so catholic a critic
overpowered my modesty at first, the minister's encouragement
recalled my scattered spirits, and I read with good tone and
emphasis what his majesty deigned to hear with some symptoms of
approbation. He spoke handsomely of my performance, and
recommended my fortunes to the special care of his minister. My
humility was not the greater for the augmentation of my
consequence; and a particular conversation some days afterwards
with the Count de Lemos swelled high the spring tide of all my
ambitious anticipations.

I waited on that nobleman from his uncle at the Prince of Spain's
court, and presented credentials from the duke, directing him to
deal unreservedly with me, as with a man who was embarked in
their design and selected by himself exclusively as their go-
between. The count then took me to a room, where he locked the
door, and then spoke as follows: Since you are confidential with
the Duke of Lerma, I doubt not you deserve to be so, and shall
unbosom myself to you without hesitation. You are to know that
matters go on just as we could wish. The Prince of Spain
distinguishes me above the most assiduous of his courtiers. I had
a private conversation with him this morning, wherein he
expressed some disgust at being restrained by the king's avarice
from following the inclinations of his liberal heart, and living
on a scale befitting his august rank. On this head I chimed in
with his regrets; and taking advantage of the opportunity,
promised to carry him a thousand pistoles early to-morrow
morning, as an earnest of larger sums with which I have engaged
to feed his necessities forthwith. He was in ecstasy at my
promises; and I am certain of securing his grace and favour in
tail, if I can but fulfil my engagement Acquaint my uncle with
these particulars, and come back in the evening with his
sentiments on the subject.

I left the Count de Lemos with the last words still quivering on
his lips, and went back to the Duke of Lerma, who, on my report,
sent to ask Calderona for a thousand pistoles, which he charged
me to carry to the count in the evening. Away went I on my
errand, muttering to myself -- So, so! now I have discovered the
minister's infallible receipt for the cure of all evils. Faith
and troth, he is in the right; and to all appearance he may draw
as copiously as he pleases from the spring, without exhausting
the source. I can easily guess what bag those pistoles come from;
but after all, is it not the order of nature that the parent
should nurture and maintain the child! The Count de Lemos, at our
parting, said to me in a low voice -- Farewell, my good and
worthy friend. The Prince of Spain has a little hankering after
the women; we must have a little conversation on that subject one
of these days; I foresee that your agency will be very applicable
on that head. I returned with my head full of this last hint,
which it was impossible to misinterpret. Neither did I wish to do
so, for it suited my talents to a nicety. What the devil is to
happen next? said I. Behold me on the point of becoming pimp to
the heir of the monarchy. Whether pimping was a virtue or a vice,
I did not stop to inquire: the coarse surtout of morality would
have worn but shabbily while the passions of so exalted a gallant
were in the glare and glow of all their newest gloss. What a
promotion for me to be the provider of pleasure to a great
prince! Fair and softly, Master Gil Blas, some one may say: after
all, you will be but second minister. May be so; but at bottom
the honour of both these posts is equal; the difference lies in
the profit only.

While executing these honourable commissions, and getting forward
daily in the good graces of the prime minister, what a happy
being should I have been, if statesmen were born with a set of
intestines to turn the chameleon's diet into chyle! It was more
than two months since I had got rid of my grand lodging, and had
taken up my quarters in a little room scarcely good enough for a
banker's clerk. Though this was not quite as it should be, yet
since I went out betimes in the morning, and never returned at
night before bed-time, there was not much to quarrel about on
that score. All day I was the hero of my own stage, or rather of
the duke's. It was a principal part that I was playing. But when
I retired from this brilliant theatre to my own cockloft, the
great lord vanished, and poor Gil Blas was left behind, without a
royal image in his pocket, and what was worse, without the means
of conjuring up his glorious resemblance. Besides that it would
have wounded my pride to have divulged my necessities, there was
not a creature of my acquaintance who could have assisted me but
Navarro, and him I had too palpably neglected since my
introduction at court, to venture on soliciting his benevolence.
I had been obliged to sell my wardrobe article by article. There
was nothing more left than was absolutely necessary to make a
decent appearance. I no longer went to the ordinary, because I
had no longer wherewithal to pay my score. How then did I make
shift to keep body and soul together? There was every morning, in
our offices, a scanty breakfast set out, consisting of a little
bread and wine; this was the whole of our commons on the
minister's establishment. I never knew what it was to exceed this
stint during the day, and at night I most frequently went
supperless to bed.

Such was the fare of a man who made a splendid figure at court;
but his illustrious fortunes, like those of other courtiers, were
more a subject of pity than of grudge. I could no longer resist
the pressure of my circumstances, and ultimately resolved on
their disclosure at a seasonable opportunity. By good luck such
an occasion offered at the Escurial, whither the king and the
Prince of Spain removed some days afterwards.



CH. VI.  --  Gil Blas gives the Duke of Lerma a hint of his
wretched condition. That minister deals with him accordingly.


WHEN the king kept his court at the Escurial, all the world was
at free quarters: under such easy circumstances I did not feel
where the saddle galled. My bed was in a wardrobe near the duke's
chamber. One morning that minister, having got up according to
his cursed custom at daybreak, made me take my writing apparatus,
and follow him into the palace gardens. We went and sat down
under an avenue of trees; myself, as he would have it, in the
posture of a man writing on the crown of his hat; his attitude
was with a paper in his hand, and any one would have supposed he
had been reading. At some distance, we must have looked as if the
scale of Europe was to turn upon our decision; but between
ourselves, who partook of it, the talk was miserably trifling.

For more than an hour had I been tickling his excellency's fancy
with all the conceits, engendered by a merry nature and an
eccentric course of life, when two magpies perched on the trees
above us. Their clack and clatter was so obstreperous, as to
force our attention whether we would or no. These birds, said the
duke, seem to be in dudgeon with one another. I should like to
learn the cause of their quarrel. My lord, said I, your curiosity
reminds me of an Indian story in Pilpay or some other fabulist.
The minister insisted on the particulars, and I related them in
the following terms:

There reigned in Persia a good monarch, who not being blessed
with capacities of sufficient compass to govern his dominions in
his own person, left the care of them to his grand vizier. That
minister, whose name was Atalmuc, was possessed of first-rate
talents. He supported the weight of that unwieldy monarchy,
without sinking under the burden. He preserved it in profound
peace. His art consisted in uniting the love of the royal
authority with the reverence of it; while the people at large
looked up to the vizier as to an affectionate father, though a
devoted servant of his prince. Atalmuc had a young Cachemirian 
among his secretaries, by name Zeangir, to whom he was
particularly attached. He took pleasure in his conversation,
invited him frequently to the chase, and opened to him his most
secret thoughts. One day as they were hunting together in a wood,
the vizier, at the croaking of two ravens on a tree, said to his
secretary -- I should like to know what those birds are talking
about in their jargon. My lord, answered the Cachemirian, your
wishes may be fulfilled. Indeed! How so? replied Atalmuc. 
Because, rejoined Zeangir, a dervise read in many mysteries, has
taught me the language of birds. If you wish it, I will lay my
ear close to these, and will repeat to you word for word whatever
they may happen to say.

The vizier agreed to the proposal. The Cachemirian got near the
ravens, and affected to suck in their discourse. Then, returning
to his master, My lord, said he, would you believe it? We are
ourselves the topic of their talk. Impossible! exclaimed the
Persian minister. Prithee now, what do they say of us? One of the
two, replied the secretary, spoke thus: Here he is, the very man;
the grand vizier Atalmuc, the guardian eagle of Persia, hovering
over her like the parent bird over its nest, watching without
intermission for the safety of its brood. For the purpose of
unbending from his wearisome toils, he is hunting in this wood
with his faithful Zeangir. How happy must that secretary be, to
serve so partial and indulgent a master! Fair and softly,
observed the other raven shrewdly, fair and softly! Make not too
much parade about that Cachemirian's happiness. Atalmuc, it is
true, talks and jokes familiarly with him, honours him with his
confidence, and may very possibly intend to signalize his
friendship by a lucrative post; but between the cup and the lip
Zeangir may perish with thirst. The poor devil lodges in a ready-
furnished apartment, where there is not an article of furniture
for his use. In a word, he leads a starving life, with all the
paraphernalia of a plump-fed courtier. The grand vizier never
troubles his head about inquiring into the right or wrong of his
affairs; but satisfied with empty good wishes towards him, leaves
his favourite within the ruthless gripe of poverty.

I stopped here, to see how the Duke of Lerma would take it; and
he asked me with a smile what effect the fable had produced on
the mind of Atalmuc; and whether the grand vizier had not felt a
little offended at the secretary's presumption. No, my noble
lord, answered I, with some little embarrassment at the question;
historians say that his ingenuity was amply rewarded. He was more
lucky than discreet, replied the duke with a serious air; there
are some ministers who would esteem it no joke to be lectured at
that rate. But the king will not be long before he is getting up;
my duty demands my attendance. After this hint he walked off with
hasty strides towards the palace without throwing away a word
more upon me, and to all appearance in high dudgeon at my Indian
parable.

I followed him up to the very door of his majesty's chamber, and
went thence to arrange my papers in the places whence they had
been taken. Then I entered a closet where our two copying
secretaries were at work; for they also were of the migratory
party. What is the matter with you, Signor de Santillane? said
they at the sight of me. You are quite down in the mouth! Has
anything untoward happened?

I was too much mortified at the ill success of my narrative, to
be cautious in the expression of my grief. On the recital of what
had passed with the duke, they sympathized in my disappointment
You have some reason to fret, said one of them. Heaven grant you
may be better treated than a secretary of Cardinal Spinosa. This
unlucky secretary, tired of working for fifteen months without
pay, took the liberty of representing his necessities to his
Eminence one afternoon, and of asking for a little money towards
his subsistence. It is very proper, said the minister, that you
should be paid. Here, pursued he, putting into his hands an order
on the royal treasury for a thousand ducats; go and receive that
sum; but take notice at the same time that it balances accounts
between us. The secretary would have pocketed his thousand ducats
without remorse, had the thousand ducats been tangible, and the
liberty of changing services secure; but just as he stepped down
from the cardinal's threshold, he was tapped on the shoulder by
an alguazil, and carried away to the tower of Segovia, where he
has been a prisoner for a length of lime.

This little historical anecdote set my teeth chattering. All was
lost and gone! There was no comfort from within nor from without!
My own impatience had been my ruin! just as if I had not borne
starving, till patience could avail no longer. Alas! said I,
wherefore must I have blurted out that ill-starred fable, which
went so much against the grain of the minister? He might have
been just on the point of extricating me from all my miseries; it
might have been the moment of that tide in the affairs of men,
which sets in for sudden and enormous elevation. What wealth,
what honours have slipped through the fingers by my blunder! I
ought to have been aware that great folks do not love to be
forestalled, but require the common privileges of elementary
subsistence to be received as favours at their hands. It would
have been more prudent to have kept my lenten entertainment
longer without bothering the duke about it, and even to have died
with hunger, that he might be blamed for letting me.

Supposing any hope to have remained, my master, when I saw him
after dinner, put an extinguisher over it at once. He was very
serious with me, contrary to his usual custom, and spoke scarcely
at all; an omen of dire dismay for the remainder of the evening.
The night did not pass more tranquilly: the chagrin of seeing my
agreeable illusions vanish, and the fear of swelling the calendar
of state prisoners, left no room but for sighs and lamentations.

The following was the critical day. The duke sent for me in the
morning. I went into his chamber, with the ague fit of a criminal
before his judge. Santillane, said he, showing me a paper in his
hand, take this order . . . . I shuddered at the word order, and
said within myself: Oh heaven! here is the Cardinal Spinosa over
again; the carriage is ordered out for Segovia. Such was my alarm
at this moment, that I interrupted the minister, and throwing
myself at his feet, May it please your lordship, said I, bathed
in tears, I most humbly beseech your excellency to forgive me for
my boldness; necessity alone impelled me to acquaint you with my
wretched circumstances.

The duke could not help laughing at my distress. Be comforted,
Gil Blas, answered he, and hearken attentively. Though by
betraying your necessities a reproach lights upon me for not
having prevented them, I do not take it ill, my friend. I rather
ought to be angry with myself for not having inquired how you
were going on. But to begin making amends for my want of
attention, there is an order on the royal treasury for fifteen
hundred ducats, payable at sight. This is not all; I promise you
the same sum annually; and moreover, when people of rank and
substance shall solicit your interest, I have no objection to
your addressing me on their behalf.

In the excess of joy occasioned by such tidings, I kissed the
feet of the minister, who, having commanded me to rise, continued
in familiar conversation. I endeavoured to rally my free and easy
humour; but the transition from sorrow to rapture was too
instantaneous to be natural. I felt as comical as a culprit, with
a pardon singing in his ears, just when he was on the point of
being launched into eternity. My master attributed all my flurry
to the sole dread of having offended him; though the fear of
perpetual imprisonment had its share of influence on my nerves.
He owned that he had affected to look cool, to see whether I
should be hurt at the alteration; that thereby he formed his
opinion with respect to the liveliness of my attachment to his
person, and that his own regard for me would always be
proportionate.



CH. VII.  -- A good use made of the fifteen hundred ducats. A
first introduction to the trade of office, and an account of the
profit accruing therefrom.


THE king, as if on purpose to play into the hands of my
impatience, returned to Madrid the very next day. I flew like a
harpy to the royal treasury, where they paid me down upon the
nail the sum drawn for in my order. Ambition and vanity now
obtained complete empire over my soul. My paltry lodging was fit
only for secretaries of an inferior cast, unpractised in the
mysterious language of birds; for which reason, my grand suite of
apartments fortunately being vacant, I engaged them for the
second time. My next business was to send for an eminent tailor,
who arrayed the pretty persons of all the fine gentlemen in town.
He took my measure, and then introduced me to a draper, who sold
me five ells of cloth, the exact quantity, as he said, to make a
suit for a man of my size. Five ells for a light Spanish dress!
Whither did this draper and tailor expect to go? . . . . But we
must not be uncharitable. Tailors who have a reputation to
support require more materials for the exercise of their genius
than the vulgar snippers of the shopboard. I then bought some
linen, of which I was very bare; an assortment of silk stockings,
and a laced hat.

With such an equipage, there was no doing without a footman; so
that I desired Vincent Ferrero, my landlord, to look out for one.
Most of the foreigners who were recommended to his lodgings, on
their arrival at Madrid, were wont to hire Spanish servants; and
this was the means of turning his house into a register office.
The first who offered was a lad of so mortified and devotional an
aspect, that I would have nothing to say to him; he put me in
mind of Ambrose de Lamela. I am quite out of conceit, said I to
Ferrero, with these pious coat-brushers; I have been taken in by
them already.

I had scarcely turned virtue in a livery out of doors, when
another came upstairs. This seemed to be a good sprightly fellow,
with as little mock modesty as if he had been bred at court, and
a certain something about him which indicated that he did not
carry principle to any dangerous excess. He was just to my mind.
His answers to my questions were pat and to the purpose: he
evinced a talent for intrigue beyond my most sanguine hopes. This
was exactly the subject for my purpose; so I fixed him at once.
Neither had I any reason to repent of my bargain; for it was very
soon evident that further off I must have fared worse. As the
duke had allowed me to solicit on behalf of my friends, and it
was my design to push that permission to the utmost, a staunch
hound was necessary to put up the game; or in phrase familiar to
dull capacities, an active chap, with a turn for routing out and
bringing to my market all palm-tickling petitioners for the
loaves and fishes of the prime minister. This was just where
Scipio shone most; for my servant's name was Scipio. He had lived
last with Donna Anna de Guevara, the Prince of Spain's nurse,
where he had ample scope for the exercise of that accomplishment.

As soon as he became acquainted with my credit at court and the
use to which I meant to put it, he took the field like his great
ancestors, and began the campaign without the loss of a day.
Master, said he, a young gentleman of Grenada is just come to
Madrid; his name is Don Roger de Rada. He has been engaged in an
affair of honour which compels him to throw himself on the Duke
of Lerma's protection, and he is well disposed to come down
handsomely for any grace and favour he may obtain. I have talked
with him on the subject. He had a mind to have made friends with
Don Rodrigo de Calderona, whose influence had been represented to
him in magnificent terms: but I dissuaded him, by pointing out
that secretary's method of selling his good offices for more than
their weight in gold; whereas, on the contrary, you would be
satisfied with any decent expression of gratitude for yours, and
would even do the business for the mere pleasure of doing it, if
you were in circumstances to follow the bent of your own generous
and disinterested temper. In short, I talked to him in such a
strain, that you will see the gentleman early to-morrow morning.
How is all this, Master Scipio? said I. You must have transacted
a great deal of business in a short time. You are no novice in
back-stairs influence. It is very strange that you have not
feathered your own nest. That ought not to surprise you at all,
answered he. I love to make money circulate; not to hoard it up.

Don Roger de Rada came according to his appointment. I received
him with a mixture of courtly plausibility and ministerial pride.
My worthy sir, said I, before I engage in your interests, I wish
to know the nature of the affair which brings you to court;
because it may be such as to preclude me from speaking to the
minister in your favour. Give me, therefore, if you please, the
particulars faithfully, and rest assured that I shall enter
warmly into your interests, if they are proper to be espoused by
a man who moves in my sphere. My young client promised to be
sincere in his representation, and began his narrative in the
following words.



CH. VIII. -- History of Don Roger de Rada.


DON ANASTASIO DE RADA, a gentleman of Grenada, was living happily
in the town of Antequera, with Donna Estephania his wife, who
united every charm of person and mind with the most
unquestionable virtue. If her affection was lively towards her
husband, his love for her was violent beyond all bounds. He was
naturally prone to jealousy; and though wantonness could never
assume such a semblance as his wife's, his thoughts were not
quite at rest upon the subject. He was apprehensive lest some
secret enemy to his repose might make some attempt upon his
honour. His eye was turned askance upon all his friends, except
Don Huberto de Hordales, who frequented the house without
suspicion in quality of Estephania's cousin, and was the only man
in whom he ought not to have confided.

Don Huberto did actually fall in love with his cousin, and
ventured to make his sentiments known, in contempt of
consanguinity and the ties of friendship. The lady, who was
considerate, instead of making an outcry which might have led to
fatal consequences, reproved her kinsman gently, represented to
him the extreme criminality of attempting to seduce her and
dishonour her husband, and told him very seriously that he must
not flatter himself with the most distant hope.

This moderation only inflamed the seducer's appetite the more.
Taking it for granted that, as a woman who had been accustomed to
save appearances, she only wanted to be more strongly urged, he
began to adopt little freedoms of more warmth than delicacy; and
had the assurance one day to put the question home to her. She
repulsed him with unbridled indignation, and threatened to refer
the punishment of his offence to Don Anastasio. Her suitor,
alarmed at such an intimation, promised to drop the subject; and
Estephania in the candour of her soul forgave him for the past.

Don Huberto, a man totally devoid of principle, could not feel
his passion to be foiled, without entertaining a mean spirit of
revenge. He knew the weak side of Don Anastasio's temper. This
was enough to engender the blackest design that ever scoundrel
plotted. One evening as he was walking alone with this misguided
husband, he said with an air of extreme uneasiness: My dear
friend, I can no longer live without unburdening my mind; and yet
I would be for ever silent, but that you value honour far above a
treacherous repose. Your acute feelings and my own, on points
which concern domestic injuries, forbid me to conceal what is
passing in your family. Prepare to hear what will occasion you as
much grief as astonishment. I am going to wound you in the
tenderest part.

I know what you mean, interrupted Don Anastasio, in the first
bunt of agony; your cousin is unfaithful. I no longer acknowledge
her for my cousin, replied Hordales with impassioned vehemence; I
disown her, as unworthy to share my friend's embraces. This is
keeping me too long upon the rack, exclaimed Don Anastasio: say
on, what has Estephania done? She has betrayed you, replied Don
Huberto. You have a rival to whom she listens in private, but I
cannot give you his name; for the adulterer, under favour of
impenetrable darkness, has escaped the ken of those who watched
him. All I know is, that you are duped: of that fact I am well
assured. My own share in the disgrace is a sufficient pledge of
my veracity. Her infidelity must be palpable indeed, when I turn
Estephania's accuser.

It is to no purpose, continued he, watching the successful
impression of his discourse, it is to no purpose to discuss the
subject further. I perceive your indignation at the treacherous
requital of your love, and your thoughts all aiming at a just
revenge. Take your own course. Heed not in what relation to you
your victim may stand: but convince the whole city that there is
no earthly being whom you would not sacrifice to your honour.

Thus did the traitor exasperate a too credulous husband against
an innocent wife; depicting in such glowing colours the infamy in
which he would be plunged if he left the insult unpunished, as to
heighten his anger into madness. Behold Don Anastasio, with his
mind completely overturned; as if goaded by the furies. He
returned homewards with the frantic design of murdering his ill-
fated wife. She was just going to bed when he came in. He kept
his passion under for a time, and waited till the attendants had
withdrawn. Then, unrestrained by the fear of vengeance from
above, by the vulgar scorn which must recoil upon an honourable
family, by natural affection for his unborn child, since his wife
was near her time, he approached his victim, and said to her in a
furious tone of voice: Now is your hour to die, wretch as you
are! One moment only is your own, which my relenting pity leaves
you to make your peace with heaven. I would not that your soul
should perish eternally, though your earthly honour is for ever
lost.

At these words he drew his dagger. Estephania, just speechless
with terror, throwing herself at his feet, besought him with
uplifted hands and inarticulate agony, to tell her why he raised
his arm against her life. If he suspected her fidelity, she
called heaven to attest her innocence.

In vain, in vain, replied the infuriated murderer; your treason
is but too well proved. My information is not to be contradicted:
Don Huberto . . . . Ah! my lord, interrupted she with eager
haste, you must hold your trust aloof from Don Huberto. He is
less your friend than you imagine. If he has said aught against
my virtue, believe him not. Restrain that infamous tongue,
replied Don Anastasio. By appealing against Hordales, you condemn
yourself. You would ruin your relation in my esteem, because he
is acquainted with your misconduct. You would invalidate his
evidence against you; but the artifice is palpable, and only
whets my appetite for vengeance. My dear husband, rejoined the
innocent Estephania, while her tears flowed in torrents, beware
of this blind rage. If you follow its instigation, you will
perpetrate a deed for which you will hate yourself, when
convinced of its injustice. In the name of heaven, compose your
disordered spirits. At least give me time to clear up your 
suspicions; you will then deal candidly by a wife who has nothing
to reproach herself with.

Any other than Don Anastasio would have been touched by her
pleadings, and still more by her agonizing affliction; but the
barbarian, far from being softened, ordered the lady once again
to recommend herself briefly to mercy, and lifted his arm to
strike the blow. Hold, inhuman as you are! cried she. If your
love for me is as if it had never been, if my lavish fondness in
return is all blotted from your memory, if my tears have no
eloquence to disarm your hellish purpose, have some pity on your
own blood. Launch not your frantic hand against an innocent, who
has not yet breathed this vital air. You cannot be its
executioner without the curse of heaven and earth. As for myself,
I can forgive my murderer; but the butcher of his own child,
think deeply of it, must pay the dreadful forfeit of so
detestable a deed.

Determined as Don Anastasio was to pay no attention to anything
Estephania could say, he could not help being affected by the
frightful images these last words presented to his soul.
Wherefore, as if apprehensive lest nature should play the
traitress to revenge, he hastened to make sure of his staggering
resolves, and plunged his dagger into her bosom. She fell
motionless on the ground. He thought her dead; and on that
supposition left his house immediately to be no more seen at
Antequera.

In the mean time, the unhappy victim of groundless suspicion was
so stunned with the blow she had received, as to remain for a
short interval on the ground without any signs of life.
Afterwards, coming to herself, she brought an old female servant
to her assistance by her plaints and lamentations. That good old
woman, beholding her mistress in so deplorable a state, waked the
whole household and even the neighbourhood by her cries. The room
was soon filled with spectators. Surgical assistance was sent
for. The wound was probed, and pronounced not to be mortal. Their
opinion turned out to be correct; for Estephania soon recovered,
and was in due time delivered of a son, not withstanding the
cruel circumstances in which she had been placed. That son,
Signor Gil Blas, you behold in me: I am the fruit of that
dreadful pregnancy.

Women, when chaste as ice, when pure as snow, seldom escape
calumny: this plague, however, though virtue's dowry, did not
alight upon my mother. The bloody scene passed in common fame for
the transport of a jealous husband. My father, it is true, bore
the character of a passionate man, prone to kindle into fury on
the slightest occasion. Hordales could not but suppose that his
kinswoman must suspect him of having sown wild fancies in the
mind of Don Anastasio; so that he satisfied himself with this
imperfect relish of revenge, and ceased to importune her. But,
not to be tedious, I shall pass over the detail of my education.
Suffice it to say, that my principal exercise was fencing, which
I practised regularly in the most famous schools of Grenada and
Seville. My mother waited with impatience till I was of age to
measure swords with Don Huberto, that she might instruct me in
the grounds of her complaint against him. In my eighteenth year
she submitted her cause to my arbitrement, not without floods of
tears, and every symptom of the deepest anguish. What must not a
son feel, if he has the spirit and the heart of a son, at the
sight of a mother in such distressing circumstances? I went
immediately and called out Hordales; our place of meeting was
private as it should be; we fought long and furiously; three of
my thrusts took place, and I threw him to the ground, like a dead
dog despised.

Don Huberto, feeling his wound to be mortal, fixed his last looks
upon me, and declared that he met his death at my hands as a just
punishment for his treason against my mother's honour. He owned
that in revenge for the pangs of despised love he had resolved on
her ruin. Thus did he breathe his last, imploring pardon from
heaven, from Don Anastasio, from Estephania, and from myself. I
deemed it imprudent to return home and acquaint my mother of the
issue; fame was sure to perform that office for me I passed the
mountains, and repaired to Malaga, where I embarked on board a
privateer. My outside not altogether indicating cowardice, the
captain consented at once to enrol me among his crew.

We were not long before we went into action. Near the island of
Alboutan, a corsair of Millila fell in with us, on his return
towards the African coast with a Spanish vessel richly laden,
taken off Carthagena. We attacked the African briskly, and made
ourselves masters of both ships, with eighty Christians on board,
going as slaves to Barbary. Afterwards, availing ourselves of a
wind direct for the coast of Grenada, we shortly arrived at Punta
de Helena.

While we were inquiring into the birth-place and condition of our
rescued captives, a man about fifty, of prepossessing aspect,
fell under my examination. He stated himself, with a sigh, to
belong to Antequera. My heart palpitated, without my knowing why;
and my emotion, too strong to pass unnoticed, excited a visible
sympathy in him. I avowed myself his townsman, and asked his
family name. Alas! answered he, your curiosity makes my sorrow
flow afresh. Eighteen years ago did I leave my home, where my
remembrance is coupled with scenes of blood and horror. You must
yourself have heard but too much of my story. My name is Don 
Anastasio de Rada. Merciful heaven! exclaimed I, may I believe my
senses? And can this be Don Anastasio? Father! What is it you
say, young man? exclaimed he in his turn, with surprise and
agitation equal to my own. Are you that ill-fated infant, still
in its mother's womb, when I sacrificed her to my fury? Yes, said
I; none other did the virtuous Estephania bring into the world,
after the fatal night when you left her weltering in her own
blood.

Don Anastasio stifled my words in his embraces. For a quarter of
an hour we could only mingle our inarticulate sighs and
exclamations. After exhausting our tender recollections, and
indulging in the wild expression of our feelings, my father
lifted his eyes to heaven, in gratitude for Estephania saved; but
the next moment, as if doubtful of his bliss, he demanded by what
evidence his wife's innocence had been cleared. Sir, answered I,
none but yourself ever doubted it. Her conduct has been uniformly
spotless. You must be undeceived. Know that Don Huberto was a
traitor. In proof of this I unfolded all his perfidy, the
vengeance I had taken, and his own confession before he expired.

My father was less delighted at his liberty restored than at
these happy tidings. In the forgetfulness of ecstacy, he repeated
all his former transports. His approbation of me was ardent and
entire. Come, my son, said he, let us set out for Antequera. I
burn with impatience to throw myself at the feet of a wife whom I
have treated so unworthily. Since you have brought me acquainted
with my own injustice, my heart has been torn by remorse.

I was too eager to bring together a couple so near and dear to
me, not to expedite our journey as much as possible. I quitted
the privateer, and with my share of prize-money bought two mules
at Adra, my father not choosing again to incur the hazard of a
voyage. He found leisure on the road to relate his adventures,
which I inclined to hear as seriously as did the Prince of Ithaca
the various recitals of the king his father. At length, after
several days, we halted at the foot of a mountain near Antequera.
Wishing to reach home privately, we went not into the town till
midnight.

You may guess my mother's astonishment at beholding a husband
whom she had thought for ever lost; and the almost miraculous
circumstances of his restoration were a second source of wonder.
He entreated forgiveness for his barbarity with marks of
repentance so lively, that she could not but be moved. Instead of
looking on him as a murderer, she only saw the man to whose will
high heaven had subjected her; such religion is there in the name
of husband to a virtuous wife! Estephania had been so alarmed
about me, that my return filled her with rapture. But her joy on
this account was not without alleviation. A sister of Hordales
had instituted a criminal prosecution against her brother's
antagonist. The search for me was hot, so that my mother,
considering home as insecure, was painfully anxious about me. It
was therefore necessary to set out that very night for court,
whither I come to solicit my pardon, and hope to obtain it by
your generous intercession with the prime minister.

The gallant son of Don Anastasio thus closed his narrative; after
which I observed, with a self-sufficient physiognomy: It is well,
Signor Don Roger; the offence seems to me to be venial. I will
undertake to lay the case before his excellency, and may venture
to promise you his protection. The thanks my client lavished
would have passed in at one ear and out at the other, if they had
not been backed by assurances of more substantial gratitude. But
when once that string was touched, every nerve and fibre of my
frame vibrated in unison. On the very same day did I relate the
whole story to the duke, who allowed me to present the gentleman,
and addressed him thus: Don Roger, I have been informed of the
duel which has brought you to court; Santillane has laid all the
particulars before me. Make yourself perfectly easy: you have
done nothing but what the circumstances of the case might almost
warrant; and it is especially on the ground of wounded honour,
that his Majesty is best pleased to extend his grace and favour.
You must be committed for mere form's sake; but you may depend on
it, your confinement shall be of short duration. In Santillane
you have a zealous friend, who will watch over your interests,
and hasten your release.

Don Roger paid his respectful acknowledgments to the minister, on
whose pledge he went and surrendered himself His pardon was soon
made out, owing to my activity. In less than ten days, I sent
this modern Telemachus home, to say "how do you do?" to his
Ulysses and Penelope; had he stood upon the merits of his case
without a protector, he might have whined out a year's
imprisonment, and scarcely have got off at last. My commission
was but a poor hundred pistoles. It was no very magnificent haul;
but I was not as yet a Calderona, to turn up my nose at the small
fry.



CH. IX. -- Gil Blas makes a large fortune in a short time, and
behaves like other wealthy upstarts.


THIS affair gave me a relish for my trade; and ten pistoles to
Scipio by way of brokerage, whetted his eagerness to start more
game of the same sort. I have already done justice to his talents
that way; he might as modestly have appended "the great" to the
tail of his name, as the most noted scoundrel of antiquity. The
second customer he brought me was a printer, who manufactured
books of chivalry, and had made his fortune by waging war against
common sense. This printer had pirated a work belonging to a
brother printer, and his edition had been seized. For three
hundred ducats I rescued his copies out of jeopardy, and saved
him from a heavy fine. Though this was a transaction beneath the
prime minister's notice, his excellency condescended at my
request to interpose his authority. After the printer, a merchant
passed through my hands; the occasion was thus: A Portuguese
vessel had been taken by a Barbary corsair, and re-taken by a
privateer from Cadiz. Two-thirds of the cargo belonged to a
merchant at Lisbon, who, having claimed his due to no purpose,
came to the court of Spain in search of a protector, with
sufficient credit to procure him restitution. I took up his
cause, and he recovered his property, deducting the sum of four
hundred pistoles, paid to me in consideration of my disinterested
zeal for justice.

And now most surely the reader will call out to me at this place:
Well said, good master Santillane! Make hay while the sun shines.
You are on the high road to fortune; push forward, and outstrip
your rivals. Oh! let me alone for that. I spy, or my eyes deceive
me, my servant coming in with a new gull that he has just caught.
Even so! It is my very Scipio. Let us hear what he has to say.
Sir, quoth he, give me leave to introduce this eminent
practitioner. He wants a licence to sell his drugs during the
term of ten years in all the towns of the Spanish monarchy, to
the exclusion of all other quacks; in short, a monopoly of
poisons. In gratitude for this patent to thin mankind, he will
present the donor with a gratuity of two hundred pistoles. I
looked superciliously, like a patron, at the mountebank, and told
him that his business should be done. As lameness and leprosy
would have it, in the course of a few days I sent him on his
progress through Spain, invested with full powers to make the
world his oyster, and leave nothing but the shell to his
unpatented competitors.

Besides that my avarice outran my accumulating wealth, I had
obtained the four boons just specified so easily from his grace,
as not to be mealy mouthed about asking for a fifth. The town of
Vera, on the coast of Grenada, wanted a governor; and a knight of
Calatrava wanted the government, for which he was willing to pay
me one thousand pistoles. The minister was ready to burst with
laughing, to see me so eager after the scut. By all the powers!
my friend Gil Blas, said he, you go to work tooth and nail! You
have a most inveterate itch to do as you would be done by. But
mark me! When mere trifles stand between us, I shall not stand
upon trifles; but when governments or other places of real value
are in question, you will have the modesty to be content with
half the fee for yourself and will account to me for the other
half. It is inconceivable at what expense I stand, and how it
presses on my finances to support the dignity of my station; for
though disinterestedness looks vastly well in the eyes of the
world, you are to understand between ourselves that I have made a
solemn vow against dipping into my private fortune. On this hint,
arrange your future plans.

My master, by this discourse, relieving me from the fear of being
troublesome, or rather egging me on to run at the ring for every
prize, made me still more worldly-minded than ever I had been
before. I should not have objected to circulating hand-bills,
with an invitation to all candidates for places to apply on
certain terms at the secretary's office. My functions were here,
Scipio's were there; and we met at the receipt of custom. My
client got the government of Vera for his thousand pistoles; and
as our price was fixed, a knight of St James met his brother of
Calatrava in the market on an equal footing. But mere governors
were paltry fish to fry; I distributed orders of knighthood, and
converted some good stupid burgesses into most insufferable
gentry by one stroke of the pen, and a lacing across the
shoulders with a broad-sword. The clergy, too, were not forgotten
in my charities. Lesser preferments were in my gift; everything
up to prebendal stalls and collegiate dignities. With regard to
bishoprics and archbishoprics, Don Rodrigo de Calderona had the
charge of our holy religion. As church and state must always go
together, supreme magistracies, commanderies, and viceroyalties
were all in his gift; whence the reader will naturally infer,
that the upper offices were little better tenanted than the lower
ones; since the subjects on whom our election fell, establishing
their pretensions on a certain palpable criterion, were not
necessarily and unavoidably either the cleverest or the best-
principled people in the world. We knew very well that the wits
and lampooners of Madrid made themselves merry at our expense;
but we borrowed our philosophy from misers, who hug themselves
under the hootings of the people, when they count over the
accumulation of their pelf.

Isocrates was in the right to insinuate, in his elegant Greek
expression, that what is got over the devil's back is spent under
his belly. When I saw myself master of thirty thousand ducats,
and in a fair way to gain perhaps ten times as much, it seemed to
be a necessary of office to make such a figure as became the
right hand of a prime minister. I took a house to myself, and
furnished it in the immediate taste. I bought an attorney's
carriage at second hand: he had set it up at the suggestion of
vanity, and laid it down at the suggestion of his banker. I hired
a coachman and three footmen. Justice demands that old and
faithful servants should be promoted; I therefore invested Scipio
with the threefold honour of valet-de-chambre, private secretary,
and steward. But the minister raised my pride to its highest
pitch, for he was pleased to allow my people to wear his livery.
My poor little wits were now completely turned. I was little more
in my senses than the disciples of Porcius Latro, who, by dint of
drinking cummin, having made themselves as pale as their master,
thought themselves every whit as learned; so I could scarcely
refrain from fancying myself next of kin and presumptive heir to
the Duke of Lerma himself. The populace might take me for his
cousin, and people who knew better, for one of his bastards; a
suspicion most flattering to my pride of blood.

Add to this, that after the example of his excellency, who kept a
public table, I determined to give parties of my own. Pursuant
thereunto, I commissioned Scipio to find me out a professed cook,
and he stumbled upon one who might have dished up a dinner for
Nomentanus, of dripping-pan notoriety. My cellar was well stored
with the choicest wines. My establishment being now complete, I
gave my house-warming. Every evening some of the clerks in the
public offices came to sup with me, and affected a sort of
political high life be low-stairs. I did the honours hospitably,
and always sent them home half seas over. Like master like man!
Scipio, too, had his parties in the servants' hall, where he
treated all his chums at my expense. But besides that I felt a
real kindness for that lad, he contributed to grease the wheels
of my establishment, and was entitled to have a finger in the
dissipation. As a young man, some little licence was allowable;
and the ruinous consequences did not strike me at the time.
Another reason, too, prevented me from taking notice of it;
incessant vacancies, ecclesiastical and secular, paid me amply in
meal and in malt. My surplus was increasing every day. Fortune's
curricle seemed to have driven to my door, there to have broken
down, and the driver to have taken shelter with me.

One thing more was wanting to my complete intoxication, that
Fabricio might be witness to my pomp. He was most probably come
back from Andalusia. For the fun of surprising him, I sent an
anonymous note, importing that a Sicilian nobleman of his
acquaintance would be glad of his company to supper, with the
day, hour, and place of appointment, which was at my house. Nunez
came, and was most inordinately astonished to recognize me in the
Sicilian nobleman. Yes, my friend, said I, behold the master of
this family. I have a retinue, a good table, and a strong box
besides. Is it possible, exclaimed he with vivacity, that all
this opulence should be yours? It was well done in me to have
placed you with Count Galiano. I told you beforehand that he was
a generous nobleman, and would not be long before he set you at
your ease. Of course you followed my wise advice, in giving the
rein a little more freely to your servants; you find the benefit
of it. It is only by a little mutual accommodation, that the
principal officers in great houses feather their nests so
comfortably.

I suffered Fabricio to go on as long as he liked, complimenting
himself for having introduced me to Count Galiano. When he had
done, to chastise his ecstasies at having procured me so good a
post, I stated at full length the returns of gratitude with which
that nobleman had recompensed my services. But, perceiving how
ready my poet was to string his lyre to satire at my recital, I
said to him -- The Sicilian's contemptible conduct I readily
forgive. Between ourselves, it is more a subject of
congratulation than of regret. If the count had dealt honourably
by me, I should have followed him into Sicily, where I should
still be in a subordinate capacity, waiting for dead men's shoes.
In a word, I should not now have been hand in glove with the Duke
of Lerma.

Nunez felt so strange a sensation at these last words, that he
was tongue-tied for some seconds. Then gulping. up his stammering
accents like harlequin, Did I hear aright? said he. What! you
hand in glove with the prime minister. I on one side, and Don
Rodrigo de Calderona on the other, answered I; and according to
all appearance, my fortunes will move higher. Truly, replied he,
this is admirable. You are cut out for every occasion. What an
universal genius! To borrow an expression from the tennis-court,
you have a racket for every ball; nothing comes amiss to you. At
all events, my lord, I am sincerely rejoiced at your lordship's
prosperity. The deuce and all, Master Nunez! interrupted I; good
now, dispense with your lords and lordships. Let us banish such
formalities, and live on equal terms together. You are in the
right, replied he; altered circumstances should not make strange
faces. I will own my weakness; when you announced your elevation
you took away my breath; but the chill and the shudder are over,
and I see only my old friend Gil Blas.

Our conversation was interrupted by the arrival of four or five
clerks. Gentlemen, said I, introducing Nunez, you are to sup with
Signor Don Fabricio, who writes verses of impenetrable sublimity,
and such prose as would not know itself in the glass. Unluckily I
was talking to gentry who would have had more fellow-feeling with
an Oran Outang than with a poet They scarcely condescended to
look at him. In vain did he pun, parody, rally, or rail to hit
their fancies, for they had none. He was so nettled at their
indifference, that he assumed the poetic licence, and made his
escape. Our clerks never missed him, but forgot at once that he
had been there.

Just as I was going out the next morning, the poet of the
Asturias came into my room. I beg pardon, said he, for having cut
your clerks so abruptly last night; but, to deal freely, I was so
much out of my element, that I should soon have played old chaos
with them. Proud puppies, with their starch and self-important
air! I cannot conceive how a clever fellow like you can sit it
out with such loutish guests. To-day I will bring you some of
more life and spirit. I shall be very much obliged to you,
answered I; your introduction is sufficient. Exactly so, replied
he. You shall have the feast of reason and the flow of soul. I
will go forthwith and invite them, for fear they should engage
themselves elsewhere; for happy man be his dole who can get them
to dinner or supper; they are such excellent company!

Away went he; and in the evening, at supper-time, returned with
six authors in his train, whom he presented one after another
with a set speech in their praise. According to his account, the
wits of Greece and Italy were nothing in comparison of these,
whose works ought to be printed in letters of gold. I received
this deputation from the tuneful sisters very politely. My
behaviour was even in the extravagance of good breeding; for the
republic of authors is a little monarchical in its demands upon
our flattery. Though I had given Scipio no express direction
respecting the number of covers at this entertainment, yet
knowing what a hungry and voluptnous race were to be crammed, he
had mustered the courses in more than their full complement.

At length supper was announced, and we fell to merrily. My poets
began talking of their poems and themselves. One fellow, with the
most lyrical assurance, numbered up whole hosts of first-rate
nobility and high-flying dames, who were quite enraptured with
his muse. Another, though it was not for him to arraign the
choice which a learned society had lately made of two new
members, could not help saying that it was strange they should
not have elected him. All the rest were much in the same story.
Amid the clatter of knives and forks, my ears were more
discordantly dinned with verses and harangues. They each took it
by turns to give me a specimen of their composition. One
languishes out a sonnet; another mouths a scene in a tragedy; and
a third reads a melancholy criticism on the province of comedy.
The next in turn spouts an ode of Anacreon, translated into most
un-anacreontic Spanish verse. One of his brethren interrupts him,
to point out the unclassical use of a particular phrase. The
author of the version by no means acquiesces in the remark; hence
arises an argument, in which all the literati take one side or
the other. Opinions are nearly balanced; the disputants are
nearly in a passion; as argument weakens, invective grows
stronger; they get from bad to worse; over goes the table, and up
jump they to fisty-cuffs. Fabricio, Scipio, my coachman, my
footman, and myself, have scarcely lungs or strength to bring
them to their senses. The moment the battle was over, off
scampered they as if my house had been a tavern, without the
slightest apology for their ill behaviour.

Nunez, on whose word I had anticipated a very pleasant party,
looked rather blue at this conclusion. Well, my friend, said I,
what do you think of your literary acquaintance now? As sure as
Apollo is on Parnassus, you brought me a most blackguard set. I
will stick to my clerks; so talk no more to me about authors. I
shall take care, answered he, not to invite any of them to a
gentleman's house again; for these are the most select and well-
mannered of the tribe.



CH. X. -- The morals of Gil Blas become at court much as if they
had never been at all. A commission from the Count de Lemos,
which, like most court commissions, implies an intrigue.


WHEN once my name was up for a man after the Duke of Lerma's own
heart, I had very soon my court about me. Every morning was my
ante-chamber crowded with company, and my levees were all the
fashion. Two sorts of customers came to my shop; one set, to
engage my interposition with the minister, on fair commercial
principles; the other set, to excite my compassion by pathetic
statements of their cases, and give me a lift to heaven on the
packhorse of charity. The first were sure of being heard
patiently and served diligently; with regard to the second order,
I got rid of them at once by plausible evasions, or kept them
dangling till they wore their patience threadbare, and went off
in a huff. Before I was about the court my nature was
compassionate and charitable; but tenderness of heart is an
unfashionable frailty there, and mine became harder than any
flint. Here was an admirable school to correct the romantic
sensibilities of friendship: nor was my philosophy any longer
assailable in that quarter. My manner of dealing with Joseph
Navarro, under the following circumstances, will prove more than
volumes on that head.

This Navarro, the founder of my fortune, to whom my obligations
were thick and threefold, paid me a visit one day. With the
warmest expressions of regard such as he was in the habit of
lavishing, he begged me to ask the Duke of Lerma for a certain
situation for one of his friends, a young man of excellent
qualities and undoubted merit, but incumbered with an inability
of getting on in the world. I am well assured, added Joseph, that
with your good and obliging disposition, you will be enraptured
to confer a favour on a worthy man with a very slender purse; I
am sure you will feel obliged to me for giving you an opportunity
of carrying your benevolent inclinations into effect This was
just as good as telling me that the business was to be done for
nothing. Though such doctrine was not quite level to my capacity,
I still affected a wish to do as he desired. It gives me infinite
pleasure, answered I to Navarro, to have it in my power to evince
my lively sense of all your former kindness to me. It is enough
for you to take any man living by the hand; from that moment he
becomes the object of my unwearied care. Your friend shall have
the situation you want for him; nay, he has it already: it is no
longer any concern of yours; leave it entirely to me.

On this assurance Joseph went away in high glee; nevertheless,
the person he recommended had not the post in question. It was
given to another man, and my strong box was the stronger by a
thousand ducats. This sum was infinitely preferable to all the
thanks in the world, so that I looked pitifully blank when next
we met, saying -- Ah, my dear Navarro! you should have thought of
speaking to me sooner. That Calderona got the start of me; he has
given away a certain thing that shall be nameless. I am vexed to
the soul not to meet you with better tidings.

Joseph was fool enough to give me credit, and we parted better
friends than ever; but I suspect that he soon found out the
truth, for he never came near me again. This was just what I
wanted. Besides that the memory of benefits received grated
harshly, it would not have been at all the thing for a person in
my then sphere to keep company with a certain description of
people.

The Count de Lemos has been long in the background, let us bring
him a little forwarder on the canvas. We met occasionally. I had
carried him a thousand pistoles, as the reader will recollect;
and I now carried him a thousand more, by order of his uncle the
duke, out of his excellency's funds lying in my hands. On this
occasion the Count de Lemos honoured me with a long conference.
He informed me that at length he had completely gained his end,
and was in unrivalled possession of the Prince of Spain's good
graces, whose sole confidant he was. His next concern was to
invest me with a right honourable commission, of which he had
already given me a hint. Friend Santillane, said he, now is the
time to strike while the iron is hot. Spare no pains to find out
some young beauty, worthy to while away the prince's amorous
hours. You have your wits about you; and a word to the wise is
sufficient. Go; run about the town; pry into every hole and
corner; and when you have pounced upon anything likely to suit,
you will come and let me know. I promised the count to leave no
stone unturned in the due discharge of my employment, which
seemed to require no great force of genius, since the professors
of the science are so numerous.

I had not hitherto been much practised in such delicate
investigations, but it was more than probable that Scipio had,
and that his talent lay peculiarly that way. On my return home I
called him in, and spoke thus to him in private: My good fellow,
I have a very important secret to impart. Do you know that in the
midst of fortune's favours, there is something still wanting to
crown all my wishes? I can easily guess what that is, interrupted
he, without giving me time to finish what I was going to say; you
want a little snug bit of contraband amusement, to keep you awake
of evenings, and rub off the dust of business. And, in fact, it
is a marvellous thing that you should have played the Joseph in
the heyday of your blood, when so many greybeards around you are
playing the Elder. I admire the quickness of your apprehension,
replied I with a smile. Yes, my friend, a mistress is that
something still wanting; and you shall choose for me. But I
forewarn you that I am nice hungry, and must have a pretty
person, with more than passable manners. The sort of thing that
you require, returned Scipio, is not always to be met with in the
market. Yet, as luck will have it, we are in a town where
everything is to be got for money, and I am in hopes that your
commission will not hang long on hand.

Accordingly within three days he pulled me by the sleeve: I have
discovered a treasure! a young lady whose name is Catalina, of
good family and matchless beauty, living with her aunt in a small
house, where they make both ends meet by clubbing their little
matters, and set the slanderous world at defiance. Their waiting-
maid, a girl of my acquaintance, has given me to understand that
their door, though barred against all impertinent intruders,
would turn upon its hinges to a rich and generous suitor, if he
would only consent, for fear of prying neighbours, not to pay his
visits till after night-fall, and then in the most private manner
possible. Hereupon I magnified you as the properest gentleman in
the world, and intreated piety in pattens to offer your humble
services to the ladies. She promised to do so, and to bring me
back my answer to-morrow morning at an appointed place. That is
all very well, answered I; but I am afraid your goddess of bed-
making has been running her rig upon you. No, no, replied he, old
birds are not to be caught with chaff; I have already made
inquiry in the neighbourhood, and by the general report of her,
Signora Catalina is a second Danae, on whom you will have the
happiness of coming down,

Like Jove descending from his tower,
To court her in a silver shower.

Out of conceit as I was with the intrinsic value of ladies'
favours, this was not to be scoffed at; and as our Mercury in
petticoats came the next day to tell Scipio that it only depended
on me to be introduced that very evening, I dropped in between
eleven and twelve o'clock. The knowing one received me without
bringing a candle, and led me by the hand into a very neat
apartment, where the two ladies were sitting on a satin sofa,
dressed in the most elegant taste. As soon as they saw me enter,
they got up and welcomed me in a style of such superior breeding,
as would not have disgraced the highest rank. The aunt, whose
name was Signora Mencia, though with the remains of beauty, had
no attractions for me. But the niece had a million, for she was a
goddess in mortal form. And yet, to examine her critically, she
could not have been admitted for a perfect beauty; but then there
was a charm above all rules of symmetry, with a tingling and
luxurious warmth about her, that seized on men's hearts through
their eyes, and prevented their brains from being too busy.

Neither were my senses proof against so dazzling a display. I
forgot my errand as proxy, and spoke on my own private individual
account, with the enthusiasm of a raw recruit in the tender
passion. The dear little creature, whose wit sounded in my ears
with three times its actual acuteness, under favour of her
natural endowments, made a complete conquest of me by her
prattle. I began to launch out into foolish raptures, when the
aunt, to bring me to my bearings, led the conversation to the
point in hand: Signor de Santillane, I shall deal very explicitly
with you. On the high encomiums I have heard of your character,
you have been admitted here, without the affectation of making
much ado about trifles: but do not imagine that your views are
the nearer their termination for that. Hitherto I have brought my
niece up in retirement, and you are, as it were, the very first
male creature on whom she has ever set eyes. If you deem her
worthy of being your wife, I shall feel myself highly honoured by
the alliance: it is for you to consider whether those terms suit
you; but you cannot have her on cheaper.

This was proceeding to business with a vengeance! It put little
Cupid to flight at once: or else he was just going to try one of
his sharpest arrows upon me. But a truce with the Pantheon! A
marriage so bluntly proposed dispelled the fairy vision: I sunk
back at once into the count's plodding agent; and changing my
tone, answered Signora Mencia thus: Madam, your frankness
delights me, and I will meet it half-way. Whatever rank I may
hold at court, lower than the highest is too low for the peerless
Catalina. A far more brilliant offer waits her acceptance; the
Prince of Spain shall be thrown into her toils. Surely it was
enough to have refused my niece, replied the aunt sarcastically;
such compliments are sufficiently unpleasing to our sex; it could
not be necessary to make us your unfeeling sport. I really am not
in so merry a mood, madam! exclaimed I: it is a plain matter of
fact; I am commissioned to look out for a young lady of merit
sufficient to engage the prince's heart, and receive his private
visits; the object of my search is in your house, and here his
royal highness shall fix his quarters.

Signora Mencia could scarcely believe her cars; neither were they
grievously offended. Nevertheless, thinking it decent to be
startled at the immorality of the proceeding, she replied to the
following effect: Though I should give implicit credit to what
you tell me, you must understand that I am not of a character to
take pleasure in the infamous distinction of seeing my niece a
prince's concubine. Every feeling of virtue and of honour revolts
at the idea . . . . What a simpleton you are with your virtue and
honour! interrupted I. You have not a notion above the level of a
tradesman's wife. Was there ever anything so stupid as to
consider affairs of this kind with a view to their moral
tendency? It is stripping them of all their beauty and
excellence. In the magic lanthorn of plenty, pleasure, and
preferment, they appear with all their brightest gloss. Figure to
yourself the heir to the monarchy at the happy Catalina's feet;
fancy him all rapture and lavish bounty; nor doubt but that from
her shall spring a hero, who shall immortalize his mother's name,
by enrolling his own in the unperishable records of eternal fame.

Though the aunt desired no better sport than to take me at my
word, she affected not to know what she had best do; and
Catalina, who longed to have a grapple with the Prince of Spain,
affected not to care about the matter; which made it necessary
for me to press the siege closer; till at length Signora Mencia,
finding me chop-fallen and ready to withdraw my forces, sounded a
parley, and agreed to a convention, containing the two following
articles. Imprimis, if the Prince of Spain, on the fame of
Catalina's charms, should take fire, and determine to pay her a
nightly visit, it should be my care to let the ladies know when
they might expect him. Secondo, that the prince should be
introduced to the said ladies as a private gentleman, accompanied
only by himself and his principal purveyor.

After this capitulation, the aunt and niece were upon the best
terms possible with me: they behaved as if we had known one
another from our cradles; on the strength of which I ventured on
some little familiarities, which were not taken at all unkindly;
and when we parted, they embraced me of their own accord, and
slabbered me over with inexpressible fondness. It is marvellous
to think with what facility a tender connection is formed between
persons in the same line of trade, but of opposite sexes. It
might have been suspected by an eye-witness of my departure, in
all the plenitude of warm and repeated salutation, that my visit
had been more successful than it was.

The Count de Lemos was highly delighted when I announced the
long-expected discovery. I spoke of Catalina in terms which made
him long to see her. The following night I took him to her house,
and he owned that I had beat the bush to some purpose. He told
the ladies, he had no doubt but the Prince of Spain would be
fully satisfied with my choice of a mistress, who, on her part,
would have reason to be well pleased with such a lover; that the
young prince was generous, good-tempered, and amiable; in short,
he promised in a few days to bring him in the mode they enjoined,
without retinue or publicity. That nobleman then took leave of
them, and I withdrew with him. We got into his carriage, in which
we had both driven thither, and which was waiting at the end of
the street. He set me down at my own door, with a special charge
to inform his uncle next day of the new game started, not
forgetting to impress strongly how conducive a good bag of
pistoles would be to the successful accomplishment of the
adventure.

I did not fail on the following morning to go and give the Duke
of Lerma an exact account of all that had passed. There was but
one thing kept back. I did not mention Scipio's name, but took
credit to myself for the discovery of Catalina. One makes a merit
of any dirty work in the service of the great.

Abundant were the compliments paid me on this occasion. My good
friend Gil Blas, said the minister with a bantering air, I am
delighted that with all your talents you have that besides of
discovering kind-hearted beauties; whenever I have occasion for
such an article, you will have the goodness to supply me. My
lord, answered I with mock gravity like his own, you are very
obliging to give me the preference; but it may not he
unseasonable to observe that there would be an indelicacy in my
administering to your excellency's pleasures of this description.
Signor Don Rodrigo has been so long in possession of that post
about your person, that it would be manifest injustice to rob him
of it. The duke smiled at my answer; and then changing the
subject, asked whether his nephew did not want money for this new
speculation. Excuse my negligence! said I; he will thank you to
send him a thousand pistoles. Well and good! replied the
minister; you will furnish him accordingly, with my strict
injunction not to be niggardly, but to encourage the prince in
whatever pleasurable expenses his heart may prompt him to
indulge.



CH. XI. -- The Prince of Spain's secret visit, and presents to
Catalina.


I WENT to the Count de Lemos on the spur of the occasion, with
five hundred double pistoles in my hand. You could not have come
at a better time, said that nobleman. I have been talking with
the prince; he has taken the bait, and burns with impatience to
see Catalina. This very night he intends to slip privately out of
the palace, and pay her a visit; it is a measure determined on,
and our arrangements are already made. Give notice to the ladies,
through the medium of the cash you have just brought; it is
proper to let them know they have no ordinary lover to receive;
and a matter of course that generosity in princes should be the
herald of their partialities. As you will be of our party, take
care to be in the way at bed-time: and as your carriage will be
wanted, let it wait near the palace about midnight.

I immediately repaired to the ladies. Catalina was not visible,
having just gone to lie down. I could only speak with Signora
Mencia. Madam, said I, forgive my appearance here in the day-
time, but there was no avoiding it; you must know that the Prince
of Spain will be with you to-night; and here, added I, putting my
pecuniary credentials into her hand, here is an offering which he
lays on the Cytherean shrine, to propitiate the divinities of the
temple. You may perceive, I have not entangled you in a
sleeveless concern. You have been excessively kind indeed,
answered she; but tell me, Signor de Santillane, does the prince
love music? To distraction, replied I. There is nothing he so
much delights in as a fine voice, with a delicate lute
accompaniment So much the better, exclaimed she in a transport of
joy; you give me great pleasure by saying so; for my niece has
the pipe of a nightingale, and plays exquisitely on the lute:
then her dancing is in the finest style! Heavens and earth!
exclaimed I in my turn, here are accomplishments by wholesale,
aunt; more than enough to make any girl's fortune! Any one of
those talents would have been a sufficient dowry.

Having thus smoothed his reception, I waited for the prince's
bed-time. When it was near at hand, I gave my coachman his
orders, and went to the Count de Lemos, who told me that the
prince, the sooner to get rid of the people about him, meant to
feign a slight indisposition, and even to go to bed, the better
to cajole his attendants; but that he would get up an hour
afterwards, and go through a private door to a back staircase
leading into the court-yard.

Conformably with their previous arrangements, he fixed my
station. There had I to beat the hoof so long, that I began to
suspect our forward sprig of royalty had gone another way, or
else had changed his mind about Catalina; just as if princes ever
began to be fickle, till the goad of novelty and curiosity began
to be blunted. In short, I thought they had forgotten me, when
two men came up. Finding them to be my party, I led the way to my
carriage, into which they both got, and I upon the coach-box to
direct the driver, whom I stopped fifty yards from the house,
whither we walked. The door opened at our approach, and shut
again as soon as we got in.

At first we were in absolute darkness, as on my former visit,
though a small lamp was fixed to the wall on the present
occasion. But the light which it shed was so faint, as only to
render itself visible without assisting us. All this served only
to heighten the romance in the fancy of its hero, fixed as he was
in steadfast gaze at the sight of the ladies as they received him
in a saloon whose brilliant illumination was more dazzling, when
contrasted with the gloom of the avenue. The aunt and niece were
in a tempting undress, where the science of coquetry was
displayed in all its luxury and absolute sway. Our prince could
have been happy with Signora Mencia, had the dear charmer
Catalina been away; but as there was a choice, the younger,
according to the rules of precedency in the court of Cupid, had
the preference.

Well! prince, said the Count de Lemos, could you have desired a
better specimen of beauty? They are both enchanting, answered the
prince, and my heart may as well surrender at once; for the aunt
would arrest it in its flight, if it attempted to sound a retreat
from the niece's all-subduing charms.

After such compliments, as do not fall by wholesale to the share
of aunts, he addressed his choicest terms of flattery to
Catalina, who answered him in kind. As convenient personages of
my stamp are allowed to mingle in the conversation of lovers, for
the purpose of making fire hotter, I introduced the subject of
singing and playing on the lute. This was the signal of fresh
rapture! and the nymph, the muse, the anything but mortal, was
supplicated to outtune the jingle of the spheres. She complied
like a good-humoured goddess; played some tender airs, and sung
so deliciously, that the prince flopped down on his knees in a
tumult of love and pleasure. But scenes like these are vapid in
description: suffice it to say that hours glided away like
moments in this sweet delirium, till the approach of day warned
the sober plotters of the lunacy to provide for their patient's
safety, and their own. When the parties were all snugly housed,
we gave ourselves as much credit for the negotiation as if we had
patched up a marriage with a princess.

The next morning the Duke of Lerma desired to know all the
particulars. Just as I had finished relating them, the Count de
Lemos came in and said -- The Prince of Spain is so engrossed by
Catalina; he has taken so decided a fancy to her, that he
actually proposes to be constant. He wanted to have sent her
jewels to the amount of two thousand pistoles to-day, but his
finances wee aground. My dear Lemos, said he, addressing himself
to me, you must absolutely get me that sum. I know it is very
inconvenient; you have pawned your credit for me already, but my
heart owns itself your debtor; and if ever I have the means of
returning your kindness by more than empty words, your fortunes
shall not suffer by your complaisance. In answer, I assured him
that I had friends and credit, and promised to bring him what he
wanted.

There is no difficulty about that, said the duke to his nephew.
Santillane will bring you the money; or, to save trouble, he may
purchase the jewels, for he is an admirable judge, especially of
rubies. Are you not, Gil Blas? This stroke of satire was of
course designed to entertain the count at my expense, and it was
successful, for his curiosity could not but be excited to know
the meaning of the mystery. No mystery at all, replied his uncle
with a broad laugh. Only Santillane took it into his head one day
to exchange a diamond for a ruby, and the barter operated equally
to the advantage of his pocket and his penetration.

Had the minister stopped there, I should have come off cheaply;
but he took the trouble of dressing out in aggravated colours the
trick that Camilla and Don Raphael played me, with a most
provoking enlargement of the circumstances most to the
disadvantage of my sagacity. His excellency having enjoyed his
joke, ordered me to attend the Count de Lemos to a jeweller's,
where we selected trinkets for the Prince of Spain's inspection,
and they were intrusted to my care to be delivered to Catalina.

There can be little doubt of my kind reception on the following
night, when I displayed a fine pair of drop ear-rings, as the
presents of my embassy. The two ladies, out of their wits at
these costly tokens of the prince's love, suffered their tongues
to run into a gossiping strain, while they were thanking me for
introducing them into such worshipful society. In the excess of
their joy, they forgot themselves a little. There escaped now and
then certain peculiar idioms of speech, which made me suspect
that the party in question was no such dainty morsel for royalty
to feed upon. To ascertain precisely what degree of obligation I
had conferred on the heir-apparent, I took my leave with the
intention of coining to a right understanding with Scipio.



CH. XII. -- Catalina's real condition a worry and alarm to Gil
Blas. His precautions for his own ease and quiet.


ON coming home, I heard a devil of a noise, and inquired what was
the meaning of it. They told me that Scipio was giving a supper
to half-a-dozen of his friends. They were singing as loud as
their kings could roar, and threatening the stability of the
house with their protracted peals of laughter. This meal was not
in all respects the banquet of the seven wise men.

The founder of the feast, informed of my arrival, said to his
company: Sit still, gentlemen, it is only the master of the house
come home, but that need not disturb you. Go on with your merry-
making; I will but just whisper a word in his ear, and be back
again in a moment. He came to me accordingly. What an infernal
din! said I. What sort of company do you keep below? Have you,
too, got in among the poets? Thank you for nothing! answered he.
Your wine is too good to be given to such gentry; I turn it to
better account. There is a young man of large property in my
party, who wishes to lay out your credit and his own money in the
purchase of a place. This little festivity is all for him. For
every glass he fills, I put on ten pistoles, in addition to the
regular fee. He shall drink till he is under the table. If that
is the case, replied I, go to your presidentship, and do not
spare the cellar.

Then was no proper time to talk about Catalina; but the next
morning I opened the business thus: Friend Scipio, the terms we
are upon entitle me to fair dealing. I have treated you more like
an equal than a servant, consequently you would be much to blame
to cheat me on the footing of a master. Let us, therefore, have
no secrets towards each other. I am going to tell you what will
surprise you; and you on your part shall give me your sincere
opinion about the two women with whom you have brought me
acquainted. Between ourselves, I suspect them to be no better
than they should be; with so much the more of the knave in their
composition, because they affect the simpleton. If my conjecture
be right, the Prince of Spain has no great reason to be delighted
with my activity; for I will own to you frankly, that it was for
him I spoke to you about a mistress. I brought him to see
Catalina, and he is over head and ears in love with her. Sir,
answered Scipio, you have dealt so handsomely by me, that I shall
act upon the square with you. I had yesterday a private inter
view with the abigail, and she gave me a most entertaining
history of the family. You shall have it briefly, though it did
not come briefly to me.

Catalina was daughter to a sort of gentleman in Arragon. An
orphan at fifteen, with no fortune but a pretty face, she lent a
complying ear to an officer who carried her off to Toledo, where
he died in six months, having been more like a father than a
husband to her. She collected his effects together, consisting of
their joint wardrobe and three hundred pistoles in ready money,
and then went to housekeeping with Signora Mencia, who was still
in fashion, though a little on the wane. These sisters, every way
but in blood, began at length to attract the attention of the
police. The ladies took umbrage at this, and decamped in dudgeon
for Madrid, where they have been living for these two years,
without making any acquaintance in the neighbourhood. But now
comes the best of the joke: they have taken two small houses
adjoining each other, with a passage of communication through the
cellars. Signora Mencia lives with a servant girl in one of these
houses, and the officer's widow inhabits the other, with an old
duenna, whom she passes off for her grandmother, so that her
versatile child of nature is sometimes a niece brought up by her
aunt, and sometimes an orphan under her grandam's fostering wing.
When she enacts the niece, her name is Catalina; and when she
personates the grand-daughter, she calls herself Sirena.

At the grating sound of Sirena I turned pale, and interrupted
Scipio, saying -- What do you tell me? Alas! it must be so: This
cursed imp of Arragon is Calderona's charming Siren. To be sure
she is, answered he, the very same! I thought you would be
delighted at the news. Quite the reverse, replied I. It portends
more sorrow than laughter; do not you anticipate the
consequences? None of any ill omen, rejoined Scipio. What is
there to be afraid of? It is not certain that Don Rodrigo will
rub his forehead; and in case any good-natured friend should show
it him in the glass, you had better let the minister into the
secret beforehand. Tell him all the circumstances straightforward
as they happened; he will see that there has been no trick on
your part; and if after that Calderona should attempt to do you
an ill office with his excellency, it will be as clear as
daylight that he is only actuated by a spirit of revenge.

Scipio removed all my apprehensions by this advice, which I
followed, in acquainting the Duke of Lerma at once with this
unlucky discovery. My aspect, while telling my tale, was
sorrowful, and my tone faltering, in evidence of my contrition
for having unadvisedly brought the prince and Don Rodrigo into
such close quarters; but the minister was more disposed to roast
his favourite than to pity him. Indeed, he ordered me to let the
matter take its own course, considering it as a feather in
Calderona's cap to dispute the empire of love with so illustrious
a rival, and not to be worse used than his lawful prince. The
Count de Lemos, too, was informed how things stood, and promised
me his protection, if the first secretary should come at the
knowledge of the intrigue, and attempt to undermine me with the
duke.

Trusting to have secured the frail bark of my fortunes by this
notable contrivance from the rocks and quicksands that threatened
it, my mind was once more at rest. I continued attending the
prince on his visits to Catalina, sirenlike in nature as in
nickname, who was fertile in quaint devices to keep Don Rodrigo
away from next door, whenever the course of business required her
to devote her nights to his royal competitor.



CH. XIII. -- Gil Blas goes on personating the great man. He hears
news of his family: a touch of nature on the occasion. A grand
quarrel with Fabricio.


I MENTIONED some time ago, that in the morning there was usually
a crowd of people in my ante-chamber, coming to negotiate little
private concerns in the way of politics; but I would never suffer
them to open their business by word of mouth; but adopting court
precedent, or rather giving myself the airs of a jack in office,
my language to every suitor was -- Send in a memorial on the
subject. My tongue ran so glibly to that tune, that one day I
gave my landlord the official answer, when he came to put me in
mind of a twelvemonth's rent in arrear. As for my butcher and
baker, they spared the trouble of asking for their memorials, by
never giving me time to run up a bill. Scipio, who mimicked me so
exactly, that only those behind the scenes could distinguish the
double from the principal performer, held his head just as high
with the poor devils who curried favour with him, as a step of
the ladder to my ministerial patronage.

There was another foolish trick of mine, of which I do not by any
means pretend to make a merit; neither more nor less than the
extreme assurance of talking about the first nobility, just as if
I had been one of their kidney. Suppose, for example, the Duke of
Alva, the Duke of Ossuna, or the Duke of Medina Sidonia were
mentioned in conversation, I called them without ceremony, my
friend Alva, that good-natured fellow Ossuna, or that comical dog
Medina Sidonia. In a word, my pride and vanity had swelled to
such a height, that my father and mother were no longer among the
number of my honoured relatives. Alas! poor understrappers, I
never thought of asking whether you had sunk or were swimming in
the Asturias. A thought about you never came into my head. The
court has all the soporific virtues of Lethe, in the case of poor
relations.

My family was completely obliterated from the tablets of my
memory, when one morning a young man knocked at my door and
begged to speak with me for a moment in private. He was shown
into my closet, where, without asking him to take a chair, as he
seemed to be quite a common fellow, I desired to know abruptly
what he wanted. How! Signor Gil Blas? said he, do you not
remember me? It was in vain that I perused the lines of his face
over and over again; I was obliged to tell him fairly that he had
the advantage of me. Why, I am one of your old schoolfellows!
replied he, bred and born in Oviedo; Bertrand Muscada, the
grocer's son, next-door neighbour to your uncle the canon. I
recollect you as well as if it was but yesterday. We have played
a thousand times together at blind man's buff and prison bars.

My youthful recollections, answered I, are very transient and
confused. Blind man's buff and prison bars are but childish
amusement! The burden of state affairs leaves me little time to
ruminate on the trifles of my younger days. I am come to Madrid,
said he, to settle accounts with my father's correspondent. I
heard talk of you! Folks say that you have, a good berth at
court, and are already almost as well off as a Jew broker. I
thought I would just call in and say, how d'ye do? On my return
into the country, your family will jump out of their skins for
joy, when they hear how famously you are getting on.

It was impossible in decency to avoid asking how my father, my
mother, and my uncle stood in the world; but that duty was
performed in so gingerly a manner, as to leave the grocer little
room to compliment dame Nature on her liberal provision of
instinct. He seemed quite shocked at my indifference for such
near kindred, and told me bluntly, with his coarse shopman's
familiarity, Methinks you might have shown more heartiness and
natural feeling for your kinsfolk! Why, you ask after them just
as if they were vermin! Your father and mother are still at
service; take that in your dish! And the good canon, Gil Perez,
eat up with gout, rheumatism, and old age, has one foot in the
grave. People should feel as people ought; and seeing that you
are in a berth to be a blessing to your poor parents, take a
friend's advice, and allow them two hundred pistoles a year. That
will be doing a handsome thing, and making them comfortable, and
then you may spend the rest upon yourself with a good conscience.
Instead of being softened by this family picture, I only resented 
the officiousness of unasked advice. A more delicate and covert
remonstrance might perhaps have made its impression, but so bold
a rebuke only hardened my heart. My sulky silence was not lost
upon him, so that while he moralized himself out of charity into
downright abuse, my choler began to overflow. Nay, then! this is
too much, answered I, in a devil of a passion. Get about your
business, Master Muscada, and mind your own shop. You are a
pretty fellow to preach to me! As if I were to be taught my duty
by you. Without further parley I handed the grocer out of my
closet by the shoulder, and sent him off to weigh figs and
nutmegs at Oviedo.

The home-strokes he had laid on were not lost to my sober
recollection. My neglect of filial piety struck home to my heart,
and melted me into tears. When I recollected how much my
childhood was indebted to my parents, what pains they had taken
in my education, these affecting thoughts gave language for the
moment to the still small voice of nature and gratitude; but the
language was never translated into solid sense and service. An
habitual callousness succeeded this transient sensation, and
peremptorily cancelled every obligation of humanity. There are
many fathers besides mine, who will acknowledge this portrait of
their sons.

Avarice and ambition, dividing me between them, annihilated every
trace of my former temper. I lost all my gaiety, became absent
and moping,  --  in short, a most unsociable animal. Fabricio
seeing me so furiously bent on accumulation, and so perfectly
indifferent to him, very rarely came to see me. He could not help
saying one day: In truth, Gil Blas, you are quite an altered man.
Before you were about the court, you were always pleasant and
easy. Now you are all agitation and turmoil. You form project
after project to make a fortune, and the more you realize, the
wider your views of aggrandizement extend. But this is not the
worst! You have no longer that expansion of heart, those open
manners, which form the charm of friendship. On the contrary, you
wrap yourself round, and shut the avenues of your heart even to
me. In your very civilities, I detect the violence you impose
upon yourself. In short, Gil Blas is no longer the same Gil Blas
whom I once knew.

You really have a most happy talent for bantering, answered I,
with repulsive jocularity. But this metamorphose into the shag of
a savage is not perceptible to myself. Your own eyes, replied he,
are insensible to the change, because they are fascinated. But
the fact remains the same. Now, my friend, tell me fairly and
honestly, shall we live together as heretofore? When I used to
knock at your door in the morning, you came and opened it
yourself; between asleep and awake, and I walked in without
ceremony. Now, what a difference! You have an establishment of
servants. They keep me cooling my heels in your ante-chamber; my
name must be sent in before I can speak to you. When this is got
over, what is my reception? A cold inclination of the head, and
the insolent strut of office. Any one would suppose that my
visits were growing troublesome! Can you suppose this to be
treatment for a man who was once on equal terms with you? No,
Santillane, it can never be, nor will I bear it longer. Farewell!
Let us part without ill blood. We shall both be better asunder;
you will get rid of a troublesome censor, and I of a purse-proud
upstart who does not know himself.

I felt myself more exasperated than reformed by his reproaches;
and suffered him to take his departure without the slightest
effort to overcome his resolution. In the present temper of my
mind, the friendship of a poet did not seem a catch of sufficient
importance to break one's heart about its loss. I found ample
amends in the intimacy of some subaltern attendants about the
king's person, with whom a similarity of humour had lately
connected me closely. These new acquaintance of mine were for the
most part men from no one knows where, pushed up to their
appointments more by luck than merit. They had all got into warm
berths; and, wretches as they were, measuring their own
consequence by the excess of royal bounty, forgot their origin as
scandalously as I forgot mine. We gave ourselves infinite credit
for what told so much and bitterly to our disgrace. O fortune!
what a jade you are, to distribute your favours at haphazard as
you do! Epictetus was perfectly in the right, when he likened you
to a jilt of fashion, prowling about in masquerade, and tipping
the wink to every blackguard who parades the street.



BOOK THE NINTH.



CH. I. -- Scipio's scheme of marriage for Gil Blas. The match, a
rich goldsmith's  daughter. Circumstances connected with this 
speculation.


ONE evening, on the departure of my supper company, finding
myself alone with Scipio, I asked him what he had been doing that
day. Striking a masterstroke, answered he. I intend that you
should marry. A goldsmith of my acquaintance has an only
daughter, and I mean to make up a match between you.

A goldsmith's daughter! exclaimed I with a disdainful air: are
you out of your senses? Can you think of tying me up to a
trinket-maker? People of a certain character in society, and on a
certain footing at court, ought to have much higher views of
things. Pardon me, sir! rejoined Scipio, do not take the subject
up in that light. Recollect that nobility accrues by the male
side, and do not ride a higher horse than a thousand jockeys of
quality whom I could name. Do you know that the heiress in
question will bring a hundred thousand ducats in her pocket? Is
not that a pretty little sprig of jewellery? To the resounding
echo of so large a sum, my ears were instantly symphonious. The
day is your own, said I to the secretary; the fortune determines
the case in the lady's favour. When do you mean to put me in
possession? Fair and softly, sir, answered he, the more haste the
worse speed. It will be necessary for me first to communicate the
affair to the father, and instil the advantage of it into his
capacity. Good! rejoined I with a burst of laughter; is it
thereabouts you are? The match is far advanced in its progress
towards consummation. Much nearer than you suppose, replied he.
But one hour's conversation with the goldsmith, and I pledge
myself for his consent But, before we go any further, let us come
to an agreement, if you please. Supposing that I should transfer
a hundred thousand ducats to you, what would my commission be?
Twenty thousand! was my answer. Heaven be praised therefore! said
he. I guessed your gratitude at ten thousand; so that it doubles
mine in a similar case. Come on then! I will set this negotiation
on foot to-morrow morning; and you may count upon its success, or
I am little better than one of the foolish ones.

In fact, he said to me two days afterwards, I have spoken to
Signor Gabriel Salero, my friend the goldsmith. On the loud
report of your high desert and credit, he has lent a favourable
ear to my offer of you for a son-in-law. You are to have his
daughter with a hundred thousand ducats, provided you can make it
appear clearly that you are in possession of the minister's good
graces. Since that is the case, said I confidently to Scipio, I
shall soon be married. But, not entirely to forget the girl, have
you seen her? is she pretty? Not quite so pretty as her fortune,
answered he. Between ourselves, this heiress's looks are as hard
as her cash. Luckily, you are perfectly indifferent about that.
Stone blind, by the light of the sun, my good fellow! replied I.
As for us whimsical fellows about court, we marry merely for the
sake of marrying. When we want beauty, we look for it in our
friends' wives; and if, by fates and destinies, the sweets are
wasted on our own, their flavour is so mawkish to our palate,
that there is some merit in their not carrying the commodity to a
foreign market.

This is not all, resumed Scipio: Signor Gabriel hopes for the
pleasure of your company to supper this evening. By agreement,
there is to be no mention of marriage. He has invited several of
his mercantile friends to this entertainment, where you will take
your chance with the rest, and to-morrow he means to sup with you
on the same terms. By this you will perceive his drift of looking
before he leaps. You will do well to be a little on your guard
before him. Oh! for the matter of that, interrupted I with an air
of confidence, let him scrutinize me as closely as he pleases,
the result cannot fail to be in my favour.

All this happened as it was foretold. I was introduced at the
goldsmith's, who received me with the familiarity of an old
acquaintance. A vulgar dog, but warm; and as troublesome with his
civility as a prude with her virtue. He presented me to Signora
Eugenia his wife, and the youthful Gabriela his daughter. I
opened wide my budget of compliments, without infringing the
treaty, and prattled soft nothings to them, in all the vacuity of
courtly dialogue.

Gabriela, with submission to my secretary's better taste, was not
altogether so repulsive; whether by dint of being outrageously
bedizened, or because I looked at her in the raree-shew box of
her fortune. A charming house this of Signor Gabriel! There is
less silver, I verily believe, in the Peruvian mines, than under
his roof. That metal presented itself to the view in all
directions, under a thousand different forms. Every room, and
especially that where we were entertained, was a fairy palace.
What a bird's eye view for a son-in-law! The old codger, to do
the thing genteelly, had collected five or six merchants about
him, all plodding spirit-wearing personages. Their tongues could
only talk of what their hearts were set upon; it was high change
all supper-time; but unfortunately wit was at a discount.

Next night, it was my turn to treat the goldsmith. Not being able
to dazzle him with my sideboard, I had recourse to another
artifice. I invited to supper such of my friends as made the
finest figure at court; hangers-on of state noted for the
unwieldiness of their ambition. These fellows could not talk on
common topics: the brilliant and lucrative posts at which they
aimed were all canvassed in detail; this too made its way. Poor
counting-house Gabriel, in amazement at the loftiness of their
ideas, shrunk into insignificance, in spite of all his hoards, on
a comparison with these wonderful men. As for me, in all the
plausibility of moderation, I professed to wish for nothing more
than a comfortable fortune; a snug box and a competence:
whereupon these gluttons of the loaves and fishes cried out with
one voice that I was wrong, absolutely criminal; for the prime
minister would do anything upon earth for me, and it was an act
of duty to anoint my fingers with bird-lime. My honoured papa
lost not a word of all this; and seemed, at going away, to take
his leave with some complacency.

Scipio went of course the next morning, to ask him how he liked
me. Extremely well indeed, answered the knight of the ledger; the
lad has won my very heart. But, good master Scipio, I conjure you
by our long acquaintance to deal with me as a true friend. We
have all our weak side, as you well know. Tell me where Signor de
Santillane is fallible. Is he fond of play? does he wench? On
what lay are his snug little vices? Do not fight shy, I beset
you. It is very unkind, Signor Gabriel, to put such a question,
retorted the go-between. Your interest is more to me than my
master's. If he had any slippery propensities, likely to make
your daughter unhappy, would I ever have proposed him as a son-
in-law? The deuce a bit! I am too much at your service. But,
between ourselves, he has but one fault; that of being faultless.
He is too wise for a young man. So much the better, replied the
goldsmith; he is the more like me. You may go, my friend, and
tell him he shall have my daughter, and should have her though he
knew no more of the minister than I do.

As soon as my secretary had reported this conversation, I flew to
thank Salero for his partiality. He had already told his mind to
his wife and daughter, who gave me to understand by their
reception, that they yielded without disgust. I carried my
father-in-law to the Duke of Lerma, whom I had informed the
evening before, and presented him with due ceremony. His
excellency gave him a most gracious reception, and congratulated
him on having chosen a man for his son-in-law, for whom he
himself had so great a regard, and meant to do such great things.
Then did he expatiate on my good qualities, and, in fact, said so
much to my honour, that honest Gabriel thought he had met with
the best match in Spain. His joy oozed out at his eyes. On
parting, he pressed me in his arms, and said: My son, I am so
impatient to see you Gabriela's husband, that the affair shall be
finally settled within a week at latest.



CH. II. -- In the progress of political vacancies, Gil Blas
recollects that there is such a man in the world as Don Alphonso
de Leyva; and renders him a service from motives of vanity.


LET us leave my marriage to take care of itself for a season. The
order of events requires me to recount a service rendered to my
old master Don Alphonso. I had entirely forgotten that
gentleman's existence; but a circumstance recalled it to my
recollection.

The government of Valencia became vacant at this time; and put me
in mind of Don Alphonso de Leyva. I considered within myself that
the employment would suit him to a nicety; and determined to
apply for it on his be half, not so much out of friendship as
ostentation. If I could but procure it for him, it would do me
infinite honour. I told the Duke of Lerma that I had been steward
to Don Caesar de Leyva and his son; and that having every reason
in the world to feel myself obliged to them, I should take it as
a favour if he would give the government of Valencia to one or
other of them. The minister answered: Most willingly, Gil Blas. I
love to see you grateful and generous. Besides, the family stands
very high in my esteem. The Leyvas are loyal subjects; so that
the place cannot be better bestowed. You may take it as a wedding
present, and do what you like with it.

Delighted at the success of my application, I went to Calderona
in a prodigious hurry, to get the patent made out for Don
Alphonso. There was a great crowd, waiting in respectful silence
till Don Rodrigo should come and give audience. I made my way
through, and the closet door opened as if by sympathy. There were
no one knows how many military and civil officers, with other
people of consequence, among whom Calderona was dividing his
attentions. His different reception of different people was
curious. A slight inclination of the head was enough for some;
others he honoured with a profusion of courtly grimace, and bowed
than out of the closet. The proportions of civility were weighed
to a scruple. On the other hand, there were some suitors who,
shocked at his cold indifference, cursed in their secret soul the
necessity for their cringing before such a monkey of an idol.
Others, on the contrary, were laughing in their sleeve at his
gross and self-sufficient air. But the scene was thrown away upon
me; nor was I likely to profit by such a lesson. It was exactly
the counterpart of my own behaviour: and I never thought of
ascertaining whether my deportment was popular or offensive, so
long as there was no violation of outward respect.

Don Rodrigo accidentally casting a look towards me, left a
gentleman, to whom he was speaking, without ceremony, and came to
pay his respects with the most unaccountable tokens of high
consideration. Ah, my dear colleague! exclaimed he, what occasion
procures me the pleasure of seeing you here! Is there anything we
can do for you? I told him my business; whereupon he assured me,
in the most obliging terms, that the affair should be expedited
within four-and-twenty hours. Not satisfied with these
overwhelming condescensions, he conducted me to the door of his
ante-chamber, whither he never attended any but the nobility of
first rank. His farewell was as flattering as his reception.

What is the meaning of all this palaver? said I while retreating;
has any raven croaked my entrance, and prophesied promotion to
Calderona by my overthrow? Does he really languish for my
friendship? or does he feel the ground giving way under his feet,
and wish to save himself by clinging to the branches of my favour
and protection? It seemed a moot point, which of these
conjectures might be the right. The following day, on my return,
his behaviour was of the same stamp; caresses and civilities
poured in upon me in torrents. It is true that other people who
attempted to speak to him, were ramped in exact proportion with
the blandishments of his face towards me. He snarled at some,
petrified others, and made the whole circle run the gauntlet of
his displeasure. But they were all amply avenged by an
occurrence, the relation of which may give a gentle hint to all
the clerks and secretaries on the list of my readers.

A man very plainly dressed, and certainly not looking at all like
what he was, came up to Calderona and spoke to him about a
memorial, stated to have been presented by himself to the Duke of
Lerma. Don Rodrigo, without looking from his clothes up to his
face, said in a sharp, ungracious tone -- Who may you happen to
be, honest man? They called me Francillo in my childhood,
answered the stranger unabashed; my next style and title was that
of Don Francillo de Zuniga; and my present name is the Count de
Pedrosa. Calderona was all in a twitter at this discovery, and
attempted to stammer out an excuse, when he found that he had to
do with a man of the first quality. Sir, said he to the Count, I
have to beg you, ten thousand pardons; but not knowing whom I had
the honour to . . . . I want none of your apologies, interrupted
Francillo with proud indignation; they are as nauseous as your
rudeness was unbecoming. Recollect henceforth, that a minister's
secretary ought to receive all descriptions of people with good
manners. You may be vain enough to affect the representative of
your master, but the public know you for his menial servant.

The haughty Don Rodrigo blushed blue at this rebuke. Yet it did
not mend his manners one whit. On me it made a salutary
impression. I determined to take care and ascertain the rank of
my petitioners, before I gave a loose to the insolence of office,
and to inflict torture only upon mutes. As Don Alphonso's patent
was made out, I sent it by a purpose messenger, with a letter
from the Duke of Lerma, announcing the royal favour. But I took
no notice of my own share in the appointment, nor even
accompanied it with a line, in the fond hope of announcing it by
word of mouth, and surprising him agreeably, when he came to the
court on occasion of taking the customary oaths.



CH. III.  -- Preparations for the marriage of Gil Blas. A spoke
in the wheel of Hymen.


AND now once more for my lovely Gabriela! We were to be married
in a week. Preparations were making on both sides for the
ceremony. Salero ordered a rich wardrobe for the bride, and I
hired a waiting-woman for her, a footman, and a gentleman usher
of decent aspect and advanced years. The whole establishment was
provided by Scipio, who longed more longingly than myself for the
hour when we were to be fingering the fortune.

On the evening before the happy day, I was supping with my
father-in-law, the rest of the company being made up of uncles,
aunts, and cousins of either sex and every degree. The part of a
supple-visaged son-in-law sat upon me to perfection. Nothing
could exceed my profound respect for the goldsmith and his wife,
or the transports of my passion at Gabriela's feet, while I
smoothed my way into the graces of the family, by listening with
impregnable patience to their witless repartees and irrational
ratiocinations. Thus did I gain the great end of all my
forbearance, the pleasure of pleasing my new relations. Every
individual of the clan felt himself a foot taller for the honour
of my alliance.

The repast ended, the company moved into a large room, where we
were entertained with a concert of vocal and instrumental music,
not the worst that was ever heard, though the performers were not
selected from the choicest bands at Madrid. Some lively airs put
us in mind of dancing. Heaven knows what sort of performers we
must have been, when they took me for the Coryphaeus of the
opera, though I never had but two or three lessons from a petty
dancing-master, who taught the pages on the establishment of the
Marchioness de Chaves. After we had tired our tendons, it was
time to think of going home. There was no end of my bows and God-
bless-you's. Farewell, my dear son-in-law, said Salero as he
squeezed my hand, I shall be at your house in the morning with
the portion in ready money. You will be welcome, come when you
list, my dear father-in-law, answered I. Afterwards, wishing the
family good night, I jumped into my carriage, and ordered it to
drive home.

Scarcely had I got two hundred yards from Signor Gabriel's house,
when fifteen or twenty men, some on foot and some on horseback,
all with swords and fire-arms, surrounded and stopped the coach,
crying out, In the name of our sovereign lord the king. They
dragged me out by main force, and thrust me into a hack-chaise,
when the leader of the party got in with me, and ordered the
driver to go for Segovia. There could be no doubt but the honest
gentle man by my side was an alguazil. I wanted to know something
about the cause of my arrest, but he answered in the language of
those gentry, which is very bad language, that he had other
things to do than to satisfy my impertinent curiosity. I
suggested that he might have mistaken his man. No, no, retorted
he, the fool is wiser than that. You are Signor de Santillane;
and in that case you are to go along with me. Not being able to
deny that fact, it became an act of prudence to hold my tongue.
For the remainder of the night we traversed Mancanarez in sulky
silence, changed horses at Colmenar, and arrived the next evening
at Segovia, where the lodging provided for me was in the tower.



CH. IV. -- The treatment of Gil Blas in the tower of Segovia. The
cause of his imprisonment.


THEIR first favour was to clap me up in a cell, where they left
me on the straw like a criminal, whose only earthly portion was
to con over his dying speech in solitude. I passed the night, not
in bewailing my fate, for it had not yet presented itself in all
its aggravation, but in endeavouring to divine its cause.
Doubtless it must have been Calderona's handiwork. And yet though
his branching honours might have pressed thick upon his senses, I
could not conceive how the Duke of Lerma could have been induced
to treat me so inhumanly. Sometimes I apprehended my arrest to
have been without his excellency's knowledge; at other times I
thought him the contriver of it, for some political reasons, such
as weigh with ministers when they sacrifice their accomplices at
the shrine of state policy.

My mind was vibrating to and fro with these various conjectures,
when the dawn peeping in at my little grated window, presented to
my sight all the horror of the place where I was confined. Then
did I vent my sorrows without ceasing, and my eyes became two
springs of tears, flowing inexhaustibly at the remembrance of my
prosperous state. Pending this paroxysm of grief, a turnkey
brought me my day's allowance of bread and water. He looked at
me, and on the contemplation of my tear-besprinkled visage,
gaoler as he was, there came over him a sentiment of pity: Do not
despair, said he. This life is full of crosses, but mind them
not. You are young; after these days, you will live to see
better. In the meantime, eat at the king's mess, with what
appetite you may.

My comforter withdrew with this quaint invitation, answered by my
groans and tears. The rest of the day was spent in cursing my
wayward destiny, without thinking of my empty stomach. As for the
royal morsel, it seemed more like the message of wrath than the
boon of benevolence; the tantalizing protraction of pain, rather
than the solace of affliction.

Night came, and with it the rattle of a key in my keyhole. My
dungeon door opened, and in came a man with a wax-light in his
hand. He advanced towards me, saying -- Signor Gil Blas, behold
in me one of your old friends. I am Don Andrew de Tordesillas, in
the Archbishop of Grenada's service while you enjoyed that
prelate's favour. You may recollect engaging his interest in my
behalf, and thereby procuring me a post in Mexico; but instead of
embarking for the Indies, I stopped in the town of Alicant. There
I married the governor's daughter, and by a series of adventures
of which you shall hereafter have the particulars, I am now
warden of this tower. It is expressly forbidden me to let you
speak to any living soul, to give you any better bed than straw,
or any other sustenance than bread and water. But besides that
your misfortunes interest my humanity, you have done me service,
and gratitude countervails the harshness of my orders. They think
to make me the instrument of their cruelty, but it is my better
purpose to soften the rigour of your captivity. Get up and follow
me.

Though my humane keeper was entitled to some acknowledgment, my
spirits were so affected as to interdict my speech. All I could
do was to attend him. We crossed a court, and mounted a narrow
staircase to a little room at the top of the tower. It was no
small surprise, on entering, to find a table with lights on it,
neatly set out with covers for two. They will serve up
immediately, said Tordesillas. We are going to sup together. This
snug retreat is appointed for your lodging; it will agree better
with you than your cell. From your window you will look down on
the flowery banks of the Erêma, and the delicious vale of Coca,
bounded by the mountains which divide the two Castiles. At first
you will care little for prospects; but when time shall have
softened your keener sensations into a composed melancholy, it
will be a pleasure to feast your eyes on such engaging scenes.
Then, as for linen and other necessaries befitting a man
accustomed to the comforts of life, they shall be always at your
service. Your bed and board shall be such as you could wish, with
a plentiful supply of books. In a word, you shall have everything
but your liberty.

My spirits were a little tranquillized by these obliging offers.
I took courage and returned my best thanks, assuring him that his
generous conduct restored me to life, and that I hoped at some
time or other to find an opportunity of testifying my gratitude.
To be sure! and why should you not? answered he. Did you fancy
yourself a prisoner for life? Nothing less likely! and I would
lay a wager that you will be released in a very few months. What
say you, Signor Don Andrew? exclaimed I. Then surely you are
acquainted with the occasion of my misfortune. You guess right,
replied he. The alguazil who brought you hither told me the whole
story in confidence. The king, hearing that the Count de Lemos
and you were in the habit of escorting the Prince of Spain by
night to a house of suspicious character, as a punishment for
your loose morals, has banished the count, and sent you hither,
to be treated in the style of which you have had a specimen. And
how, said I, did that circumstance come to the king's knowledge?
That is what I am most curious to ascertain. And that, answered
he, is precisely what the alguazil did not tell, apparently
because he did not know.

At this epoch of our conversation, the servants brought in
supper. When everything was set in order, Tordesillas sent away
the attendants, not wishing our conversation to be overheard. He
shut the door, and we took our seats opposite to each other. Let
us say grace, and fall to, said he. Your appetite ought to be
good after two days of fasting. Under this impression he loaded
my plate as if he had been cramming the craw of a starveling. In
fact, nothing was more likely than that I should play the devil
among the ragouts; but what is likely does not always happen.
Though my intestines were yearning for support, their staple
stuck in my throat, for my heart loathed all pleasurable
indulgence in the present state of my affairs. In vain did my
warden, to drive away the blue devils, pledge me continually, and
expatiate on the excellence of his wine; imperishable nectar
would have been pricked according to the fastidious report of my
palate. This being the case, he went another way to work, and
told me the story of his marriage, with as much humour as such a
subject would admit. Here he was still less successful. So
wandering was my attention, that before the end I had forgotten
the beginning and the middle. At length he was convinced that
there was no diverting my gloomy thoughts for that evening. After
finishing his solitary supper, he rose from table, saying: Signor
de Santillane, I shall leave you to your repose, or rather to the
free indulgence of your own reveries. But, take my word for it,
your misfortune will not be of long continuance. The king is
naturally good. When his anger shall have passed away, and your
deplorable estate shall occur to his milder thoughts, your
punishment will appear sufficient in his eyes. With these words,
my kind hearted gaoler went down-stairs, and sent the servants to
take away. Not even the brass candlesticks were left behind; and
I went to bed by the palpable darkness of a glimmering lamp
suspended against the wall.



CH. V. -- His reflections before he went to sleep that night, and
the noise that waked him.


Two hours at least were my thoughts employed on what Tordesillas
had told me. Here, then, am I, for having lent myself to the
pleasures of the heir-apparent! It was certainly not having my
wits about me, to pander for so young a prince. Therein consists 
my crime; had he been arrived at a more knowing age, the king
perhaps might only have laughed at what has now made him so
angry. But who can have given such counsel to the monarch,
without dreading the prince's resentment or the Duke of Lerma's?
That minister will doubtless take ample vengeance for his nephew
the Count de Lemos. How can the king have made the discovery?
That is above my comprehension.

This last was the eternal burden of my song. But the idea most
afflictive to my mind, what drove me to despair, and laid fiend-
like hold upon my fancy, was the unquestioned plunder of my
effects. My strong box, exclaimed I, my dear wealth, what is
become of you? Into what hands have you fallen? Alas! you are
lost in less time than you were gained! The ruinous confusion of
my household was the perpetual death's-head of my imagination.
Yet this wilderness of melancholy ideas sheltered me from
absolute distraction: sleep, which had shunned my wretched straw,
now paid his readier visit to my soft and gentle manly couch.
Watching and wine, too, imparted a strong narcotic to his
poppies. My slumbers were profound; and to all appearance, the
day might have peeped in upon my repose, if I had not been
awakened all at once by such sounds as rarely perforate a prison
wall. I heard the thrum of a guitar, accompanying a man's voice.
My whole attention was absorbed; but the invisible musician
paused, and left the fleeting impression of a dream. An instant
after wards, my ear was soothed with the sound of the same
instrument, and the same voice.

Wisely the ant against poor winter hoards
The stock which summer's wealth affords;
In grasshoppers, that must at autumn die,
How vain were such an industry.

Of love or fortune the deceitful light
Might half excuse our cheated sight,
If it of life the whole small time would stay,
And be our sunshine all the day.


[To have substituted, with a slight variation, these two stanzas
from Cowley for a translation of the common-place couplet in the
original, will probably not be thought to require any apology.
They necessarily involve a change in the consequent reflections
of our hero. TRANSLATOR]

These verses, which sounded as if they had been sung expressly
for the dirge of my departed happiness, were only an aggravation
of my feelings. The truth of the sentiment, said I, is but too
well exemplified in me. The meteor of court favour has but
plunged me in substantial darkness; the summer sunshine of
ambition is quenched in these autumnal glooms. Now did I sink
again into cold and comfortless meditation; my miseries began to
flow afresh, as if they fed and grew upon their own vital stream.
Yet my wailings ended with the night; and the first rays which
played upon my chamber wall amused my mind into composure. I got
up to open my window, and let the vivid air of morning into my
room. Then I glanced over the country, so attractively depicted
in the description of my keeper. It did not seem to justify his
panegyric. The Erêma, a second Tagus in my magnifying fancy, was
little better than a brook. Its flowery banks were fringed with
nettles, and arrayed in all the majesty of thistles; the
delicious vale in this fairy prospect was a barren wilderness,
untamed by human labour. It therefore was very evident that my
keener sensations were not yet softened into such a composed
melancholy, as could give any but a jaundiced colouring to the
landscape.

I began dressing, and had already half finished my toilet, when
Tordesillas ushered in an old chambermaid, laden with shirts and
towels. Signor Gil Blas, said he, here is your linen. Do not be
saving of it; there shall always be as many changes as you can
possibly want. Well now! and how have you passed the night? Has
the drowsy god administered his anodyne? I could have slept till
this time, answered I, if I had not been awakened by a voice
singing to a guitar. The cavalier who has disturbed your repose,
resumed he, is a state prisoner; and his chamber is contiguous to
yours. He is a knight of the military order of Calatrava, and is
a very accomplished person. His name is Don Gaston de Cogollos.
You may meet as often as you like, and take your meals together.
It will afford reciprocal consolation to compare your fortunes.
There can be no doubt of your being agreeable to one another. I
assured Don Andrew how sensible I was of his indulgence in
allowing me to blend my sorrows with those of my fellow-sufferer;
and, as I betrayed some impatience to be acquainted with him, our
accommodating warden met my wishes on the very same day. He fixed
me to dine with Don Gaston, whose prepossessing physiognomy and
symmetry of feature struck me sensibly. Judge what it must have
been, to make so strong an impression on eyes accustomed to
encounter the dazzling exterior of the court. Figure to yourself
a man fashioned in the mould of pleasure; one of those heroes in
romance, who has only to shew his face, and banish the sweet
sleep from the eyelids of princesses. Add to this, that nature,
who is generally bountiful with one hand and niggardly with the
other, had crowned the perfections of Cogollos with wit and
valour. He was a man, whose like, take him for all in all, we
might not soon look upon again.

If this fine fellow was mightily to my taste, it was my good luck
not to be altogether offensive to him. He no longer sang at night
for fear of annoying me, though I begged him by no means to
restrain his inclinations on my account. A bond of union is soon
formed between brethren in misfortune. A close friendship
succeeded to mere acquaintance, and strengthened from day to day.
The liberty of uninterrupted intercourse contributed greatly to
our mutual support; our burden became lighter by division.

One day after dinner I went into his room, just as he was tuning
his guitar. To hear him more at my ease, I sat down on the only
stool; while he, reclining on his bed, played a pathetic air, and
sang to it a ditty, expressing the despair of a lover and the
cruelty of his mistress. When he had finished, I said to him with
a smile, Sir knight, such strains as these could never be
applicable to your own successes with the fair. You were not made
to cope with female repulse. You think too well of me, answered
he. The verses you have just heard were composed to fit my own
case; to soften a heart of adamant. You must hear my story, and
in my story, my distresses.



CH. VI -- History of Don Gaston de Cogollos and Donna Helena de
Galisteo.


IT will be very soon four years since I left Madrid to go and see
my aunt Donna Eleonora de Laxarilla at Coria: she is one of the
richest dowagers in Old Castile, with myself for her only heir.
Scarcely had I got within her doors, when love invaded my repose.
The windows of my room faced the lattice of a lady living
opposite: but the street was narrow, and her blinds pervious to
the eye. It was an opportunity too delicious to be lost; and I
found my neighbour so lovely that my heart was captivated. The
subject of my sentry-watch could not be mistaken. She marked it
well; but she was not a girl to glory in the detection, still
less to encourage my fooleries.

It was natural to inquire the name of this mighty conqueror. I
learnt it to be Donna Helena, only daughter of Don George de
Galisteo, lord of a large domain near Coria. She had innumerable
offers of marriage; but her father repulsed them all, because he
meant to bestow her hand on his nephew, Don Austin de Olighera,
who had uninterrupted access to his cousin while the settlements
were preparing. This was no bar to my hopes: on the contrary, it
whetted my eagerness: and the insolent pleasure of supplanting a
favoured rival was, perhaps, at bottom equally my motive with a
more noble passion. My visual artillery was obstinately planted
against my unyielding fair. Her attendant Felicia was not without
the incense of a glance, to soften her rigid constancy in my
favour; while nods and becks stood for the current coin of
language. But all these efforts of gallantry were in vain -- the
maid was impregnable like her mistress -- never was there such a
pair of cold and cruel ones.

The commerce of the eyes being so unthrifty, I had recourse to
different agents. My scouts were on the watch to hunt out what
acquaintance Felicia might have in town. They discovered an old
lady, by name Theodora, to be her most intimate friend, and that
they often met. Delighted at the intelligence, I went point blank
to Theodora, and engaged her by presents in my interest. She took
my cause up heartily, promised to contrive an interview for me
with her friend, and kept her engagement the very next day.

I am no longer the wretch of yesterday, said I to Felicia, since
my sufferings have melted you to pity. How deep is my debt to
your friend for her kind interference in my behalf. Sir, answered
she, Theodora can do what she pleases with me. She has brought me
over to your side of the question; and if I can do you a
kindness, you shall soon be at the summit of your wishes; but,
with all my partiality in your favour, I know not how far my
efforts may be successful. It would be cruel to mislead you: the
prize will not be gained without a severe conflict. The object of
your passion is betrothed to another gentleman, and her character
most inauspicious to your designs. Such is her pride, and so
closely locked are her secrets within her own breast, that if, by
constancy and assiduities, you could extort from her a few sighs,
fancy not that her haughty spirit would indulge your ears with
their music. Ah! my dear Felicia, exclaimed I in an agony, why
will you thus magnify the obstacles in my way? To set them in
array will kill me. Lead me on with false hopes, if you will; but
do not drive me to despair. With these words I took one of her
hands, pressed it between mine, and slid a diamond on her finger
value three hundred pistoles, with such a moving compliment as
made her weep again.

Such speeches and corresponding actions deserved some scanty
comfort. She smoothed a little the rugged path of love. Sir, said
she, what I have just been telling you need not quite quench your
hope. Your rival, it is true, is in possession of the ground. He
comes back and fore as he pleases, he toys with her as often as
he likes, but all that is in your favour. The habit of constant
intercourse sheds a languor over their meetings. They part
without pain, and come together without emotion. One would take
them for man and wife. In a word, my mistress has no marks of
violent love for Don Austin. Besides, in point of person, there
is such a difference between you and him as cannot fail to catch
the eye of a nice observer like Donna Helena. Therefore do not be
cast down. Continue your particular attentions. You shall have a
second in me. I shall let no opportunity escape of pointing out
to my mistress the merit of all your exertions to please her. In
vain shall she intrench herself behind reserve. In spite of guard
and garrison, I will ransack the muster-roll of her sentiments.

Now were my open attacks and secret ambuscades more fiercely
pointed against the daughter of Don George. Among the rest, I
entertained her with a serenade. After the concert Felicia, to
sound her mistress, begged to know how she had been entertained.
The singer had a good voice, said Donna Helena. But how did you
like the words? replied the abigail. I scarcely noted them,
returned the lady; the music engrossed my whole attention. The
poetry excited as little curiosity as its author. If that is the
case, exclaimed the chambermaid, poor Don Gaston do Cogollos is
reckoning without his host; and a miserable spendthrift of his
glances, to be always ogling at our lattice-work. Perhaps it may
not be he, said the mistress with petrifying indifference, but
some other spark, announcing his passion by this concert. Excuse
me, answered Felicia, it is Don Gaston himself who accosted me
this morning in the street, and implored me to assure you how he
adored, in defiance of your rigorous repulses: but that he should
esteem himself the most blest of mortals, if you would allow him
to soothe his desponding thoughts by all the most delicate and
impassioned attentions. Judge now if I can be mistaken, after so
open an avowal.

Don George's daughter changed countenance at once, and said to
her servant with a severe frown, You might well have dispensed
with the relation of this impertinent discourse. Bring me no more
such idle tales; and tell this young madman, when next he accosts
you, to play off his shallow artifices on some more accommodating
fool; but, at all events, let him choose a more gentlemanly
recreation than that of lounging all day at his window, and
prying into the privacy of my apartment.

This message was faithfully delivered at my next interview with
Felicia, who assured me that her mistress's modes of speech were
not to be taken in their literal construction, but that my
affairs were in the best possible train. For my part, being
little read in the science of coquetry, and finding no favourable
sense on the face of the author's original words, I was half out
of humour with the wire-drawn comments of the critic. She laughed
at my misgiving, and asked her friend for pen, ink, and paper,
saying: Sir knight of the doleful countenance, write immediately
to Donna Helena as dolefully as you look. Make echo ring with
your sufferings; outsigh the river's murmur; and, above all, let
rocks and woods resound with the prohibition of appearing at your
window. Then pawn your existence on obeying her, though without
the possibility ever to redeem the pledge. Turn all that nonsense
into pretty sentences, as you gay deceivers so well know how to
do, and leave the rest to me. The event, I flatter myself will
redound more than you are aware to the honour of my penetration.

He must have been a strange lover who would not have profited by
so opportune an occasion of writing to his mistress. My letter
was couched in the most pathetic terms. Felicia smiled at its
contents; and said, that if the women knew the art of infatuating
men, the men in return had borrowed their influence over women
from the arch wheedler himself. My privy counsellor took the
note, and went back to Don George's, with a special injunction
that my windows should be fast shut for some days.

Madam, said she, going up to Donna Helena, I met Don Gaston. He
must needs endeavour to come round me with his flattering
speeches. In tremulous accents, like a culprit pleading against
his sentence, he begged to know whether I had spoken to you on
his behalf. Then, in prompt and faithful compliance with your
orders, I snapped up the words out of his mouth. To be sure, my
tongue did run at a fine rate against him. I called him all
manner of names, and left him in the street like a stock, staring
at my termagant loquacity. I am delighted, answered Donna Helena,
that you have disengaged me from that troublesome person. But
there was no occasion to have snubbed him so unmercifully. A
creature of your degree should always keep a good tongue in its
mouth. Madam, replied the domestic, one cannot get rid of a
determined lover by mincing one's words, though it comes to much
the same thing when one flies into a passion. Don Gaston, for
instance, was not to be bullied out of his senses. After having
given it him on both sides of his ears, as I told you, I went on
that errand of yours to the house of your relation. The lady, as
ill-luck would have it, kept me longer than she ought. I say
longer than she ought, because my plague and torment met me on my
return. Who the deuce would have thought of seeing him? It put me
all in a twitter; but then my tongue, which at other times is apt
to be in a twitter, stuck motionless in my mouth. While my tongue
stuck motionless in my mouth, what did he do? He slid a paper
into my hand without giving me time to consider whether I should
take it or no, and made off in a moment.

After this introduction, she drew my letter from under her stays,
and gave it with half a banter to her mistress, who affected to
read it in humorous scorn, but digested the contents most
greedily, and then put on the starch, offended prude. In good
earnest, Felicia, said she with all the gravity she could assume,
you were extremely off your guard, quite bewildered and
fascinated, to have taken the charge of such an epistle. What
construction would Don Gaston put upon it? What must I think of
it myself? You give me reason, by this strange behaviour, to
mistrust your fidelity, while he must suspect me of encouraging
his odious suit. Alas! he may, perhaps, lay that flattering
unction to his soul, that my love is legible in these characters,
and not his trespass. Only consider how you lay my towering
pride. Oh! quite the reverse, madam, answered the petticoated
pleader; it is impossible for him to think that; and if he did,
he would soon be convinced with a flea in his ear. I shall tell
him, when next we meet, that I have delivered his letter, that
you glanced at the superscription with petrifying indifference,
and then, without reading a word, tore it into ten thousand
pieces. You may swear that I did not read it with a safe
conscience, replied Donna Helena. I should be puzzled to retrace
a single sentiment. Don George's daughter, not contented with
these words, suited the action to them, tore my letter, and
imposed silence on my advocate.

As I had promised no longer to play the lover at my window, the
farce of obedience was kept up for several days. Ogling being
interdicted, my courtship was doomed to enter in at my Helena's
obdurate ears. One night I at tended under her balcony with
musicians; the first bars of the serenade were already playing,
when a swaggering blade, sword in hand, rushed in upon our
harmony, laying about him to the right and left, to the utter
discomfiture of the troop. Such mad warfare fired my tilting
propensities to equal fury. The affray became serious. Donna
Helena and her maid were disturbed by the clash of swords. They
looked out at their lattice, and saw two men engaged. Their cries
roused Don George and his servants. The whole neighbourhood was
assembled to part the combatants. But they came too late: on the
field of battle, bathed in his own blood and almost lifeless, lay
my unfortunate body. They carried me to my aunt's, and sent for
the best surgical assistance in the place.

All the world was merciful, and wished me well, especially Donna
Helena, whose heart was now unmasked. Her forced severity yielded
to her natural feelings. Would you believe it? The cold,
relentless, insensible, was kindled into the warmest of love's
votaries. She wore out the remainder of the night in weeping with
her faithful confidante, and giving her cousin, Don Austin de
Olighera, to perdition: for him they taxed with the plotted
massacre, and the bill was a true one. He could hide his heart as
well as his cousin; he therefore watched my motions, without
seeming to suspect them; and fancying them not to be without a
corresponding impulse, he resolved not to be sacrificed with
impunity. The accident was an awkward one to me, but it ended in
overpowering rapture. Dangerous as my wound was, the surgeons
soon brought me about. I was still confined to my chamber, when
my aunt, Donna Eleonora, went over to Don George, and made
proposals for Donna Helena. He consented the more readily to the
marriage, as he never expected to see Don Austin again. The good
old man was afraid of his daughter's not liking me, because
cousin Olighera had kept her company; but she was so tractable to
the parental behest, as to furnish grounds for believing that in
Spain, as in other countries, the species, not the individual, is
the object with the sex.

Felicia, at our first private meeting, communicated the emotions
of her mistress on my misfortune. Now, like another Paris, I
thought Troy well lost for my Helen, and blessed the happy
consequences of my wound. Don George allowed me to speak with his
daughter in presence of her attendant. What a heavenly interview!
I begged and prayed the lady so earnestly to tell me whether her
sufferance of my vows was forced upon her by her father, that she
at length confessed her obedience to be in unison with her
inclinations. After so delicious a declaration, my whole soul was
given up to love and pleasurable gratifications. Our nuptials
were to be graced by a magnificent procession of all the
principal people in Coria and the neighbourhood.

I gave a splendid party at my aunt's country-house, in the
suburbs on the side of Manroi. Don George, his daughter, the
family, and friends on both sides were present. There was a
concert of vocal and instrumental music, with a company of
strolling players, to represent a comedy. In the middle of the
festivities, some one whispered me that a man wanted to speak
with me in the hall. I got up from table to go and see who it
was. The stranger looked like a gentleman's servant. He put a
letter into my hand, containing these words:

"If you have any sense of honour, as a knight of your order ought
to have, you will not fail to attend to-morrow morning in the
plain of Manroi. There you will find an antagonist, ready to give
you your revenge for his former attack upon your person, or, what
he rather hopes and meditates, to spoil your connubial transports
with Donna Helena.

"DON AUSTIN DE OLIGHERA."


If love is a Spanish passion, revenge is the Spanish lunacy. Such
a note as this was not to be read with composure. At the mere
subscription of Don Austin, there kindled in my veins a fire,
which almost made me forget the claims of hospitality. I was
tempted to steal away from my company, and seek my antagonist on
the instant. For fear of disturbing the merriment, however, I
bridled in my rage, and said to the messenger: My friend, you may
tell your employer that I shall meet him on the appointed spot at
sun-rise, and resume the contest with obstinacy equal to his own.

After sending this answer, I resumed my seat at table with so
composed a mien, that no creature had the least suspicion of what
had occurred. During the rest of the day, I gave myself up to the
pleasures of the festival, which ended not till midnight. The
guests then returned to town, but I staid behind, under pretext
of taking the air on the following morning. Instead of going to
bed, I watched for the dawn with maddening impatience. With the
first ray I got on horseback, and rode alone towards Manroi. On
the plain was a horseman, riding up to me at full speed. I pushed
forward, and we met half way. It was my rival. Knight, said he,
superciliously, it is against my will that I meet you a second
time on the same occasion, but you have brought your fate on
yourself. After the adventure of the serenade, you ought to have
waived your pretensions to Don George's daughter, or at least to
have been assured that the support of them must cost you dearer
than a single encounter. You are too much elated, answered I,
with an advantage which is less owing, perhaps, to your superior
skill, than to the darkness of the night. Remember, that victory
is of the same blind family with fortune. It shall be my lot to
teach you, replied he with insulting scorn, that I have unsealed
the eyes of both.

At this proud defiance, we both dismounted, tied our horses to a
tree, and engaged with equal fury. I must candidly acknowledge
the prowess of my antagonist, who was a consummate master of
fencing. My life was exposed to the greatest possible danger.
Nevertheless, as the strong is often vanquished by the weak, my
rival, in spite of all his science, received a thrust through the
heart, and fell a lifeless corpse.

I immediately returned, and told a confidential servant what had
happened, requesting him to take horse and acquaint my aunt,
before the officers of justice could get intelligence of the
event. He was also to obtain from her a supply of money and
jewels, and then join me at the first inn as you enter Plazencia.

All this was performed within three hours. Donna Eleonora rather
triumphed than mourned over a catastrophe, which restored my
injured honour; and sent me large remittances for my travels
abroad, till the affair had blown over.

Not to dwell on indifferent circumstances, suffice it to say,
that I embarked for Italy, and equipped myself so as to make a
respectable figure at the several courts.

While I was endeavouring to beguile the weary hours of absence,
Helena was weeping at home from the same cause. Instead of
joining in the family resentment, her heart was panting for a
compromise, and for my speedy return. Six months had already
elapsed, and I firmly believe that her constancy would have been
proof against the track of time, had time been seconded by no
more powerful ally. Don Blas de Combados, a gentleman from the
western coast of Galicia, came to Coria, to take possession of a
rich inheritance unsuccessfully contested by a near relation. He
liked that country so much better than his own, that he made it
his principal residence. Combados was a personable man. His
manners were gentle and well-bred, his conversation most
insinuating. With such a passport, he soon got into the best
company, and knew all the family concerns of the place.

It was not long before he heard of Don George's daughter, and of
her extraordinary beauty. This touched his curiosity nearly; he
was eager to behold so formidable a lady. For this purpose, he
endeavoured to worm himself into the good graces of her father,
and succeeded so well, that the old gentleman, already looking on
him as a son-in-law, gave him free admission to the house, and
the liberty of conversing with Donna Helena in his presence. The
Galician soon became deeply enamoured of her: indeed, it was the
common fate of all who had ever beheld her charms. He opened his
heart to Don George, who consented to his paying his addresses,
but told him that so far from offering violence to her
inclination, he should never interfere in her choice. Hereupon
Don Blas pressed every device that impassioned ingenuity could
suggest into his service, to melt and warm the icicles of
reserve; but the lady was impenetrable to his arts, fast bound in
the fetters of an earlier love. Felicia, however, was in the new
suitor's interest, convinced of his merit by the universal
argument. All the faculties of her soul were called forth in his
cause. On the other hand, the father urged his wishes and
entreaties. Thus was Donna Helena tormented for a whole year with
their importunities, and yet her faith continued unshaken.

Combados finding that Don George and Felicia took up his cause
with very little success, proposed an expedient for conquering
prejudice to the following effect. We will suppose a merchant of
Coria to have received a letter from his Italian correspondent,
in which, among the news of the day, there shall be the following
paragraph: "A Spanish gentleman, Don Gaston de Cogollos, has
lately arrived at the court of Parma. He is said to he nephew and
sole heir to a rich widow of Coria. He is paying his addresses to
a nobleman's daughter; but the family wishes to ascertain the
validity of his pretensions. Send me word, therefore, whether you
know this Don Gaston, together with the amount of his aunt's
fortune. On your answer the marriage will depend. Parma, day of,
&c."

The old gentleman considered this trick as a mere ebullition of
humour, a lawful stratagem of amorous warfare; and the jade of a
go-between, with conscience still more callous than her master's,
was delighted with the probability of the manoeuvre. It seemed to
be so much the more happily imagined, as they knew Helena to be a
proud girl, capable of taking decisive measures, in the moment of
surprise and indignation. Don George undertook to be the herald
of my fickleness, and by way of colouring the contrivance more
naturally, to confront the pretended correspondent with her. This
project was executed as soon as formed. The father, with
counterfeit emotions of displeasure, said to Donna Helena:
Daughter, it is not enough now to tell you that our relations
inveigh against an alliance with Don Austin's murderer; a still
stronger reason henceforward presses, to detach you from Don
Gaston. It may well overwhelm you with shame, to have been his
dupe so long. Here is an undeniable proof of his inconstancy.
Only read this letter just received by a merchant of Coria from
Italy. The trembling Helena caught at this forged paper; glanced
over the writing; then weighed every expression, and stood aghast
at the import of the whole. A keen pang of disappointment wrung
from her a few reluctant tears; but pride came to her assistance;
she wiped away the falling drops of weakness, and said to her
father in a determined tone: Sir, you have just been witness of
my folly; now bear testimony to my triumph over myself. The
delusion is past; Don Gaston is the object of my utter contempt.
I am ready to meet Don Blas at the altar, and be beforehand with
the traitor in the pledge of our transferred affections. Don
George, transported with joy at this change, embraced his
daughter, extolled her spirit to the skies, and hastened the
necessary preparations, with all the self-complacency of a
successful plotter.

Thus was Donna Helena snatched from me. She threw herself into
the arms of Combados in a pet, not listening to the secret
whispers of love within her breast, nor suspecting a story which
ought to have seemed so improbable in the annals of true passion.
The haughty are always the victims of their own rash conclusions.
Resentment of insulted beauty triumphed wholly over the
suggestions of tenderness. And yet, a few days after marriage,
there came over her some feelings of remorse for her
precipitation; it struck her that the letter might have been a
forgery; and the very possibility disturbed her peace. But the
enamoured Don Blas left his wife no time to nurse up thoughts
injurious to
their new-found joys; a succession of gaiety and pleasure kept
her in a thoughtless whirl, and shielded her from the pangs of
unavailing repentance.

She appeared to be in high good humour with so spirit-stirring a
husband; so that they were living together in perfect unanimity,
when my aunt adjusted my affair with Don Austin's relations. Of
this she wrote me word to Italy. I returned on the wings of love.
Donna Eleonora, not having announced the marriage, informed me of
it on my arrival; and remarking what pain it gave me, said: You
are in the wrong, nephew, to shew so much feeling for a faithless
fair. Banish from your memory a person so unworthy to share in
its tender recollections.

As my aunt did not know how Donna Helena had been played upon,
she had reason to talk as she did: nor could she have given me
better advice. To affect indifference, if not to conquer my
passion, was my bounden duty. Yet there could be no harm in just
inquiring by what means this union had been brought to bear. To
get at the truth, I determined on applying to Felicia's friend
Theodora. There I met with Felicia herself, who was confounded at
my unwelcome presence, and would have escaped from the necessity
of explanation. But I stopped her. Why do you avoid me? said I.
Has your perjured mistress forbidden you to give ear to my
complaints? or would you make a merit with the ungrateful woman,
of your voluntary refusal?

Sir, answered the plotting abigail, I confess my fault, and throw
myself on your mercy. Your appearance here has filled me with
remorse. My mistress has been betrayed, and unhappily in part by
my agency. The particulars of their infernal device followed this
avowal, with an endeavour to make me amends for its lamentable
consequence. To this effect, she offered me her services with her
mistress, and promised to undeceive her; in a word, to work night
and day, that she might soften the rigour of my sufferings, and
open the career of hope.

I pass over the numberless contradictions she experienced, before
she could accomplish the projected interview. It was at length
arranged to admit me privately, while Don Blas was at his
hunting-seat. The plot did not linger. The husband went into the
country, and they sent for me to his lady's apartment.

My onset was reproachful in the extreme, but my mouth was shut
upon the subject. It is useless to look back upon the past, said
the lady. It can be no part of our present intention to work upon
each other's feelings; and you are grievously mistaken, if you
fancy me inclined to flatter your aspiring hopes. My sole
inducement for receiving you here was to tell you personally,
that you have only henceforth to forget me. Perhaps I might have
been better satisfied with my lot, had it been united with yours;
but since heaven has ordered it otherwise, we must submit to its
decrees.

What! madam, answered I, is it not enough to have lost you, to
see my successful rival in quiet possession of all my soul holds
dear, but I must also banish you from my thoughts? You would tear
from me even my passion, my only remaining blessing! And think
you that a man, whom you have once enchanted, can recover his
self-possession? Know yourself better, and cease to enforce
impracticable behests. Well then! if so, rejoined she with
hurried importunity, do you cease to flatter yourself with
interesting my gratitude or my pity. In one short word, the wife
of Don Blas shall never be the mistress of Don Gaston. Let us at
once end a conversation at which delicacy revolts m spite of
virtue, and peremptorily forbids its longer continuance.

I now threw myself at the lady's feet in despair. All the powers
of language and of tears were called forth to soften her. But
even this served only to excite some inbred sentiments of
compassion, stifled as soon as born, and sacrificed at the shrine
of duty. After having fruitlessly exhausted all my stores of
tender persuasion, rage took possession of my breast. I drew my
sword, and would have fallen on its point before the inexorable
Helena, but she saw my design and prevented it. Stay your rash
hand, Cogollos, said she. Is it thus that you consult my
reputation? In dying thus and here, you will brand me with
dishonour, and my husband with the imputation of murder.

In the agony of my despair, far from yielding to these
suggestions, I only struggled against the preventive efforts of
the two women, and should have struggled too successfully, if Don
Blas had not appeared to second them. He had been apprized of our
assignation; and instead of going into the country, had concealed
himself behind the hangings, to overhear our conference. Don
Gaston, cried he, as he arrested my uplifted arm, recall your
scattered senses, and no longer give a loose to these mad
transports.

Here I could hold no longer. Is it for you, said I, to turn me
from my resolution? You ought rather yourself to plunge a dagger
in my bosom. My love, with all its train of miseries, is an
insult to you. Have you not surprised me in your wife's apartment
at this unseasonable hour? what greater provocation can you want
for your revenge? Stab me, and rid yourself of a man, who can
only give up the adoration of Donna Helena with his life. It is
in vain, answered Don Blas, that you endeavour to interest my
honour in your destruction. You are sufficiently punished for
your rashness; and my wife's imprudence, in giving you this
opportunity of indulging it, is sanctified by the purity of her
sentiments. Take my advice, Cogollos: shrink not effeminately
from your wayward destiny, but bear up against it with the
patient courage of a hero.

The prudent Galician, by such language, gradually composed the
ferment of my mind, and waked me once more to virtue. I withdrew
in the determination of removing far from the scene of my folly,
and went for Madrid, two days afterwards. There, pursuing the
career of fortune and preferment, I appeared at court, and laid
myself out for connections. But it was my ill luck to attach
myself particularly to the Marquis of Villareal, a Portuguese
grandee, who, lying under a suspicion of intending to emancipate
his country from the Spanish yoke, is now in the castle of
Alicant. As the Duke of Lerma knew me to be closely connected
with this nobleman, he gave orders for my arrest and detention
here. That minister thought me capable of engaging in such a
project -- he could not have offered a more outrageous affront to
a man of noble birth and a Castilian.

Don Gaston thus ended his story. By way of consolation I said to
him, Illustrious sir, your honour can receive no taint from this
temporary detainer, and your interest will probably be promoted
by it in the end. When the Duke of Lerma shall be convinced of
your innocence, he will not fail to give you a considerable post,
and thus retrieve the character of a gentleman unjustly accused
of treason.



CH. VII. -- Scipio finds Gil Blas out in the tower of Segovia,
and brings him a budget of news.


OUR conversation was interrupted by Tordesillas, who came into
the room, and addressed me thus: Signor Gil Blas, I have just
been speaking with a young man at the prison gate. He inquired if
you were not here, and looked much mortified at my refusal to
satisfy his curiosity. Noble governor, said he, with tears in his
eyes, do not reject my most humble petition. I am Signor de
Santillane's principal domestic, and you will do an act of
charity by allowing me to see him. You pass for a kind-hearted
gentleman in Segovia; I hope you will not deny me the favour of
conversing for a few minutes with my dear master, who is
unfortunate rather than criminal. In short, continued Don Andrew,
the lad was so importunate, that I promised to comply with his
wishes this evening.

I assured Tordesillas that he could not have pleased me better
than by bringing this young man to me, who could probably
communicate tidings of the last importance. I waited with
impatience for the entrance of my faithful Scipio; since I could
not doubt him to be the man, nor was I mistaken in my conjecture.
He was introduced at the time appointed; and his joy, which only
mine could equal, broke forth into the most whimsical
demonstrations. On my side, in the ecstasy of delight, I
stretched out my arms to him, and he rushed into them with no
courtly measured embrace. All distinctions of master and
dependent were levelled in the sympathetic rapture of our
meeting.

When our transports had subsided a little, I inquired into the
state of my household. You have neither household nor house,
answered he: to spare you a long string of questions, I will sum
up your worldly concerns in two words. Your property has been
pillaged at both ends, both by the banditti of the law and by
your own retainers, who, regarding you as a ruined man, paid
themselves their own wages out of whatever they found that was
portable. Luckily for you, I had the dexterity to save from their
harpy clutches two large bags of double pistoles. Salero, in
whose custody I deposited them, will make restitution on your
release, which cannot be far distant, as you were put upon his
majesty's pension list of prisoners without the Duke of Lerma's
knowledge or consent.

I asked Scipio how he knew his excellency to have had no share in
my arrest. You may depend on it, answered he, my information is
undeniable. One of my friends in the Duke of Uzeda's confidence
acquainted me with all the circumstances of your imprisonment.
Calderona, having discovered by a spy that Signora Sirena, with
the handle of an alias to her name, was receiving night visits
from the Prince of Spain, and that the Count de Lemos managed
that intrigue by the panderism of Signor de Santillane,
determined to be revenged on the whole knot. To this end he
waited on the Duke of Uzeda, and discovered the whole affair. The
duke, overjoyed at such a fine opportunity of ruining his enemy,
did not fail to bestir himself. He laid his information before
the king, and painted the prince's danger in the most lively
colours. His majesty was much angered, and shewed that he was so,
by sending Sirena to the nunnery provided for such frail sisters,
banishing the Count de Lemos, and condemning Gil Blas to
perpetual imprisonment.

This, pursued Scipio, is what my friend told me. Hence, you
gather your misfortune to be the Duke of Uzeda's handiwork, or
rather Calderona's.

Thus it seemed probable that my affairs might be reinstated in
time; that the Duke of Lerma, chagrined at his nephew's
banishment, would move heaven and earth for that nobleman's
recall; and it might not be too much to expect that his
excellency would not forget me. What a delicate gipsy is hope!
She wheedled me out of all anxiety about my shattered fortunes,
and made me as light-hearted as if I had good reason to be so. My
prison looked not like the dungeon of perpetual misery, but like
the vestibule to a more distinguished station. For thus ran the
train of my reasoning: Don Fernando Borgia, Father Jerome of
Florence, and more than all, Friar Louis of Aliaga, who may thank
him for his place about the king's person, are the prime
minister's partisans. With the aid of such powerful friends, his
excellency will bear down all opposition, even supposing no
change to take place in the political barometer. But his
majesty's health is very precarious. The first act of a new reign
would be to recall the Count de Lemos; he would not feel himself
at home in the young monarch's presence till he had introduced me
at court; and the young monarch
would not sit easy on his throne till he had showered benefits on
my head. Thus, feasting by anticipation on the pleasures of
futurity, I became callous to existing evils. The two bags, snug
in the goldsmith's custody, were no bad doubles to the part which
hope acted in this shifting pantomime.

It was impossible not to express my gratitude to Scipio for his
zeal and honesty. I offered him half the salvage, but he rejected
it. I expect, said he, a very different acknowledgment.
Astonished as much at his mysterious claim as at his refusal, I
asked what more I could do for him. Let us never part, answered
he. Allow me to link my fate with yours. I feel for you what I
never felt for any other master. And on my part, my good fellow,
said I, you may rest assured that your attachment is not thrown
away. You caught my fancy at first sight. We must have been born
under Libra or Gemini, where friendship is lord of the ascendant.
I willingly accept your proffered partnership, and will commence
business by prevailing with the warden to immure you along with
me in this tower. That is the very thing, exclaimed he. You were
beforehand with me, for I was just going to beg that favour. Your
company is dearer to me than liberty itself. I shall only just go
to Madrid now and then, to snuff the gale of the ministerial
atmosphere, and try whether any scent lies which may be
favourable for your pursuit. Thus will you combine in me a bosom
friend, a trusty messenger, and an unsuspected spy.

These advantages were too important for me to forego them. I
therefore kept so useful a person about me, with leave of the
obliging warden, who would not stand in the way of so soothing a
relief to the weariness of solitude.



CH. VIII. -- Scipio's first journey to Madrid: its object and
success. Gil Blas falls sick. The consequence of his illness.


IF it is a common proverb that our direst enemies are those of
our own household, the converse ought equally to be admitted
among the saws of a more candid experience. After such
incontestable proofs of Scipio's zeal, he became to me like
another self. All distinction of place was confounded between Gil
Blas and his secretary; all insolence was dropped on the one
hand, all cringing on the other. Their lodging, bed, and board
were in common.

Scipio's conversation was of a very lively turn; he might have
been dubbed the Spanish Momus, without any derogation to the
Punch of the Pantheon. But he had a long head, as well as a
fanciful brain, combining the characters of counsellor and
jester. My friend, said I, one day, what do you think of writing
to the Duke of Lerma? It could, methinks, do no harm. Why, as to
that, answered he, the great are such chameleons, that there is
no knowing where to have them.  At all events you may risk it;
though I would not lay the postage of your letter on its success.
The minister loves you, it is true; but then political love lacks
memory, as much as personal love lacks visual discrimination. Out
of sight, out of mind! is at once the motto and the stigma of
these gentry.

True as this may be in the general, replied I, my patron is a
glorious exception. His kindness lives in my recollection. I am
persuaded that he suffers for my sufferings, and that they are
incessantly preying on his spirits. We must give him credit for
only waiting till the king's anger shall pass away. Be it so,
resumed he; I wish you may not reckon without your host. Assail
his excellency then with an epistle to stir the waters. I will
engage to deliver it into his own hands. Pen, ink, and paper
being brought, I composed a specimen of eloquence which Scipio
declared to be a paragon of pathos, and Tordesillas preferred,
for the cant of sermonizing prolixity, to the old archbishop's
homilies.

I flattered myself that there would be tears in the Duke of
Lerma's eyes, and distraction in his aspect, at the detail of
miseries which existed only on paper. In that assurance, I
despatched my messenger, who no sooner got to Madrid, than he
went to the minister's. Meeting with an old domestic of my
acquaintance, he had no difficulty in gaining access to the duke.
My lord, said Scipio to his excellency, as he delivered the
packet, one of your most devoted servants, lying at his length on
straw, in a damp and dreary dungeon at Segovia, most humbly
supplicates for the perusal of this letter, which a tender-
hearted turnkey has furnished him with the means of writing. The
minister opened the letter, and glanced over the contents. But
though he found there a motive and a cue for passion, enough to
amaze all his faculties at once, far from drowning the floor with
briny secretions, he cleaved the ear of his household, and smote
the heart of my courier with horrid speech: Friend, tell
Santillane that he has a great deal of impudence to address me,
after so rank an offence, worthily confronted by the severe
sentence of the king. Under that sentence let the wretch drag out
his days, nor look to my mediation for a respite.

Scipio, though neither dull nor muddy-mettled, began to be
unpregnant of this defeated cause. Yet he was not so pigeon-
livered as to retire without an effort in my favour. My lord,
replied he, this poor prisoner will give up the ghost with grief,
at the recital of your excellency's displeasure. The duke
answered like a prime minister, with a supercilious corrugation
of features, and a decisive revolution of his front to some more
prosperous suitor. This he did, to cover his own share in the
shame of pimping; and such treatment must all those hireling
scavengers expect, who rake in the filth and ordure of rotten
statesmen, courtiers, and politicians.

My secretary came back to Segovia and delivered the result of his
mission. And now behold me, sunk deeper than on the first day of
my imprisonment, in the gulf of affliction and despair! The Duke
of Lerma's turning king's evidence gave a hanging posture to my
affairs. My courage was run out; and though they did all they
could to keep up my spirits, the agitation and distress of my
mind threw me into a fever.

The warden, who took a lively interest in my recovery, fancying
in his unmedical head that physicians cured fevers, brought me a
double dose of death in two of that doleful deity's most
practised executioners. Signor Gil Blas, said he, as he ushered
in their grisly forms, here are two godsons of Hippocrates, who
are come to feel your pulse, and to augment the number of their
trophies in your person. I was so prejudiced against the whole
faculty, that I should certainly have given them a very
discouraging reception, had life retained its usual charms in my
estimation; but being bent on my departure from this vale of
tears, I felt obliged to Tordesillas for hastening my journey, by
a safer conveyance than the crime of suicide.

My good sir, said one of the pair, your recovery will, under
Providence, depend on your entire confidence in our skill.
Implicit confidence I answered I: with your assistance, I am
fully persuaded that a few days will place me beyond the reach of
fever, and all the shocks that flesh is heir to. Yes! with the
blessing of Heaven, rejoined he, it is a consummation devoutly to
be wished, and easily to be effected. At all events, our best
endeavours shall not be wanting. And indeed it was no joke: for
they got me into such fine training for the other world, that few
of my material particles were left in this. Already had Don
Andrew, observing me fumble with the sheets, and smile upon my
fingers' ends, and thinking there was but one way, sent for a
Franciscan to shew it me: already had the good father, having
mumbled over the salvation of my soul, retired to the refection
of his own body: and my own opinion leaned to the immediate
necessity of making a good end. I beckoned Scipio to my bedside,
My dear friend, said I, in the faint accents of a tortured and
evacuated patient I give and bequeath to you one of the bags in
Gabriel's possession; the other you must carry to my father and
mother in the Asturias, who, if still living, must be in narrow
circumstances. But, alas! I fear, they have not been able to bear
up against my ingratitude. Muscada's report of my unnatural
behaviour must have brought their grey hairs with sorrow to the
grave. Should Heaven have fortified their tender hearts against
my indifference, you will give them the bag of doubloons, with
assurances of my dying remorse: and, if they are no more, I
charge you to lay out the money in masses for the repose of their
souls and of mine. Then did I stretch out my hand, which he
bathed in silent tears. It is not always true, that the mourning
of an heir is mirth in masquerade.

For some hours I fancied myself outward-bound, and on the point
of sailing; but the wind changed. My pilots having quitted the
helm, and left the vessel to the steerage of nature, the danger
of shipwreck disappeared. The fever, mutinying against its
commanding officers, gave all their prognostics the lie, and
acted contrary to general orders. I got better by degrees, in
mind as well as in body. My consolation was all derived from
within. I looked at wealth and honours with the eye of a dying
anchorite, and blessed the malady which restored my soul. I
abjured courts, politics, and the Duke of Lerma. If ever my
prison doors were opened, it was my fixed resolve to buy a
cottage, and live like a philosopher.

My bosom friend applauded my design, and to further its
execution, under took a second journey to solicit my release, by
the intervention of a clever girl about the person of the
prince's nurse. He contended that a prison was a prison still, in
spite of kind indulgence and good cheer. In this I agreed, and
gave him leave to depart, with a fervent prayer to Heaven that we
might soon take possession of our hermitage.



CH. IX. -- Scipio's second journey to Madrid. Gil Blas is set at
liberty on certain conditions. Their departure from the tower of
Segovia, and conversation on their journey.

WHILE waiting for Scipio's return from Madrid, I began a course
of study. Tordesillas furnished me with more books than I wanted.
He borrowed them from an old officer who could not read, but had
fitted up a magnificent library, that he might pass for a man of
learning. Above all, I delighted in moral essays and treatises,
because they abounded in common-places according with my
antipathy to courts and philosophic relish of solitude.

Three weeks elapsed before I heard a syllable from my negotiator,
who returned at length with a cheerful countenance, and news to
the following effect: By the intercession of a hundred pistoles
with the chambermaid, and her intercession with her mistress, the
Prince of Spain has been prevailed with to plead for your
enlargement with his royal father. I hastened hither to announce
these happy tidings, and must return immediately to put the last
hand to my work. With these words, he left me, and went back to
court

At the week's end my expeditious agent returned, with the
intelligence that the prince had procured my liberty, not without
some difficulty. On the same day my generous keeper confirmed the
assurance in person, with the kindest congratulations, and the
following notice: --  Your prison doors are open, but on two
conditions, which I am sorry that my duty obliges me to announce,
because they will probably be disagreeable to you. His majesty
expressly forbids you to shew your face at court, or to be found
within the limits of the two Castiles on this day month. I am
extremely sorry that you are interdicted from court. And I am
delighted at it, answered I. Witness all the powers above! I
asked the king for only one favour; he has granted me two.

With my liberty thus confirmed, I hired a couple of mules, on
which we mounted the next day, after taking leave of Cogollos,
and thanking Tordesillas a thousand times for all his instances
of friendship. We set forward cheerfully on the road to Madrid,
to draw our deposit out of Signor Gabriel's hands, amounting to a
thousand doubloons. On the road my fellow-traveller observed: If
we are not rich enough to purchase a splendid property, we can at
least secure ease and competency to ourselves. A cabin, answered
I, would be large enough for my most ambitious thoughts. Though
scarcely at the middle period of life, the world has lost its
charms for me; its hopes, its fears, its cares, its duties, are
all absorbed in the selfishness of philosophical retirement.
Independently of these principles, I can assure you I have
painted for myself a rural landscape, with a foreground of
innocent pleasures, and pastoral simplicity in the perspective.
Already does the enamel of the meadows glitter under my eyes;
already does the river's murmur accord with the winged chorus of
the grove: hunting exasperates the manly virtues, and fishing
preaches patience. Only figure to yourself; my friend, what a
continual round of amusement solitude may furnish, and you will
pant to be admitted of her crew. Then for the economy of our
table, the simplest will be the cheapest, and of course the best.
Unadulterated Ceres shall be our official caterer: when hunger
shall have tamed our fastidious appetites into sobriety, a
mumbled crust will relish like an ortolan. The supreme delight of
eating is not in the thing ate, but in the palate of him who
eats; a proposition in culinary philosophy, proved by the
frequent loathing of my own stomach, through a long series of
ministerial dinners. Abstemiousness is a luxury of the most
exquisite refinement, and the best recipe in the materia medica.

With your good leave, Signor Gil Blas, interrupted my secretary,
I am not altogether of your mind respecting the luscious treat of
abstemiousness. Why should we mess like the bankrupt sages of
antiquity? Surely we may indulge the carnal man a little, without
any reasonable offence to the spiritual. Since we have, by the
blessing of Providence and my forecast, wherewithal to keep the 
spit and the spigot in exercise, do not let us take up our abode
with famine and wretchedness. As soon as we get settled, we must
stock our cellar, and establish a respectable larder, like people
who know what is what, and do not separate themselves from the
vulgar crowd to renounce the good things of this life, but to
taste them with a more exquisite relish. As Hesiod says,
Enjoy thy riches with a liberal soul;Plenteous the feast, all
smiling be the bowl.
And again,To stint the wine a frugal husband shows,When from the
middle of the cask it flows.

What the devil, Master Scipio, interrupted I in my turn, you can
cap verses out of the Greek poets! And pray where did you get
acquainted with Hesiod? In very learned company, answered he. I
lived some time with a walking dictionary at Salamanca, a fellow
up to the elbows in quotation and commentary. He could put a
large volume together like a house of cards. His library
furnished him with a hodge-podge of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
common places, which he translated into buckram Castilian. As I
was his transcriber, some tags of verses, stings of epigrams, and
sage truisms stuck by the way. With such an apparatus, replied I,
your memory must be most philosophically stocked. But, not to
lose sight of our future prospects, whereabouts in Spain had we
best fix our Socratic abode? My voice is for Arragon, resumed my
counsellor. We shall there enjoy all the beauties of nature, and
lead the life of Paradise. Well, then, for Arragon! said I. May
it teem with all the dear delights that youthful poets fancy when
they dream!



CH. X.  --  Their doings at Madrid. The rencounter of Gil Blas in
the street, and its consequences.


ON our arrival in Madrid, we alighted at a little public-house
where Scipio had been accustomed to put up, whence our first
visit was to my banker, Salero. He received us very cordially,
and expressed the highest satisfaction at my release. Indeed,
added he, your untoward fate touched me so nearly as to change my
views of a political alliance. The fortunes of courtiers are like
castles in the air: so I have married my daughter Gabriela to a
wealthy trader. You have acted very wisely, answered I; for
besides that a bird in the hand is worth two in a bush, when a
plodding citizen aspires to the honour of bringing a man of
fashion into his family, he very often has an impertinent puppy
for his son-in-law.

Then changing the topic, and coming to the point: Signor Gabriel,
pursued I, we came to talk a little about the two thousand
pistoles which. . . . Your money is all ready, said the
goldsmith, interrupting me. He then took us into his closet, and
delivered the two bags, carefully labelled with my name on them.

I thanked Salero for his exactness, and heaven in my sleeve for
my escape from his daughter. At our inn we counted over the
money, and found it right, deducting fifty doubloons for the
expenses of my enlargement. Our thoughts were now wholly bent
upon Arragon. My secretary undertook to buy a carriage and two
mules. It was my office to provide household and body linen.
During my peregrinations for that purpose, I met Baron Steinbach,
the officer in the German Guards with whom Don Alphonso had been
brought up.

I touched my hat to him; he knew me again, and returned my
greeting warmly. My joy is extreme, said I, at seeing your
lordship in such fine health, to say nothing of my wish to
inquire after Don Caesar and Don Alphonso de Leyva. They are both
in Madrid, answered he, and staying at my house. They came to
town about three months ago, to be presented on occasion of Don
Alphonso's promotion. He has been appointed Governor of Valencia,
on the score of old family claims, without having in any shape
pushed his interest at court. Nothing could be more grateful to
his feelings, or prove more strongly our royal master's goodness,
who delights to recognize the merits of ancestry in the persons
of their descendants.

Though I knew more of this matter than Steinbach, I kept my
knowledge in the background. Yet so lively was my impatience to
hail my old masters, that he would not damp my ardour by delay. I
had a mind to try Don Alphonso, whether he still retained his
regard for me. He was playing at chess with Baroness Steinbach,
On my entrance, he started up from his game, ran towards me, and
squeezing me tight in his embrace: Santillane, said he, with
demonstrations of the sincerest joy, at length, then, you are
restored to my heart. I am delighted at it! It was not my fault
that we ever parted. You may remember how strongly I urged you
not to withdraw from the Castle of Leyva. You were deaf to my
entreaties. But I must not chide your obstinacy, because its
motive was the peace of the family. Yet you ought to have let me
hear from you, and to have spared my fruitless inquiries at
Grenada, where my brother-in-law, Don Ferdinand, sent me word
that you were. And now tell me what you are doing at Madrid. Of
course you have some situation here. Be assured that I shall
always take a lively interest in your concerns. Sir, answered I,
it is but four months since I occupied a considerable post at
court. I had the honour of being the Duke of Lerma's confidential
secretary. Can it be possible? exclaimed Don Alphonso, as if he
could scarcely believe his ears. What, were you so near the
person of the prime minister? I then related how I had gained and
lost his favour, and ended with avowing my determination to buy a
cottage and garden with the wreck of my shattered fortunes.

The son of Don Caesar heard me attentively, and made this answer:
My dear Gil Blas, you know how I have always loved you; nor shall
you longer be fortune's puppet I will set you above her vagaries,
by securing you an independence. Since you declare for a country
life, a little estate of ours near Lirias, about four leagues
from Valencia, shall be settled on you. You are acquainted with
the spot. Such a present we can make, without putting ourselves
to the least inconvenience. I can answer for my father's joining
in the act, and for Seraphina's entire approbation.

I threw myself at Don Alphonso's feet, who raised me immediately.
More penetrated by his affection than by his bounty, I pressed
his hand and said, Sir, your conduct charms me. Your noble gift
is the more welcome, as it precedes the knowledge of a service it
has been in my power to render you; and I had rather owe it to
your generosity, than to your gratitude. This governor of my
making did not know what to understand by the hint, and pressed
for an explanation. I gave it in full, to his utter astonishment.
Neither he nor Baron Steinbach could ever have the slightest
suspicion that the government of Valencia was owing to my
interest at court. Yet having no reason to doubt the fact, my
friend proposed to grant me an annuity of two thousand ducats, in
addition to the little farm at Lirias.

Hold your hand, Signor Don Alphonso! exclaimed I at this offer.
You must not set my avarice afloat again. I am myself a living
witness, that fortune may give superfluities to her favourites,
but has no competence to bestow. With pleasure will I accept of
the estate at Lirias, where my present property will be
sufficient for all my wants. Rather than increase my cares with
my possessions, I would build a hospital out of my existing
funds. Riches are a burden: and it must be a foolish animal that
would bear fardels in the manger or the field.

While we were talking after this fashion, Den Caesar came in. His
joy was not less than his son's at the sight of me; and being
informed of the family obligations, he again pressed me to accept
of the annuity, which I again refused. When the writings were
drawn, the father and son made the assignment their joint act and
deed, transferring to me the fee simple, and putting me in
immediate possession. My secretary half stared the eyes out of
his head, when I told him we lad a landed estate of our own, and
how we came by it. What is the value of this little freehold?
said he. Five hundred ducats per annum, answered I, and the farm
in high cultivation, within a ring fence. I have often been there
during my stewardship. There is a small house on the banks of the
Guadalaviar, in a little hamlet, surrounded by a charming
country.

What pleases me better than all, cried Scipio, is that we shall
have plenty of sporting, rare living, and excellent wine. Come,
master, let us leave this crowded city, and hasten to our
hermitage. I long to be there as much as you can do, answered I;
but I must first go to the Asturias. My father and mother are not
in comfortable circumstances. They shall therefore end their days
with me at Lirias. Heaven, perhaps, has thrown this windfall in
my way to try my filial duty, and would punish me for the neglect
of it Scipio approved my purpose, and urged its speedy execution.
Yes, my friend, said I, we will set out as soon as possible. I
shall consider it as my dear delight to
share the gifts of fortune with the authors of my existence. We
shall soon be settled in our country retreat; and then will I
write these two Latin verses over the door of my farm-house, in
letters of gold, for the pious edification of my rustic
neighbours:

Inveni portum. Spes et fortuna, valete.
Sat me lusistis; ludite nunc alios.



BOOK THE TENTH.



CH. I. -- Gil Blas sets out for the Asturias; and passes through
Valladolid, where he goes to see his old master, Doctor Sangrado.
By accident, he comes across Signor Manuel Ordonnez, governor of
the hospital.


JUST as I was arranging matters to take my departure from Madrid,
and go with Scipio to the Asturias, Paul V. gave the Duke of
Lerma a cardinal's hat. This pope, wishing to establish the
inquisition in the kingdom of Naples, invested the minister with
the purple, and by that means hoped to bring King Philip over to
so pious and praiseworthy a design. Those who were best
acquainted with this new member of the sacred college, thought
much like myself, that the church was in a fair way for
apostolical purity, after so ghostly an acquisition.

Scipio, who would have liked better to see me once more blazing
at court, than either cloistered or rusticated, advised me to
shew my face at the cardinal's audience. Perhaps, said he, his
eminence, finding you at large by the king's order, may think it
unnecessary to affect any further displeasure against you, and
may even reinstate you in his service. My good friend Scipio,
answered I, you seem to forget that my liberty was granted only
on condition of making myself scarce in the two Castiles.
Besides, can you suppose me so soon inclined to become an
absentee from my domain of Lirias? I have told you before, and I
tell it you once again: Though the Duke of Lerma should restore
me to his good graces, though he should even offer me Don Rodrigo
de Calderona's place, I would refuse it. My resolution is taken:
I mean to go and find out my parents at Oviedo, and carry them
with me to Valencia. As for you, my good fellow, if you repent of
having linked your fate with mine, you have only to say so: I am
ready to give you half of my ready money, and you may stay at
Madrid, where fortune puts on her kindest smiles to those who woo
her lustily.

What then! replied my secretary, a little affected by these
words, can you suspect me of any unwillingness to follow you into
your retreat? The very idea is an injury to my zeal and my
attachment . . . . What, Scipio! that faithful appendage, who
would willingly have passed the remnant of his days with you in
the tower of Segovia, rather than abandon you to your wretched
fate, can he feel sorrowful at the prospect of an abode, where a
thousand rural delights are waiting to smile on his arrival? No,
no, I have not a wish to turn you aside from your resolution. Nor
can I refrain from owning my malicious drift; when I advised you
to shew your face at the Duke of Lerma's audience, it was for the
purpose of ascertaining whether any seedlings of ambition were
scattered among the fallows of your philosophy. Since that point
is settled, and you are mortified to all the pomps and vanities
of the world; let us make the best of our way from court, to go
and suck in with Zephyrus and Flora the innocent, delicious
pleasures so luxuriant in the nursery of our imaginations.

In fact, we soon afterwards took our departure together, in a
chaise drawn by two good mules, driven by a postilion whom I had
added to my establishment. We stopped the first day at Alcala de
Henarès, and the second at Segovia, whence, without stopping to
see our generous warden, Tordesillas, we went forward to Penáfiel
on the Duero, and the next day to Valladolid. At sight of this
large town, I could not help fetching a deep sigh. My companion,
surprised at that conscientious ventilation, inquired the reason
of it. My good fellow, said I, it is because I practised medicine
here for a long time. It gives me the horrors, even now, to think
of my unexpiated murders. The whole list of killed and wounded
are mustered in battle-array yonder: the tomb and the hospital
yawn with their disgorged inhabitants, who are rushing on to tear
me piece-meal, and exact the vengeance due to the drenched crew.
What a dreadful fancy! said my secretary. In truth, Signor de
Santillane, your nature is too tender. Why should you be shocked
at the common course of exchange in your branch of trade? Look at
all the oldest physicians: their withers are unwrung. What can
exceed the self-complacency with which they view the exits of
patients, and the entrances of diseases? Natural constitution
bears the brunt of all their failures, and medical infallibility
takes the credit of lucky accidents.

It is very true, replied I, that Doctor Sangrado, on whose
practice I formed myself, was like the rest of the old physicians
in point of self-complacency. It was to little purpose that
twenty people in a day yielded to his prowess; he was so
persuaded that bleeding in the arm and copious libations of warm
water were specifics for every case, that instead of doubting
whether the death of his patients might not possibly invalidate
the efficacy of his prescriptions, he ascribed the result to a
vacillating compliance with his system. By all the powers! cried
Scipio with a burst of laughter, you open to me an incomparable
character. If you have any curiosity to be better acquainted with
him, said I, it may be gratified to-morrow, should Sangrado be
still living, and resident at Valladolid: but it is highly
improbable; for he had one foot in the grave when I left him
several years ago.

Our first care, on putting up at the inn, was to inquire after
this doctor. We were told that he was not dead; but being
incapacitated by age from paying visits or any other vigorous
exertions, he had been superseded by three or four other doctors
who had risen into repute by a new practice, accomplishing the
same end by different means. We determined on lying by for a day
at Valladolid, as well to rest our mules, as to call on Signor
Sangrado. About ten o'clock next morning we knocked at his door;
and found him sitting in his elbow-chair, with a book in his
hand. He rose on our entrance; advanced to meet us with a firm
step for a man of seventy, and begged to know our business. My
worthy and approved good master, said I, have you lost all
recollection of an old pupil? There was formerly one Gil Blas, as
you may remember, a boarder in your house, and for some time your
deputy. What! is it you, Santillane? answered he, with a cordial
embrace. I should not have known you again. It, however, gives me
great pleasure to see you once more. What have you been doing
since we parted? Doubtless you have made medicine your
profession. It was very strongly my inclination so to do, replied
I; but imperious circumstances made me reluctantly abandon so
illustrious a calling.

So much the worse, rejoined Sangrado: with the principles you
sucked in under my tuition, you would have become a physician of
the first skill and eminence, with the guiding influence of
heaven to defend you from the dangerous allurements of chemistry.
Ah, my son! pursued he with a mournful air, what a change in
practice within these few years! The whole honour and dignity of
the art is compromised. That mystery, by whose inscrutable
decrees the lives of men have in all ages been determined, is now
laid open to the rude, untutored gaze of blockheads, novices, and
mountebanks. Facts are stubborn things; and ere long the very
stones will cry aloud against the rascality of these new
practitioners: lapides clamabunt! Why, sir, there are fellows in
this town, calling themselves physicians, who drag their degraded
persons at the currus triumphalis antimonii, or as it should
properly be translated, the cart's tail of antimony. Apostates
from the faith of Paracelsus, idolaters of filthy kermes, healers
at haphazard, who make all the science of medicine to consist in
the preparation and prescription of drugs. What a change have I
to announce to you! There is not one stone left upon another in
the whole structure which our great predecessors had raised.
Bleeding in the feet, for example, so rarely practised in better
times, is now among the fashionable follies of the day. That
gentle, civilized system of evacuation which prevailed under my
auspices is subverted by the reign of anarchy and emetics, of
quackery and poison. In short, chaos is come again! Every one
orders what seems good in his own eyes; there is no deference to
the authority of ancient wisdom; our masters are laid upon the
shelf, and their axioms not one tittle the more regarded, for
being delivered in languages as defunct as the subjects of their
application.

However desirable it might seem to laugh at so whimsical a
declamation, I had the good manners to resist the impulse; and
not only that, but to inveigh bitterly against kermes, without
knowing whether it was a vegetable or an animal, and to pour
forth a commination of curses against the authors and inventors
of so diabolical an engine. Scipio, observing my by-play in this
scene, had a mind to come in for his share in the banter. Most
venerable prop of the true practice, said he to Sangrado, as I am
descended in the third generation from a physician of the old
school, give me leave to join you in your philippic against
chemical conspiracies. My late illustrious progenitor, heaven
forgive him all his sins! was so warm a partisan of Hippocrates,
that he often came to blows with ignorant pretenders, who vomited
forth blasphemies against that high priest of the faculty. What
is bred in the bone will not come out of the flesh: I could
willingly inflict tortures and death with my own hands on those
rash innovators whose daring enormities you have characterized
with such accuracy of discrimination and such force of language.
When wretches like these gain an ascendancy in civilized society,
can we wonder at the disjointed condition of the world?

The times are even more out of joint than you are aware of, said
the doctor. My book against the vanities and delusions of the new
practice might as well have fallen still-born from the press; it
seems, if anything, to have acted by contraries, and to have
exasperated heresy. The apothecaries, like the Titans of old,
heaping potion upon pill, and invading the Olympus of medicine,
think themselves fully qualified to usurp and maintain the
throne, now that it is only thought necessary to set open the
doors, and to drive the enemy out at the portal or the postern by
main force. They go to the length of infusing their deadly drugs
into apozems and cordials, and then set themselves up against the
most eminent of the fraternity. This contagion has spread its
influence even among the cloisters. There are monks in our
convents who unite surgery and pharmacy to the labours of the
confessional. Those medical baboons are always dipping their paws
into chemistry, and inventing compositions strong enough to lay a
scene of ecclesiastical mortality in the temperate abodes of
peace and religion. Now there are in Valladolid above sixty
religious houses for both sexes; judge what ravage must have been
made there by unmerciful pumping and the lancet misapplied.
Signor Sangrado, said I, you are perfectly in the right to give
these poisoners no quarter. I utter groan for groan with you, and
heave the philanthropic sigh over the invaded lives of our
fellow-creatures, sinking under the fell attack of so heterodox a
practice. It fills me with horror to think what a dead weight
chemistry may one day be to medicine, just as adulterated coin
operates on national credit. Far be that evil day from this
generation.

Just at this climax of our discourse, in came an old female
servant, with a salver for the doctor, on which was a little
light roll and a glass with two decanters, the one filled with
water and the other with wine. After he had eaten a slice, he
washed it down with a diluted beverage, two parts water to one of
wine; but this temperate use of the good creature did not at all
save him from the acrimony of my ridicule. So so, good master
doctor, said I, you are fairly caught in the fact. You a wine-
bibber! you, who have entered the lists like a knight-errant
against that unauthenticated fermentation? you, who reached your
grand climacteric on the strength of the pure element? How long
have you been so at odds with yourself? Your time of life can be
no excuse for the alteration; since, in one passage of your
writings, you define old age to be a natural consumption, which
withers and attenuates the system; and as an inference from that
position, you reprobate the ignorance of those writers who
dignify wine with the appellation of old men's milk. What can you
say, therefore, in your own defence?

You belabour me most unjustly, answered the old physician. If I
drank neat wine, you would have a right to treat me as a deserter
from my own standard; but your eyes may convince you that my wine
is well mixed. Another heresy, my dear apostle of the wells and
fountains! replied I. Recollect how you rated the canon Sédillo
for drinking wine, though plentifully dashed with the salubrious
fluid. Own modestly and candidly that your theory was unfounded
and fanciful, and that wine is not a poisonous liquor, as you
have so falsely and scandalously libelled it in your works, any
further than, like any other of nature's bounties, it may be
abused to excess.

This lecture sat rather uneasily on our doctor's feelings, as a
candidate for consistency. He could not deny his inveteracy
against the use of wine in all his publications; but pride and
vanity not allowing him to acknowledge the justice of my attack
on his apostasy, he was left without a word to say for himself.
Not wishing to push my sarcasm beyond the bounds of good humour,
I changed the subject; and after a few minutes' longer stay, took
my leave, gravely exhorting him to maintain his ground against
the new practitioners. Courage, Signor Sangrado! said I: never be
weary of setting your wits against kermes; and deafen the health-
dispensing tribe with your thunders against the use of bleeding
in the feet. If, spite of all your zeal and affection for medical
orthodoxy, this empiric generation should succeed in supplanting
true and legitimate practice, it will be at least your
consolation to have exhausted your best endeavours in the support
of truth and reason.

As my secretary and myself were walking to the inn, making our
observations in high glee on the doctor's entertaining and
original character, n man from fifty five to sixty years of age
happened to pass near us in the street, walking with his eyes
fixed on the ground, and a large rosary in his hand. I conned
over the distinctive cut of his appearance most cunningly, and
was rewarded in the recognition of Signor Manuel Ordonnez, that
faithful trustee for the affairs of the hospital, of whom so
honourable mention is made in the first volume of these true and
instructive memoirs. Accosting him with the most profound and
unquestionable tokens of respect, I paid my compliments in due
form and order to the venerable and trust-worthy Signor Manuel
Ordonnez, the man of all the world in whose hands the interests
of the poor and needy are most safely and beneficially placed. At
these words he looked me steadfastly in the face, and answered
that my features were not altogether strange to him, but that he
could not recollect where he had seen me. I used to go backwards
and forwards to your house, replied I, when one of my friends, by
name Fabricio Nunez, was in your service. Ah! I recollect the
circumstance at once, rejoined the worthy director with a cunning
leer, and have good reason to do so; for you were a brace of
pleasant lads, and were by no means backward in the little scape-
grace tricks of youth and inexperience. Well! and what is become
of poor Fabricio? Whenever he comes across my thoughts, I cannot
help feeling a little uneasy about his temporal and eternal
welfare.

It was to relieve your mind upon that subject, said I to Signor
Manuel, that I have taken the liberty of stopping you in the
street. Fabricio is settled at Madrid, where he employs himself
in publishing miscellanies and collections. What do you mean by
miscellanies and collections? replied he. I mean, resumed I, that
he writes in verse and prose, from epic poems and the highest
branches of philosophy, down to plays, novels, epigrams, and
riddles. In short, he is a lad of universal genius, and most
exemplary benevolence; sometimes modestly taking to himself the
credit of his own compositions, and sometimes lending out his
talents to the literary ambition of those noblemen who write for
their own amusement, but wish their names to be concealed, except
from a chosen circle. By traffic like this he sits at the very
first tables. But how does he sit at his own? said the director:
upon what terms does he live with his baker? Not quite so
confidentially as with people of fashion, answered I; for between
ourselves, I take him to be quite as much out at elbows as ever
Job was. More bonds and judgments against him than ever Job had,
take my word for it! replied Ordonnez. Let him lick the spittle
of his titled friends and patrons till his stomach heaves at the
nauseating saliva; his printed dedications and his oral flattery,
in spite of all the cringing and all the toad-eating, which
constitute the stock-in-trade of his profession, with all the
profits of his works, whether by subscription or ordinary
publication, will not bring grist enough to his mill, to keep
hunger from the door. Mind if what I say does not turn out to be
true! He will come to the dogs at last.

Nothing more likely! replied I; for he cohabits with the muses
already; and many a plain man has found, to his cost, that there
is no keeping company with the sisters, without being worried by
their bullying brethren. My friend Fabricio would have done much
better by remaining quietly with your lordship; he would now have
been lying on a bed of roses, and everything he had touched would
have turned to gold. He would at least have been in a very snug
berth, said Manuel. He was a great favourite of mine; and I
meant, by a regular gradation from subaltern to principal
situations, to have established him in ease and affluence on the
basis of public charity; but the foolish fellow took it into his
head to set up for a wit. He wrote a play, and brought it out at
the theatre in this town: the piece went off tolerably well, and
nothing thenceforth would serve his turn but commencing author by
profession. Lope de Vega, in his estimation, was but a type of
him: preferring, therefore, the intoxicating vapour of public
applause to the plain roast and boiled of this substantial
ordinary, he came to me for his discharge. It was to no purpose
for me to argue the point, or to prove to him what a silly cur he
was, to drop the bone and run after the shadow: the mad blockhead
was so suffocated by the smother of authorship, that the
instinctive dread of fire could not rouse his alacrity to escape
burning. In short, he was miserably unconscious of his own
interest, as his successor can testify: for he, possessing
practical good sense, though without half Fabricio's quickness
and versatility, makes it his whole study and delight to go
through his business in a workmanlike manner, and to fall in with
all my little ways. In return for such good conduct, I pushed him
forward in a manner corresponding with his deserts; and he unites
in his own person, even at this time of day, two offices in the
hospital, the least lucrative of which would be more than
sufficient to place any honest man at his ease, though encumbered
with a yearly teeming wife.



CH. II. -- Gil Blas continues his journey, and arrives in safety
at Oviedo. The condition of his family. His father's death, and
its consequences.


FROM Valladolid we got to Oviedo in four days, without any
untoward accident on the road, in spite of the proverb, which
says, that robbers lay their ears to the ground, when pilgrims
are going with rich offerings, and traders are riding with fat
purses. It would have been a feasible, as well as a tempting
speculation. Two tenants of a subterraneous abode might have
presented an aspect to have frightened our doubloons into a
surrender; for courage was not one of the qualities I had imbibed
at court; and Bertrand, my mule-driver, seemed not to be of a
temper to get his brains blown out in defending a purse into
which he had no free ingress. Scipio was the only one of the
party who was anything of a bully.

It was night when we came into town. Our lodgings were at an inn
near my uncle, Gil Perez, the canon. I was very desirous of
ascertaining the circumstances of my parents before my first
interview with them; and, in order to gain that information, it
was impossible to make my inquiries in a better channel than
through my landlord and landlady, into the lines of whose faces
you could not look without being satisfied that they knew every
tittle of their neighbours' concerns. As it turned out, the
landlord kenned me after a diligent perusal of my features, and
cried out: By Saint Anthony of Padua! this is the son of the
honest usher, Blas of Santillane. Ay, indeed! said the hostess;
and so it is: without a single muscle altered! just for all the
world that same little stripling Gil Blas, of whom we used to say
that he was as saucy as he was high. It brings old times to my
memory! when he used to come hither with his bottle under his
arm, to fetch wine for his uncle's supper.

Madam, said I, you have a most inveterate memory; but for
goodness' sake change the subject, and tell me the modern news of
my family. My father and mother are doubtless in no very enviable
situation. In good truth, you may say that, answered the
landlady: you may rack your brains as long as you like, but you
will never think of anything half so miserable as what they are
suffering at this present moment. Gil Perez, good soul! is
defunct all down one side by a stroke of the palsy, and the other
half of him is little better than a corpse; we cannot expect him
to last long: then your father, who went to live with his
reverence a little while ago, is troubled with an inflammation of
the lungs, and is standing, as a body may say, quavery-mavery
between life and death; while your mother, who is not over and
above hale and hearty herself, is obliged to nurse them both.

On this intelligence, which made me feel some compunctious
yearnings of nature, I left Bertrand with my stud and baggage at
the inn: then, with my secretary at my heels, who would not
desert me in my time of need, I repaired to my uncle's house. The
moment I came within my mother's reach, a natural emotion of
maternal instinct unfolded to her who I was, before her eyes
could possibly have run over the traces of my countenance. Son,
said she, with a melancholy expression, after having embraced me,
come and be present at your father's death; your visit is just in
time to take in all the piteous circumstances of so deplorable an
event. With this heart-rending reception, she led me by the hand
into a chamber where the wretched Blas of Santillane, stretched
on a comfortless bed, in cold and dismal accord with the thinness
of his fortunes, was just entering on the last great act of human
nature. Though surrounded by the shades of death, he was not
quite unconscious of what was passing about him. My dearest
friend, said my mother, here is your son Gil Blas, who entreats
your forgiveness for all his undutiful behaviour, and is come to
ask your blessing before you die. At these tidings my father
opened his eyes, which where on the point of closing for ever: he
fixed them upon me; and reading in my countenance,
notwithstanding the awful brink on which he stood, that I was a
sincere mourner for his loss, his feelings were recalled to
sympathy by my sorrow. He even made an attempt to speak, but his
strength was too much exhausted. I took one of his hands in mine,
and while I bathed it with my tears, in speechless agony of soul,
he breathed his last, as if he had only waited my arrival to pay
the debt of nature, and wing his way to scenes of untried being.

This event had been too long present to my mother's mind to
overwhelm her with any unparalleled affliction. Perhaps it sat
more heavily on me than on her, though my father had never in his
life given me any reason to feel for him as a father. But besides
that mere filial instinct would have made me weep over his cold
remains, I reproached myself with not having contributed to the
comfort of his latter days; then, when I considered what a hard-
hearted villain I had been, I seemed to myself like a monster of
ingratitude, or rather like an impious parricide. My uncle, whom
I afterwards saw lying at his length on another wretched couch,
and in a most lamentable pickle, made me experience fresh agonies
of upbraiding conscience. Unnatural son! said I, communing with
my own uneasy thoughts, behold the chastisement of heaven upon
thy sins, in the disconsolate condition of thy nearest relations.
Hadst thou but thrown to them the superflux of that abundance, in
which before thy imprisonment thou rolledst, thou mightest have
procured for them those little comforts which thy uncle's
ecclesiastical pittance was too scanty to furnish, and perhaps
have lengthened out the term of thy father's life.

Gil Perez had fallen into a state of second childhood, and was,
though numerically upon the list of the living, in every
individual organ a mere corpse. His memory, nay, his very senses
had retired from their allotted stations in his system. Bootless
was it for me to strain him in my pious arms, and lavish outward
tokens of affection on him: they might as well have been wasted
on the desert air. To as little purpose did my mother ring in his
unnerved ear, that I was his nephew Gil Blas; be gazed at me with
a vacant, stupid stare, and gave neither sign nor answer. Had the
ties of consanguinity and gratitude been all too weak, to awaken
my tender sympathy for an uncle, to whom I owed the means of my
first launch into the world, the impression of helpless dotage on
my senses must have softened me into something like the
counterfeit of virtuous emotion.

While this scene was passing, Scipio preserved a melancholy
silence, sharing in all my sorrows, and mingling his sighs with
mine in the chastised luxury of friendship. But concluding that
my mother, after so long an absence, might wish to have some such
conversation with me, as the presence of a stranger must rather
repress than promote, I drew him aside, saying, Go, my good
fellow, sit down quietly at the inn, and leave me here with my
only surviving parent, who might consider your company as an
intrusion, while talking over family affairs. Scipio withdrew,
for fear of being a clog upon our confidence; and I sat down with
my mother to an interchange of communication, which lasted all
night. We reciprocally gave a faithful account of all that had
happened to each of us, since my first sally from Oviedo. She
related, in full measure and running over, all the petty insults,
disappointments, and mortifications, which she had undergone in
her pilgrimage from house to house as a duenna. A great number of
these little anecdotes it would have hurt my pride that my
secretary should have noted down in his biographical budget,
though I had never concealed from him the ups and downs in the
lottery of my own life. With all the respect I owe to my mother's
sainted memory, the good lady had not the knack of going the
shortest road to the end of a story; had she but pruned her own
memoirs of all luxuriant circumstances, there would not have been
materials for more than a tithe of her narrative.

At length she got to the end of her tether, and I began my
career. With respect to my general adventures, I passed them over
lightly; but when I came to speak of the visit which the son of
Bertrand Muscada, the grocer of Oviedo, had paid me at Madrid, I
enlarged with decent compunction on that dark article in the
history of my life. I must frankly own, said I to my mother, that
I gave that young fellow a very bad reception; and he, doubtless,
in revenge, must have drawn a hideous outline of my moral
features. He did you more than justice, I trust, answered she;
for he told us that he found you so puffed and swollen with the
good fortune thrust upon you by the prime minister, as scarcely
to acknowledge him among your former acquaintance; and when he
gave you a moving description of our miseries, you listened as if
you had no interest in the tale, or knowledge of the parties. But
as fathers and mothers can always find some clue for palliation
in the conduct of their graceless children, we were loath to
believe that you had so bad a heart. Your arrival at Oviedo
justifies our favourable interpretation, and those tears which
are now flowing down your cheeks, are so many pledges either of
your innocence or your reformation.

Your constructions were too partial, replied I; there was a great
deal of truth in young Muscada's report. When he came to see me
all my faculties were engrossed by vanity and mammon; ambition,
the prevailing devil which possessed me, left not a thought to
throw away on the desolate condition of my parents. It therefore
could be no wonder, if in such a disposition of mind I gave
rather a freezing reception to a man who, accosting me in a
peremptory style, took upon him to say, without mincing the
matter, that it was well known I was as rich as a Jew, and
therefore he advised me to send you a good round sum, seeing that
you were very much put to your shifts: nay, he went so far as to
reproach me, in phrase of more sincerity than good manners, with
my unfeeling negligence of my family. His confounded personality
stuck in my throat; so that losing my little stock of patience, I
shoved him fairly by the shoulders out of my closet. It must be
confessed that I took the administration of justice a little too
much into my own hands, being judge and party in the same cause;
neither was it proper that you should bear the brunt, because the
grocer was a little anti-saccharine in his phraseology; nor was
his advice the less pertinent or just, though couched in homely
terms, or urged with plodding vulgarity.

All this came plump in the teeth of my conscience, the moment I
had turned Muscada out of doors. The voice of natural instinct
contrived to make its way; my duty to my parents brought the
blood into my face; but it was the blush of shame for its
neglect, and not the glow of triumph at its performance. Yet even
my remorse can give me little credit in your eyes, since it was
soon stifled in the fumes of avarice and ambition. But some time
afterwards, having been safely lodged in the tower of Segovia by
royal mandate, I fell dangerously ill there; and that timely
remembrancer was the cause of bringing back your son to you. So
true is it, that sickness and imprisonment were my best moral
tutors; for they enabled nature to resume her rights, and weaned
me effectually from the court. Henceforth all my dear delight is
in solitude; and my only business in the Asturias is to entreat
that you would share with me in the mild pleasures of a retired
life. If you reject not my earnest petition, I will attend you to
an estate of mine in the kingdom of Valencia, and we will live
there together very comfortably. You are of course aware that I
intended to take my father thither also; but since heaven has
ordained it otherwise, let me at least have the satisfaction of
affording an asylum to my mother, and making amends by all the
attentions in my power for the fallow seasons in the former
harvest of my filial duty.

I accept your kind intentions in very good part, said my mother;
and would take the journey without hesitation, if I saw no
obstacles in the way. But to desert your uncle in his present
condition would be unpardonable; and I am too much accustomed to
this part of the country, to like living elsewhere: nevertheless,
as the proposal deserves to be maturely weighed, I will consider
further of it at my leisure, At present, your father's funeral
requires to be ordered and arranged. As for that, said I, we will
leave it to the care of the young man whom you saw with me; he is
my secretary, with as clever a head and as good a heart as you
have often been acquainted with; let the business rest with him;
it cannot be in better hands.

Hardly had I pronounced these words, when Scipio came back; for
it was already broad day. He inquired whether he could be of any
service in our present distresses. I answered that he was come
just in time to receive some very important directions. As soon
as he was made acquainted with the business in hand: A word to
the wise! said he: the whole procession with its appropriate
heraldry is already marshalled in this head of mine; you may
trust me for a very pretty funeral. Have a care, said my mother,
to make it plain and decent without anything like pomp or parade.
It can scarcely be too humble for my husband, whom all the town
knows to have been low in rank, and indigent in circumstances.
Madam, replied Scipio, though he had been the meanest and most
destitute of the human race, I would not bate one button in the
array of his posthumous honours. My master's credit is at stake
in the proper conduct of the ceremony; he has been in an
ostensible situation under the Duke of Lerma, and his father
ought to be buried with all the forms of state and nobility.

I thought exactly as my secretary did upon the subject; and even
went so far as to bid him spare no expense on the occasion. A
little leaven of vanity still fermented in the mass of my
philosophy, and rose in my bosom with all the effervescence of
its original lightness. I flattered myself that by lavishing
posthumous honours on a father who had blessed the day of his
decease by no lucrative bequest, I should instil into the
conceptions of the bystanders a high sense of my generous nature.
My mother, on her part, whatever airs of humility she might put
on, had no dislike to seeing her husband carried out with due
observance of funeral pomp and ceremony. We therefore left Scipio
to do just as he pleased; and he, without a moment's delay,
adopted all the necessary measures for the display of the
undertaker's liveliest fancy.

The genius of that artist was called forth but too successfully.
His emblems, devices, and draperies, were so ostentatious, as to
disgust instead of cajoling the natives: every individual,
whether of the town or the suburbs, whether high or low, rich or
poor, felt shocked and insulted by this after-thought parade.
This ministerial beggar on horseback, said one, can put his hand
into his pocket for his father's funeral baked meats, but never
found in his heart wherewithal to furnish his living table with
common necessaries. It would have been much more to the purpose,
said another, to have made the old gentleman's latter days
comfortable, than to have wasted such thriftless sums on a post
obit act of filial munificence. In short, quips of the brain and
peltings of the tongue pattered round our execrated heads. It
would have been well had the storm been only a whirlwind of
passion, or hurricane of words; but we were all, Scipio,
Bertrand, and myself, corporally admonished of our misdeeds, on
our coming out of church; they abused us like pickpockets, made
mouths and odious noises as we passed, and followed Bertrand at
his heels to the inn with a copious volley of stones and mud. To
disperse the mob which had collected before my uncle's house, my
mother was obliged to shew herself at the window, and to declare
publicly, that she was thoroughly satisfied with my proceedings.
Another detachment had filed off to the stable-yard where my
carriage stood, in the full determination of breaking it to
pieces; and this they would inevitably have done, if the landlord
and lady had not found some means of quieting their perturbed
spirits, and turning them aside from their outrageous purpose.

All these affronts, so revolting to my dignity, the effect of the
tales which the young grocer had been spreading about town,
inspired me with such a thorough hatred for my native place, that
I determined on quitting Oviedo almost immediately, though but
for this bustle I might have made it my residence for some time.
I announced my intention, with the reasons of it, to my mother,
who, considering my uncouth reception as no very flattering
compliment to herself, did not urge my longer stay among people
so little inclined to treat me civilly. The only point remaining
now to be discussed was her future destiny and provision. My dear
mother, said I, since my uncle stands so much in need of your
attendance, I will no longer urge you to go along with me; but,
as his days seem likely to be very few on earth, you must promise
to come and take up your abode with me at my farm, as soon as the
last duties are performed to his honoured remains.

I shall make no such promise, answered my mother, for I mean to
pass the remnant of my days in the Asturias, and in a state of
perfect independence. Will you not on all occasions, replied I,
be absolute mistress in my household? May be so, and may be not!
rejoined she: you have only to fall in love with some flirt of a
girl, and then you will marry: then she will be my daughter-in-
law, and I shall be her stepmother; and then we shall live
together as step mothers and daughters-in-law usually do. Your
prognostics, said I, are fetched from a great distance. I have
not at present the most remote intention of entering into the
happy state: but even though such a whim should take possession
of my brain, I will pledge myself for instructing my wife betimes
in an implicit submission to your will and pleasure. That is
giving security, without the means of making good your contract,
replied my mother: you would scarcely be able to justify bail. I
would not even swear that in our sparring-matches, you might not
take your wife's part in preference to mine, however ill she
might behave, or however unreasonably she might argue.

You talk very excellent sense, madam, cried my secretary, coming
in for his share of the conversation: I think just as you do,
that docility is about as much the virtue of a donkey as of a
daughter-in-law. As the matter stands, that there may be no
difference of opinion between my master and you, since you are
absolutely determined to live asunder, you in the Asturias, and
he in the kingdom of Valencia, he must allow you an annuity of a
hundred pistoles, and send me hither every year for the payment.
By thus arranging matters, mother and son will be very good
friends, with an interval of two hundred leagues between them.
The parties concerned fell in at once with the proposal: I paid
the first year in advance, and stole out of Oviedo the next
morning before dawn, for fear of vying with Saint Stephen in
popular favour. Such were the charms of my return to my native
place. An admirable lesson this for those successful upstarts,
who having gone abroad to make their fortunes, come home to be
the purse-proud tyrants of their birth-place.



CH. III. -- Gil Blas sets out for Valencia, and arrives at
Lirias; description of his seat; the particulars of his
reception, and the characters of the inhabitants he found there.


We took the road for Leon, afterwards that of Palencia; and,
continuing our journey by short stages, arrived on the evening of
the tenth day at the town of Segorba, whence early on the morrow
we repaired to my seat, at the distance of very little more than
three leagues. In proportion as we approached nearer, it was
amusing to see with what a longing eye my secretary looked at all
the estates which lay in our way, to the right and left of the
road. Whenever he caught a glimpse of any which bespoke the rank
and opulence of its owner, he never missed pointing at it with
his finger, and wishing that were the place of our retreat.

I know not, my good friend, said I, what idea you have formed of
our habitation; but if you have taken it into your head that ours
is a magnificent house, with the domain of a great landed
proprietor, I warn you in time that you are laying much too
flattering an unction to your vanity.

If you have no mind to be the dupe of a warm imagination, figure
to yourself the little ornamented cottage which Horace fitted up
near Tibur in the country of the Sabines, on a small farm, the
fee-simple of which was given hint by Maecenas. Don Alphonso has
made me just such another present, more as a token of affection
than for the value of the thing. Then I must expect to see
nothing but a dirty hovel! exclaimed Scipio. Bear in mind,
replied I, that I have always given you quite an unvarnished
description of my place; and now, even at this moment, you may
judge for yourself whether I have not stuck to truth and nature
in my representations. Just carry your eye along the course of
the Guadalaviar, and observe at a little distance from the
further bank, near that hamlet, consisting of nine or ten
tenements, a house with four small turrets; that is my mansion.

The deuce and all! stammered out my secretary, short-breathed
with sudden admiration: why, that house is one of the prettiest
things in nature. Besides the castellated air which those turrets
give it, all the beauties of situation and architecture,
fertility of soil, and perfection of landscape, combine to rival
or excel the immediate neighbourhood of Seville, complimented as
it is for its picturesque attractions by the appellation of an
earthly paradise. Had we chosen the place of our settlement for
ourselves, it could not have been more to my taste: a river
meanders through the grounds, distilling plenty and verdure from
its fertilizing bosom; the leafy honours of an umbrageous wood
invite the mid-day walk, and qualify the temperature of the
seasons. What a heavenly abode of solitude and contemplation! Ah!
my dear master, we shall act very foolishly if we are in a hurry
to run away from our happiness. I am delighted, answered I, that
you are so well satisfied with the retreat provided for us,
though yet acquainted with only a small part of its attractions.

As we were chatting in this strain, we got nearer and nearer to
the house, where the door opened, as by magic, the moment Scipio
announced Signor Gil Blas de Santillane, who was coming to take
possession of his estate. At the mention of this name, received
with reverential homage by the people who had been instructed in
the transfer of their obedience, my carriage was admitted into a
large court, where I alighted; then leaning with all my weight
upon Scipio, as if walking was a derogation from my dignity, and
putting on the great man after the most consequential models, I
reached the hall, where, on my entrance, seven or eight servants
made their obeisances. They told me they were come to welcome
their new master with their best loves and duties: that Don
Caesar and Don Alphonso de Leyva had chosen them to farm my
establishment, one in quality of cook, another as under-cook, a
third as scullion, a fourth as porter, and the rest as footmen;
with an express injunction to receive no wages or perquisites, as
those two noblemen meant to defray all the expenses of my
household. The cook, Master Joachim by name, was commander-in-
chief of this battalion, and announced to me the whole array of
the campaign; he declared that he had laid in a large stock of
the choicest wines in Spain, and insinuated that for the solid
supply of the table, he flattered himself a person of his
education and experience, who had been six years at the head of
my Lord Archbishop of Valencia's kitchen, must know how to dish
up a dinner so as to meet the ideas of the most fastidious layman
in Christendom. But the proof of the pudding is in the eating,
added he; so I will just go and give you a specimen of my talent.
You had better take a walk, my lord, while dinner is getting
ready: look about the premises; and see whether you find them in
tenantable condition for a person of your lordship's dignity.

The reader may guess whether I did not stir my stumps; and
Scipio, still more eager than myself to take a bird's eye
inventory of our goods and chattels, dragged me back and fore
from room to room. There was not a corner of the house that we
did not peep into, from the garret to the cellar: not a closet or
a cranny, at least as we supposed, could escape our prying
curiosity; and in every fresh room we went into, I had occasion
to admire the kindness of Don Caesar and his son towards me. I
was struck, among other things, with two apartments, which were
as elegantly furnished as they could be, without misplaced
magnificence. One of them was hung with tapestry, the celebrated
manufacture of the Low Countries; the velvet bed and chairs were
still very handsome, though in the fashion of the time when the
Moors possessed the kingdom of Valencia. The furniture of the
other room was in the same taste; to wit, an old suit of
hangings, made of yellow Genoa damask, with a bed and arm-chairs
to match, fringed with blue silk. All these effects, which would
have furnished but a sorry display in an upholsterer's shop, made
no contemptible appearance in their present situation.

After having rummaged over every article of the paraphernalia, my
secretary and myself returned to the dining-room, where the cloth
was laid for two; we sat down; and in an instant they served up
so delicious an olla podrida, that we could not help revolving on
the various turns of the fate below which had parted the good
Archbishop of Valencia from his cook. We had in truth a most
catholic and ravenous appetite; a circumstance which added new
zest to our praises and enjoyments. Between every succeeding help
my servants, with all the alacrity of fresh and holiday service,
filled our large glasses to the brim with wine, the choicest
vintage of La Mancha. Scipio, not thinking it genteel to express
aloud the inward chucklings of his heart at our dainty fare,
winked and nodded his delight, and spoke by signs, which I
returned with the like dumb eloquence of overflowing
satisfaction. The remove was a dish of roast quails, flanking a
little leveret in high order, just kept long enough; for this we
left our hash, good as it was, and gorged ourselves to a surfeit
on the game. When we had eaten as if we had never eaten before,
and pledged one another in due proportion, we rose from table and
went into the garden to look out for some cool, pleasant spot,
and take our afternoon's nap voluptuously.

If hitherto my secretary had goggled satisfaction at what he had
seen, he stared wider and grinned broader at this vista vision of
the garden. He scarcely allowed the comparison to be in favour of
the Escurial. The reason of its extreme niceness was that Don
Caesar, who came backwards and forwards to Lirias, took pleasure
in improving and ornamenting it. All the walks well gravelled and
lined with orange trees, a large reservoir of white marble, with
a lion in bronze spouting water like a dolphin's deputy in the
middle, the beauty of the flower borders, the profusion and
variety of the fruit trees; such pretty particulars as these made
Scipio smack his lips and snuff the air; but his raptures reached
their summit at the gradual descent of a long walk, leading to
the bailiff's cottage, and over-arched by the interwoven boughs
of the trees planted on each side. While eulogizing a place so
well adapted for a refuge from the intenseness of the heat, we
made a halt, and sat down at the foot of an elm, where sleep
required very little cunning to entangle two high-fed, half-tipsy
blades, just risen from so voluptuous and voracious a repast.

In about two hours we were startled out of our sleep by the
report of musketry, popping so near the head-quarters of our
repose that we apprehended the camp to be attacked. On the alert!
was the first idea that invaded our dozing minds. That we might
procure the most authentic intelligence, in what direction the
enemy was approaching, we directed our march towards the
bailiff's tenement. There were collected eight or ten
clodhoppers, all friends and neighbours, assembled on the green
for the purpose of honouring my arrival, just communicated to the
vacant senses of the said clodhoppers, by a discharge of fire-
arms, whose barrels and furniture might thank me for the unusual
favour of a thorough cleaning. The greater part of them were
acquainted with my person, having seen me more than once at the
castle, while engaged in the business of my stewardship. No
sooner did they set eyes on me, than they all shouted in unison:
Long life to our new lord and master! welcome to Lirias! Then
they loaded once again, and fired another volley in honour of the
occasion. My habits and manners were softened down to the most
condescending urbanity, though with a decorous infusion of
distance, lest any degrading constructions might he put upon too
unlimited a freedom of address. With respect to my protection, I
promised it according to the customary charter of newly-installed
possessors; and went so far as to throw them a purse of twenty
pistoles: and this, in my opinion, was the point of all others in
my conduct which touched their hearts most nearly. After this
benefaction, I left them at liberty to waste as much powder as
they pleased, and withdrew with my secretary into the wood, where
we walked to and fro till night-fall, without being at all tired
of our rural prospect: so many charms had the view of a
landscape, heightened by the substantial beauties of ownership in
fee-simple, to our elevated and delighted imaginations.

The cook, the under-cook, and the scullion were not resting upon
their oars all this time: they were working hard to fit up for us
an artifice of belly timber more magnificent that what we had
already demolished; so that we were over head and ears in
amazement, when on our return to the room where we had dined, we
saw on the table a dish of four roast partridges, with a
smothered rabbit on one side, and a fricasseed capon on the
other. The second course consisted of pigs' ears, jugged game,
and chocolate cream. We drank deeply of the most delicious wines,
and began to think of going to bed, when it became a matter of
doubt whether we could sit up any longer. Then my people, with
lighted candles before me, led the way to the best bed-room,
where they were all most officious in assisting to undress me:
but when they had tendered me my gown and nightcap, I dismissed
them with an authoritative undulation of my hand, signifying that
their services were dispensed with for the remainder of that
night.

Thus I sent them all about their business, keeping Scipio for a
little private conference between ourselves; and I led to it by
asking him what he thought of my reception, as arranged by order
of my noble patrons. Indeed and indeed, answered he, the human
heart could not devise anything more delicious. I only wish we
may go on as we have begun. I have no wish of the kind, re plied
I: it is contrary to my principles to allow that my benefactors
should put themselves to so much expense on my account; it would
be a downright fraud upon their benevolence. Besides, I could
never feel myself at home with servants in the pay of other
people; it is just like living in a lodging or an inn. Then it is
to be remembered, that I did not come hither to live upon so
expensive a scale. What occasion have we for so large an
establishment of servants? Our utmost want, with Bertrand, is a
cook, a scullion, and a footman. Though my secretary would not
have been at all sorry to table for a continuance at the governor
of Valencia's expense, he did not oppose his own luxurious taste
to my moral delicacy, but conformed at once to my sentiments, and
approved the reduction I was meditating to introduce. That point
being decided, he left my chamber, and betook himself to his
pillow in his own.



CH. IV. -- A journey to Valencia, and a visit to the lords of
Leyva. The conversation of the gentlemen, and Seraphina's
demeanour.


I GOT my clothes off as soon as possible, and went to bed, where,
finding no great inclination to sleep, I communed with my own
thoughts. The mutual attachment between the lords of Leyva and
myself was uppermost in the various topics of my contemplation.
With my heart full of their late kindness, I determined on
setting out for their residence the next day, and quenching my
impatience to thank them for their favours. Neither was it a
slender gratification to anticipate another interview with
Seraphina; though there was somewhat of alloy in that pleasure:
it was impossible to reflect without shuddering, that I should at
the same time have to encounter the glances of Dame Lorenza
Sephora, who might not be greatly delighted at the renewal of our
acquaintance, should her memory happen to stumble upon the
circumstances connected with a certain box on the ear. With my
mind exhausted by all these different suggestions, my eyelids at 
length closed, and the sun had peeped in at my window long before
they turned upon their hinges.

I was soon out of bed; and dressed myself with all possible
expedition, in the earnest desire of prosecuting my intended
journey. Just as I had finished my hasty operations, my secretary
came into the room. Scipio, said I, you behold a man on the point
of setting out for Valencia. I ought to lose no time in paying my
respects to those noblemen to whom I am indebted for my little
independence. Every moment of delay in the performance of this
duty throws a new weight of ingratitude on my conscience. As for
you, my friend, there is no necessity for your attendance; stay
here during my absence; I shall come back to you within the space
of a week. Heaven speed you, sir! answered he -- be sure you do
not slight Don Alphonso and his father -- they seem to me to
thrill with the kindly vibrations of friendship, and to be
unbounded in their acknowledgment of obligation: gratitude and
benevolence are so uncommon in people of rank, that they deserve
to be made the most of where found. I sent a message to Bertrand,
to hold himself in readiness for setting out, and took my
chocolate while he was harnessing the mules. When all was
prepared, I got into my carriage, after having directed my people
to consider my secretary as master of the house in my absence,
and to obey his orders as if they were my own.

I got to Valencia in less than four hours, and drove at once to
the governor's stables, where I alighted and left my equipage. On
going to the house, I was informed that Don Caesar and his son
were together. I did not wait for an introduction, but went in
without ceremony; and addressing myself to both of them,
Servants, said I, never send in their names to their masters;
here is an old piece of family furniture, not ornamental indeed,
but of a fashion when gratitude was neither out of date nor out
of countenance. These words were accompanied with an effort to
throw myself on my knees; but they anticipated my purpose, and
embraced me one after the other with all possible evidence of
sincere affection. Well, then, my dear Santillane, said Don
Alphonso, you have been at Lirias to take possession of your
little property. Yes, my lord, answered I; and my next request
is, that you would be pleased to take it back again. What is your
reason for that? replied he. Is there anything about it at all
offensive to your taste? Not in the place itself, rejoined I: on
the contrary, that is everything that my heart can wish; the only
fault I have to find with it is, that the kitchen smells too
strongly of the hierarchy; a lay Christian should not live like
an archbishop; besides that, there are three times as many
servants as are necessary, and consequently you are put to an
expense at once enormous and useless.

Had you accepted the annuity of two thousand ducats which we
offered you at Madrid, said Don Caesar, we should have thought it
enough to give you the mansion furnished as it is: but you know,
you refused it; and we felt it but right to do what we have done
as an equivalent. Your bounty has been too lavish, answered I:
the gift of the estate was the utmost limit to which it should
have been extended, and that was more than sufficient to crown my
largest wishes. But to say nothing about what it has cost you to
keep up so great and expensive an establishment, I declare to you
most solemnly that these people stand in my way, and are a great
annoyance. In one word, gentlemen, either take back your boon, or
give me leave to enjoy it in my own way. I pronounced these last
words so much as if I was in earnest, that the father and son,
not meaning to lay me under any unpleasant restraint, at length
gave me their permission to manage my household as it should seem
expedient to my better judgment.

I was thanking them very kindly for having granted me that
privilege, without which a dukedom would have been but splendid
slavery, when Don Alphonso interrupted me by saying: My dear Gil
Blas, I will introduce you to a lady who will be extremely happy
to see you. Thus preparing me for the interview, he took me by
the hand and led the way to Seraphina s apartment, who set up a
scream of joy on recognizing me. Madam, said the governor, I
flatter myself that the visit of our friend Santillane at
Valencia is not less acceptable to you than myself. On that head,
answered she, he may rest confidently assured; time has not
obliterated the remembrance of the service which he once rendered
me and to that must be added a new debt of gratitude incurred on
the score of your obligations. I told the governor's lady that I
was already too well requited for the danger which I had shared
in common with her deliverers, in exposing my life for her sake:
compliments to the like effect were bandied about for some time
on both sides, when Don Alphonso motioned to quit Seraphina's
room. We then went back to Don Caesar, whom we found in the
saloon with a fashionable party, who were come to dinner.

All these gentleman were introduced, and paid their compliments
to me in the politest manner; nor did their attentions relax in
assiduity, when Don Caesar told them that I had been one of the
Duke of Lerma's principal secretaries. In all likelihood several
of them might not be unacquainted that Don Alphonso had been
promoted to the government of Valencia by my interest, for
political secrets are seldom kept. However that might be, while
we were at table, the conversation principally turned on the new
cardinal. Some of the company either were, or affected to be, his
unqualified admirers, while others allowed his merit upon the
whole, but thought it had been rather overrated. I plainly saw
through their design of drawing me on to enlarge on the subject
of his eminence, and to gratify their taste for scandal with
court anecdotes at his expense. I could have been well enough
pleased to have delivered my real sentiments on his character,
but I kept my tongue within my teeth, and thereby passed in the
estimation of the guests for a close, confidential, politic,
trustworthy young statesman.

The party respectively retired home after dinner to take their
usual nap, what Don Caesar and his son, yielding to a similar
inclination, shut themselves up in their apartments.

For my own part, full of impatience to see a town which I had so
often heard extolled for its beauty, I went out of the governor's
palace with the intention of walking through the streets. At the
gate a man accosted me with the following address: Will Signor de
Santillane allow me to take the liberty of paying my respects to
him? I asked him who and what he was. I am Don Caesar's valet-de-
chambre, answered he, but was one of his ordinary footmen during
your stewardship; I used to make my court to you every morning,
and you used to take a great deal of notice of me. I regularly
gave you intelligence of what was passing in the house. Do you
recollect my apprising you one day that the village surgeon of
Leyva was privately admitted into Dame Lorenza Sephora's
bedchamber? It is a circumstance which I have by no means
forgotten, replied I. But now that we are talking of that 
formidable duenna, what is become of her? Alas! resumed he, the
poor creature moped and dwindled after your departure, and at
length gave up the ghost, more to the grief of Seraphina than of
Don Alphonso, who seemed to consider her death as no great evil.

Don Caesar's valet-de-chambre, having thus acquainted me with
Sephora's melancholy end, made an humble apology for having
presumed to stop my walk, and then left me to continue my
progress. I could not help paying the tribute of a sigh to the
memory of that ill-fated duenna; and her decease affected me the
more, because I taxed myself with that melancholy catastrophe,
though a moment's reflection would have convinced me, that the
grave owed its precious prey to the inroads of her cancer rather
than to the cruel charms of my person.

I looked with an eye of pleasure upon everything worth notice in
the town. The archbishop's marble palace feasted my eyes with all
the magnificence of architecture; nor were the piazzas which
surrounded the exchange much inferior in commercial grandeur; but
a large building at a distance, with a great crowd standing
before the doors, attracted all my attention. I went nearer, to
ascertain the reason why so great a concourse of both sexes was
collected, and was soon let into the secret by reading the
following inscription in letters of gold on a tablet of black
marble over the door: La Posada de los Representantes [The
theatre] . The play-bills announced for that day a new tragedy,
never performed, and gave the name of Don Gabriel Triaquero as
the author.



CH. V. -- Gil Blas goes to the play, and sees a new tragedy. The
success of the piece. The public taste at Valencia.


I STOPPED for some minutes before the door, to make my remarks on
the people who were going in. There were some of all sorts and
sizes. Here was a knot of genteel-looking fellows, whose tailors
at least had done justice to their fashionable pretensions; there
a mob of ill-favoured and ill-mannered mortals, in a garb to
identify vulgarity. To the right was a bevy of noble ladies,
alighting from their carriages to take possession of their
private boxes; to the left a tribe of female traders in
lubricity, who came to sell their wares in the lobby. This mixed
concourse of spectators, as various in their minds as in their
faces, gave me an itching inclination to increase their number.
Just as I was taking my check, the governor and his lady drove
up. They spied me out in the crowd, and having sent for me, took
me with them to their box, what I placed myself behind them, in
such a position as to converse at my ease with either.

The theatre was filled with spectators from the ceiling
downwards, the pit thronged almost to suffocation, and the stage
crowded with knights of the three military orders. Here is a full
house! said I to Don Alphonso. You are not to consider that as
anything extraordinary, answered he; the tragedy now about to be
produced is from the pen of Don Gabriel Triaquero, the most
fashionable dramatic writer of his day. Whenever the play-bill
announces any novelty from this favourite author, the whole town
of Valencia is in a bustle. The men as well as the women talk
incessantly on the subject of the piece: all the boxes are taken;
and, on the first night of performance, there is a risk of broken
limbs in getting in, though the price of admission is doubled,
with the exception of the pit, which is too authoritative a part
of the house for the proprietors to tamper with its patience.
What a paroxysm of partiality! said I to the governor. This eager
curiosity of the public, this hot-headed impatience to be present
at the first representation of Don Gabriel's pieces, gives me a
magnificent idea of that poet's genius.

At this period of our conversation the curtain rose. We
immediately left off talking, to fix our whole attention on the
stage. The applauses were rapturous even at the prologue: as the
performance advanced, every sentiment and situation, nay, almost
every line of the piece called forth a burst of acclamation; and
at the end of each act the clapping of hands was so loud and
incessant, as almost to bring the building about our ears. After
the dropping of the curtain, the author was pointed out to me,
going about from box to box, and with all the modesty of a
successful poet, submitting his head to the imposition of those
laurels, which the genteeler, and especially the fairer part of
the audience had prepared for his coronation.

We returned to the governor's palace, where we were met by a
party of three or four gentlemen. Besides these mere amateurs,
there were two veteran authors of considerable eminence in their
line, and a gentleman of Madrid with tolerably fair claims to
critical authority and judgment They had all been at the play.
The new piece was the only topic of conversation during supper-
time. Gentlemen, said a knight of St James, what do you think of
this tragedy? Has it not every claim to the character of a
finished work? Thoughts that breathe, and words that burn, a hand
to touch the true chords of pity, and sweep the lyre of poetry;
requisites how rarely, and yet how admirably united! In a word,
it is the performance of a person mixing in the higher circles of
society. There can be no possible difference of opinion on that
subject, said a knight of Alcantara. The piece is full of strokes
which Apollo himself might have aimed, and of perplexities
contrived so that none but the author himself could have
unravelled them. I appeal to that acute and ingenious stranger,
added he, addressing his discourse to the Castilian gentleman; he
looks to me like a good judge, and I will lay a wager that he is
on my side of the question. Take care how you stake on an
uncertainty, my worthy knight, answered the gentleman with a
sarcastic smile. I am not of your provincial school; we do not
pass our judgment so hastily at Madrid. Far from sentencing a
piece on its first representation, we are jealous of its apparent
merit while aided by scenic deception; our fancies and our
feelings may be carried away for the moment, but our serious
decision is suspended till we have read the work; and the most
common result of its appeal to the press is a defalcation from
its powers of pleasing on the stage.

Thus you perceive, pursued he, that it is our practice to examine
a work of genius closely before we stamp on it the mark of a
stock piece: its author's fame, let it ring as loudly as it may,
can never confound our exactness of discrimination. When Lope de
Vega himself or Calderona ventured on the boards, they
encountered rigid critics, though in an audience which doted on
them: critics who would not sign their passport to the regions of
immortality till they had sifted their claims to be admitted
there.

That is a little too much, interrupted the knight of St James. We
are not quite so cautious as you. It is not our custom to wait
for the printing of a piece in order to decide on its reputation.
By the very first performance it sinks or swims. It does not even
seem necessary to be inconveniently attentive to the business of
the stage. It is sufficient that we know it for a production of
Don Gabriel, to be persuaded that it combines every excellence.
The works of that poet may justly be considered as commencing a
new era, and fixing the criterion of good taste. The school of
Lope and Calderona was the mere cart of Thespis, compared with
the polished scenes of this great dramatic master. The gentleman,
who looked up to Lope and Calderona as the Sophocles and
Euripides of the Spaniards, could not easily be brought to
acknowledge such wild canons of criticism. This is dramatic
heresy with a vengeance! exclaimed he. Since you compel me,
gentlemen, to decide like you on the fallacious evidence of a
first night, I must tell you that I am not at all satisfied with
this new tragedy of your Don Gabriel. As a poem it abounds more
with glittering conceits than with passages of pathos or
delineations of nature. The verses, three out of four, are
defective either in measure or rhyme; the characters, clumsily
imagined or incongruously supported; and the thoughts have often
the obscurity of a riddle without its ingenuity.

The two authors at table, who, with a prudence equally
commendable and unusual, had said nothing for fear of lying under
the imputation of jealousy, could not help assenting to the last
speaker's opinions by their looks; which warranted me in
concluding that their silence was less owing to the perfection of
the work than to the dictates of personal policy. As for the
military critics, they got to their old topic of ringing the
changes on Don Gabriel, and exalted him to a level with the
under-tenants of Olympus. This extravagant association with the
demi-gods, this blind and stiff-necked idolatry, divorced the
Castilian from his little stock of patience, so that, raising his
hands to heaven, he broke out abruptly into a volley of
enthusiasm: O divine Lope de Vega, sublime and unrivalled genius,
who has left an immeasurable space between thee and all the
Gabriels who would light their tapers from thy bright effulgence!
and thou, mellow, soft-voiced Calderona, whose elegance and
sweetness, rejecting buskined rant and tragic swell, reign with
undisputed sway over the affections, fear not, either of you,
lest your altars should be overturned by this tongue-tied
nurseling of the muses! It will be the utmost of his renown, if
posterity, before whose eyes your works shall live in daily view,
and form their dear delight, shall enrol his name, as. matter of
history and curious record, on the list of obsolete authors.

This animated apostrophe, for which the company was not at all
prepared, raised a hearty laugh, after which we all rose from
table and withdrew. An apartment had been got ready for me by Don
Alphonso's order, where I found a good bed; and my lordship,
lying down in luxurious weariness, went to sleep upon the tag of
the Castilian gentleman's impassioned vindication, and dreamed
most crustily of the injustice done to Lope and Calderona by
ignorant pretenders.



CH. VI. -- Gil Blas, walking about the streets of Valencia, meets
with a man of sanctity, whose pious face he has seen somewhere
else. What sort of man this man of sanctity turns out to be.


As I had not been able to complete my view of the city on the
preceding day, I got up betimes in the morning with the intention
of taking another walk. In the street I remarked a Carthusian
friar, who doubtless was thus early in motion to promote the
interests of his order, He walked with his eyes fixed on the
ground, and a gait so holy and contemplative, as to inspire every
passenger with religious awe. His path was in the same direction
as mine, I looked at him with more than ordinary curiosity, and
could not help fancying it was Don Raphael, that man of shifts
and expedients, who has already secured so honourable a niche in
the temple of fame. (See Books I. to VI. of my Memoirs.)

I was so utterly astonished, so thrown off my balance by this
meeting, that instead of accosting the monk, I remained
motionless for some seconds, which gave him time to get the start
of me. Just heaven! said I, were there ever two faces more
exactly alike? I do not know what to make of it! It seems
incredible that Raphael should turn up in such a guise! And yet
how is it possible to be any one else! I felt too great a
curiosity to get at the truth not to pursue the inquiry. Having
ascertained the way to the monastery of the Carthusians, I
repaired thither immediately, in the hope of coming across the
object of my search on his return, and with the full intent of
stopping and parleying with him. But it was quite unnecessary to
wait for his arrival to enlighten my mind on the subject: on
reaching the convent gate, another physiognomy, such as few
persons had read without paying for their lesson, resolved all my
doubts into certainty; for the friar who served in the capacity
of porter was unquestionably my old and godly-visaged servant,
Ambrose de Lamela.

Our surprise was equal on both sides at meeting again in such a
place. Is not this a play upon the senses? said I, paying my
compliments to him. Is it actually one of my friends who presents
himself to my astonished sight? He did not know me again at
first, or probably might pretend not to do so; but reflecting
within himself that it was in vain to deny his own identity, he
assumed the start of a man who all at once hits upon a
circumstance which had hitherto escaped his recollection, Ah,
Signor Gil Blas! exclaimed he, excuse my not recognizing your
person immediately. Since I have lived in this holy place, every
faculty of my soul has been absorbed in the performance of the
duties prescribed by our rules, so that by degrees I lose the
remembrance of all worldly objects and events.

After a separation of ten years, said I, it gives me much
pleasure to find you again in so venerable a garb. For my part,
answered he, it fills me with shame and confusion to appear in it
before a man who has been an eye-witness of my guilty courses.
These ghostly weeds are at once the charm of my present life, and
the condemnation of my former. Alas! added he, heaving a
righteous sigh, to be worthy of wearing it, my earlier years
should have been passed in primitive innocence. By this
discourse, so rational and edifying, replied I, it is plain, my
dear brother, that the finger of the Lord has been upon you, that
you are marked out for a vessel of sanctification. I tell you
once again, I am delighted at it, and would give the world to
know in what miraculous manner you and Raphael were led into the
path of the righteous; for I am persuaded that it was his own
self whom I met in the town, habited as a Carthusian. I was
extremely sorry afterwards not to have stopped and spoken to him
in the street; and I am waiting here to apologize for my neglect
on his return.

You were not mistaken, said Lamela, it was Don Raphael himself
whom you saw; and as for the particulars of our conversion, they
are as follow: After parting with you near Segorba, we struck
into the Valencia road, with the design of bettering our trade by
some new speculation. Chance or destiny one day led our steps
into the church of the Carthusians, while service was performing
in the choir. The demeanour of the brethren attracted our notice,
and we experienced in our own persons the involuntary homage
which vice pays to virtue. We admired the fervour with which they
poured forth their devotions, their looks of pious mortification,
their deadness to the pleasures of the world and the flesh, and
in the settled composure of their countenances, the outward sign
of an approving conscience within.

While making these observations, we fell into a train of thought
which became like manna to the hungry and thirsty soul: we
compared our habits of life with the employments of these holy
men, and the wide difference between our spiritual conditions
filled us with confusion and affright. Lamela, said Don Raphael,
as we went out of church, how do you stand affected by what we
have just seen? For my part, there is no disguising the truth, my
mind is ill at ease. Emotions, new and indescribable, are rushing
upon my mind: and, for the first time in my life, I reproach
myself with the wickedness of my past actions. I am just in the
same temper of soul, answered I; my iniquities are all drawn up
in array against me, they beset me, they stare me in the face; my
heart, hitherto proof against all the arrows of remorse, is at
this moment shot through, torn and disfigured, tormented and
destroyed. Ah! my dear Ambrose, resumed my partner, we are two
stray sheep, whom our Heavenly Father, in mercy, would lead back
gently to the fold. It is he himself, my child, it is he who
warms and guides us. Let us not be deaf to the call of his voice;
let us abandon all our wicked courses, let us begin from this day
to work out our salvation with diligence and in the spirit of
repentance: we had better spend the remainder of our days in this
convent, and consecrate them to penitence and devotion.

I applauded Raphael's sentiment, continued brother Ambrose; and
we formed the glorious resolution of becoming Carthusians. To
carry it into effect, we applied to the venerable prior, who was
no sooner made acquainted with our purpose, than to ascertain
whether our call was front the world above or the world beneath,
he appointed us to cells, and all the strictness of monkish
discipline, for a whole year. We acted up to the rules with equal
regularity and fortitude, and, by way of reward, were admitted
among the novices. Our condition was so much what we wished it,
and our hearts were so full of religious zeal, that we underwent
the toils of our noviciate with unflinching courage. When that
was over, we professed; after which, Don Raphael, appearing
admirably well qualified, both by natural talent and various
experience, for the management of secular concerns, was chosen
assistant to an old friar who was at that time proctor. The son
of Lucinda would infinitely have preferred dedicating every
remaining moment of his existence to prayer; but he found it
necessary to sacrifice his taste for devotion, in furtherance of
the general prosperity. He entered with so much zeal and
knowledge into the interests of the house, that he was considered
as the most eligible person to succeed the old proctor, who died
three years afterwards. Don Raphael accordingly fills that office
at present; and it may be truly said that he discharges his duty 
to the entire satisfaction of all our fathers, who praise in the
highest terms his conduct in the administration of our
temporalities. What is most of all miraculous, and shews the hand
of heaven in his conversion, is that, with such an accumulation
of business rushing in upon him in his bursarial department, his
regards are inalienably fixed on the world to come. When business
leaves him but a moment to recruit nature, instead of lavishing
the short period in indulgence, his thoughts wing their way into
the regions of devout and holy meditation. In short, he is the
most exemplary member of this body.

At this period of our conversation I interrupted Lamela by an
ebullition of joy to which I gave vent at the sight of Raphael
coming in. Here he is! exclaimed I: behold that righteous bursar
for whom I have been so impatiently waiting. With a leap and a
bound did I run to meet and embrace him. He submitted to the hug
with his newly-acquired resignation; and, without betraying the 
slightest shock at meeting with an old companion of his profaner
hours, his words were dictated by the spirit of gentleness and
humility: The powers above be praised, Signor de Santillane, the
powers be praised for this kind providence whereby we meet again.
In good truth, my dear Raphael, replied I, your happy destiny
pleases me as much as if it had been my own good luck; brother
Ambrose has told me the whole story of your conversion, and the
tale almost moved me to a similar change. What a glorious lot for
you two, my friends, when you have reason to flatter yourselves
with being among that picked number of the elect, who have
eternal happiness thrust upon them whether they will or no!

Two miserable sinners like ourselves, resumed the son of Lucinda,
with an air which marked the extreme of sanctified morality, must
not hope that our own merits are of weight enough to save our
souls; but even the wicked one who repenteth, findeth grace with
the Father of mercies. And you, Signor Gil Blas, added he, is it
not time to lay in a claim for pardon of the offences which you
have committed? What is your business here in Valencia? Are you
not hankering after some office of devil's deputy, and making
shipwreck of your voyage to another world? Not so, by the
blessing of heaven, answered I; since I turned my back on the
court, I have led a very moral sort of life: sometimes enjoying
rural recreations on an estate of mine at a few leagues distance
from this town, and sometimes coming hither to pass my time with
my friend the governor, whom you both of you must know perfectly
well.

On this cue I related to them the story of Don Alphonso de Leyva.
They heard the particulars with attention; and on my telling them
that I had carried to Samuel Simon, on the part of that nobleman,
the three thousand ducats of which we had robbed him, Lamela
interrupted the thread of my narrative, and addressing his
discourse to Raphael, said: Father Hilary, if this be true, the
honest vendor of wares has no reason to quarrel with a robbery
which has paid him fifty per cent; and our consciences, as far as
that indictment goes, may bask in the sunshine of acquitted
innocence. Brother Ambrose and I, said the bursar, did actually,
on the assumption of the habit, send Samuel Simon fifteen hundred
ducats privately, by a pious ecclesiastic who made a pilgrimage
to Xelva for the sole purpose of accomplishing this restitution;
but it will go hard with Samuel at the general reckoning, if he
for filthy lucre could soil his fingers with that sum, after
having been reimbursed in full by Signor de Santillane. But, said
I, how do you know that your fifteen hundred ducats were
faithfully paid into his hands? Unquestionably they were!
exclaimed Don Raphael; I would answer for the disinterested
purity of that ecclesiastic as soon as for my own. I would be
your collateral security, said Lamela; he is a priest of the
strictest sanctity, a sort of universal almoner; and though many
times cited for sums of money, deposited with him for charitable
uses, he has always nonsuited the plaintiff and gone out of court
with an augmentation of alms-giving notoriety.

Our conversation continued for some time longer: at length we 
parted, with many a pious exhortation on their side, always to
have the fear of the Lord before my eyes, and with many an
earnest intreaty on mine, that they would remember me constantly
in their prayers. Don Alphonso was now the first object of my
search. You will never guess, said I, with whom I have just had a
long conference. I am but now come from two venerable Carthusians
of your acquaintance; the name of the one is father Hilary, that
of the other, brother Ambrose. You are mistaken, answered Don
Alphonso; I am not acquainted with a single Carthusian. Pardon
me, replied I; you have seen brother Ambrose at Xelva in the
capacity of commissary, and father Hilary as register to the
Inquisition. Oh heaven! exclaimed the governor with surprise, can
it be within the bounds of possibility that Raphael and Lamela
should have turned Carthusians? It is even so, answered I; they
professed several years ago. The former is bursar and proctor to
the convent; the latter, porter.

The son of Don Caesar rubbed his forehead twice or thrice, then
shaking his bead, These worshipful officers of the Inquisition,
said he, most assuredly purpose playing over the old farce on a
new stage here. You judge of them by prejudice, answered I, from
the impression of their characters as men of sin: but had you
been edified by their lectures as I have been, you would think
more favourably of their holiness. To be sure, it is not for
mortal men to fathom the depth of other men's hearts; but to all
appearance they are two prodigals returned home. It possibly may
be so, replied Don Alphonso: there are many instances of
libertines, who hide their heads in cloisters, after having
scandalized human nature by their obliquities, to expiate their
offences by a severe penance: I heartily wish that our two monks
may be such libertines restored.

Well! and why not? said I. They have embraced the monastic life
of their own accord, and have squared their conduct for a length
of time according to the maxims of their order. You may say what
you please, retorted the governor; but I do not like the
convent's rents being received by this father Hilary, of whom I
cannot help entertaining a very untoward opinion. When the fine
story he told us of his adventures comes across my mind, I
tremble for the reverend brotherhood. I am willing to believe
with you, that he has taken the vow with the pious intention of
keeping it; but the blaze of gold may be too much for the
weakness of his regenerated eye-sight. It is bad policy to lock
up a reformed drunkard in a wine cellar.

In the course of a few days Don Alphonso's misgivings were fully
justified; these two official props and stays of the
establishment ran away with the year's revenue. This news, which
was immediately noised about the town, could not do otherwise
than set the tongues of the wits in motion; for they always make
themselves merry at the crosses and losses of the well-endowed
religious orders. As for the governor and myself, we condoled
with the Carthusians, but kept our acquaintance with the apostate
pilferers in the background.



CH. VII. -- Gil Blas returns to his seat at Lirias. Scipio's
agreeable intelligence, and a reform in the domestic
arrangements.


I PASSED a week at Valencia in the first company, living on equal
terms with the best of the nobility. Plays, balls, concerts,
grand dinners, ladies' parties, all things that heart could wish
or vanity grow tall upon, were provided for me by the governor
and his lady, to whom I paid my court so dexterously, that they
were heartily sorry to see me set out on my return to Lirias.
They even obliged me, before they would let me go, to engage for
a division of my time between them and my hermitage. It was
determined that I should spend the winter in Valencia, and the
summer at my seat. After this bargain, my benefactors left me at
liberty to tear myself from them, and go where their kindness
would be always staring me in the face.

Scipio, who was waiting impatiently for my return, was ready to
jump out of his skin for joy at the sight of me; and his
ecstasies were doubled at my circumstantial account of the
journey. And now for your history, my friend, said I, taking
breath: to what moral uses have you turned the solitary period of
my absence? Has the time passed agreeably? As well, answered he,
as it could with a servant to whom nothing is so dear as the
presence of his master. I have walked over our little domain,
circuitously and diagonally: sometimes seated on the margin of a
fountain in our wood, I have taken pleasure in be holding the
transparency of its waters, which are as pellucid as those of the
sacred spring, whose projection from the rock made the vast
forest of Albunea to resound with the roar of the cascade:
sometimes lying at the foot of a tree, I have listened to the
song of the linnet or the nightingale. At other times I have
hunted or fished; and, what has given me more rational delight
than all these pastimes, I have whiled away many a profitable
hour in the improvement of my mind.

I interrupted my secretary in a tone of eager inquiry, to ask
where he had procured books. I found them, said he, in an elegant
library here in the house, whither master Joachim took me.
Heyday! in what corner, resumed I, can this said library be? Did
we not go over the whole building on the day of our arrival? You
fancied so, rejoined he; but you are to know that we only
explored three sides of the square, and forgot the fourth. It was
there that Don Caesar, when he came to Lirias, employed part of
his time in reading. There are in this library some very good
books, left as a never-failing phylactery against the blue
devils, when our gardens despoiled of Flora's treasure, and our
woods of their leafy honours, shall no longer challenge those
miscreant invaders to combat in the forest or the bower. The
lords of Lena have not done things by halves, but have catered
for the mind as well as for the body.

This intelligence filled me with sincere rapture. I was shewn to
the fourth side of the square, and feasted with an intellectual
banquet Don Caesar's room I immediately determined to make my
own. That nobleman's bed was still there, with correspondent
furniture, consisting of historical tapestry, representing the
rape of the Sabine women by the Romans. From the bed-chamber, I
went into a closet fitted up with low bookcases well filled, and
over them the portraits of the Spanish kings. Near a window
whence you command a prospect of a most bewitching country, there
was an ebony writing-desk and a large sofa, covered with black
morocco. But I gave my attention principally to the library. It
was composed of philosophers, poets, historians; and abounded in
romances. Don Caesar seemed to give the preference to that light
reading, if one might judge by the profusion of supply. I must
own, to my shame, that my taste was not at all above the level of
those productions, notwithstanding the extravagances they delight
in stringing together; whether it was owing to my not being a
very critical reader at that time, or because the Spaniards are
naturally addicted to the marvellous. I must nevertheless plead 
in my own justification, that I was alive to the charms of a
sprightly and popular morality, and that Lucian, Horace, and
Erasmus became my favourite and standard authors.

My friend, said I to Scipio, when my eyes had coursed over my
library, here is wherewithal to feed and pamper our minds; but
our present business is to reform our household. On that subject
I can spare you a great deal of trouble, answered he. During your
absence I have sifted your people thoroughly, and flatter myself
it is no empty boast to say that I know them. Let us begin with
master Joachim: I take him to be as great a scoundrel as ever
breathed, and have no doubt but he was turned away from the
archbishop's for errors which were too great to be excepted in
the passing of his accounts. Yet we must keep him for two
reasons: the first, because he is a good cook; and the second,
because I shall always have an eye over him; I shall peep into
his actions like a jackdaw into a marrow-bone, and he must be a
more cunning fellow than I take him for, to evade my vigilance. I
have already told him that you intended discharging three-fourths
of your establishment. This declaration stuck in his stomach; and
he assured me that, owing to his extreme desire of living with
you, he would be satisfied with half his present wages rather
than be turned off, which made me suspect that he was tied to the
string of some petticoat in the hamlet, and did not like to break
up his quarters. As for the under-cook, he is a drunkard, and the
porter a foul-mouthed Cerberus, of whose guardianship our gates
are in no want; neither is the gamekeeper a necessary evil. I
shall take the latter office myself, as you may see to-morrow,
when we have got our fowling-pieces in order, and are provided
with powder and shot. With regard to the footmen, one of them is
an Arragonese, and to my mind a very good sort of fellow. We will
keep him; but all the rest are such rapscallions, that I would
not advise you to harbour one of them, if you wanted an army of
attendants.

After having fully debated the point, we resolved to keep well
with the cook, the scullion, the Arragonese, and to get rid of
the remainder as decently as we could: all which was planned and
executed on the same day, mollifying the bitter dose by the
application of a few pistoles, which Scipio took from our strong
box, and distributed among them as from me. When we had carried
this reform into effect, order was soon established in our
mansion; we divided the business fairly among our remaining
people, and began to look into our expenses. I could willingly
have been contented with very frugal commons; but my secretary,
loving high dishes and relishing bits, was not a man who would
suffer master Joachim to hold his place as a sinecure. He kept
his talents in such constant play, working double tides at dinner
and at supper, that any one would have thought we had been
converted by father Hilary, and were working out the term of our
probation.



CH. VIII. -- The loves of Gil Blas and the fair Antonia.


Two days after my return from Valencia to Lirias, clodpole Basil,
my farming man, came at my dressing-time, to beg the favour of
introducing his daughter Antonia, who was very desirous, as he
said, to have the honour of paying her respects to her new
master. I answered that it was very proper, and would be well
received. He withdrew, and in a few minutes returned with his
peerless Antonia. That epithet, though bold, will not be thought
extravagant, in the case of a girl from sixteen to eighteen years
of age, uniting to regular features the finest complexion and the
brightest eyes in the world. She was dressed in nothing better
than a stuff gown; but a stature somewhat above the female
standard, a dignified deportment, and such graces as soared
higher than the mere freshness and glow of youth, communicated to
her rustic attire the simplicity of classical costume. She had no
cap on her head; her hair was fastened behind with a knot of
flowers, according to the chaste severity of the Spartan
fashionables.

When she illumined my chamber with her presence, I was struck as
much on a heap by her beauty, as ever were the princes, knights,
nobles, and strangers assembled at the solemn feast and
tournament of Charlemain, by the personal charms of Angelica.
Instead of receiving Antonia with modish indifference, and paying
her compliments of course, instead of ringing the changes on her
father's happiness in possessing so lovely a daughter, I stood
stock still, staring, gaping, stammering: I could not have
uttered an articulate sound for the universal world. Scipio, who
saw clearly what was the matter with me, took the words out of my
mouth, and accepted those bills of admiration which my affairs
were in too much disorder to admit of my duly honouring For her
part, my figure being shrouded by a dressing-gown and night-cap,
like the orb of day by a winter fog, she accosted me without
being shame-faced, and paid her duty in terms which fired all the
combustibles in my composition, though her words were but the
holiday expressions of common-place salutation. In the mean time,
while my secretary, Basil, and his daughter, were engaged in
reciprocal exchange of civility, I found my senses again; and
passed from one extreme of absurdity to another, just as if I had
thought that a hare-brained loquacity would be a set-off against
the idiotic silence of my first encounter. I exhausted all my
stock of well-bred rodomontade; and expressed myself with so
unguarded a freedom, as to make Basil look about him: so that he,
with his eye upon me as a man who would set every engine at work
to seduce Antonia, was in a hurry to get her safely out of my
apartment, with a resolved purpose, probably, of withdrawing her
for ever from my pursuit.

Scipio finding himself alone with me, said with a smile: Here is
another defence for you against the blue devils! I did not know
that your farming man had so pretty a daughter; for I had never
seen her before, though I have been twice at his house. He must
have taken infinite pains to keep her out of the way, and it is
impossible to be angry with him for it What the plague! here is a
morsel for a liquorish palate! But there seems to be no necessity
for blazoning her perfections to you; their very first glance
dazzled you out of countenance. I do not deny it, answered I. Ah!
my beloved friend, I have surely seen an inhabitant of the realms
above; the electrical spark now thrills through all my frame, it
scorches like lightning, yet tingles like the vivifying fluid at
my heart.

You slight me beyond measure, replied my secretary, by giving me
to understand that you have at length fallen in love. Nothing but
a mistress was wanting to complete your rural establishment at
all points. Thanks to Heaven, you are now likely to be
accommodated in every way. I am well aware that we shall have a
hard matter to elude Basil's vigilance; but leave that to me, and
I will undertake before the end of three days to manage a private
meeting for you with Antonia. Master Scipio, said I, it is not so
sure that you would be able to keep your word; but at all events,
I have not the least desire to make the experiment I will have
nothing to do with the ruin of that girl; for she is an angel,
and does not deserve to be numbered among the fallen ones.
Therefore, instead of laying the guilt upon your soul of
assisting me in her dishonour, I have made up my mind to marry
her with your kind help, supposing her heart not to be pre-
occupied by a prior attachment I had no idea, said he, of your
directly plunging headlong into the cold bath of matrimony. The
generality of landlords, in your place, would stand upon the
ancient tenure of manorial rights: they would not deal with
Antonia upon the square of modern law and gospel, till after
failure in the establishment of their feudal privileges. But
though this may be the way of the world, do not suppose that I am
by any means against your honourable passion, or at all wish to
dissuade you from your purpose. Your bailiff's daughter deserves
the distinction you design for her, if she can give you the
first-fruits of her heart, an offering of sensibility and
gratitude; that is what I shall ascertain this very day by
talking with her father, and possibly with her.

My agent was a man to transact his business according to the
letter. He went to see Basil privately, and in the evening came
to me in my closet, where I waited for him with impatience,
somewhat exasperated by apprehension. There was a slyness in his
countenance, whence my prognostic inclined to the brighter side.
Judging, said I, by that look of suppressed merriment, you are
come to acquaint me that I shall soon be at the summit of human
bliss. Yes, my dear master, answered he, the heavens smile upon
your vows. I have talked the matter over with Basil and his
daughter, declaring your intentions without reserve. The father
is delighted at the idea of your asking his blessing as a son-in-
law; and you may set your heart at rest about Antonia's taste in
a husband. Darts and flames! cried I in an ecstacy of amorous
transport; what! am I so happy as to have made myself agreeable
to that lovely creature? Never question it, replied he; she loves
you already. It is true, she has not owned so much by word of
mouth; but my assurance rests on the tale-telling sparkle of her
eye, when your proposals were made known to her. And yet you have
a rival! A rival! exclaimed I, with a faltering voice, and a
cheek blanched with fear. Do not let that give you the least
uneasiness, said he; your competitor cannot bid very high, for he
is no other than master Joachim your cook. Ah! the hangdog! said
I, with an involuntary shout of laughter: this is the reason,
then, why he had so great an objection to being turned out of my
service. Exactly so, answered Scipio; within these few days he
made proposals of marriage to Antonia, who politely declined
them. With submission to your better judgment, replied I, it
would be expedient, at least so it strikes me, to get rid of that
strange fellow, before he is informed of my intended match with
Basil's daughter: a cook, as you are aware, is a dangerous rival.
You are perfectly in the right, rejoined my trusty counsellor; we
must clear the premises of him -- he shall receive his discharge
from me to-morrow morning, before he puts a finger in the
fricandeaus; thus you will have nothing more to fear either from
his poisonous sauces or bewitching tongue. Yet it goes rather
against the grain with me to part with so good a cook; but I
sacrifice the interests of my own belly to the preservation of
your precious person. You need not, said I, take on so for his
loss: he had no exclusive patent; and I will send to Valencia for
a cook, who shall outcook all his fine cookery. According to my
promise I wrote immediately to Don Alphonso, to let him know that
our kitchen wanted a prime minister; and on the following day he
filled up the vacancy in so worthy a manner, as reconciled Scipio
at once to the change in culinary politics.

Though my adroit and active secretary had assured me of Antonia's
secret self-congratulation on the conquest of her landlord's
heart, I could not venture to rely solely on his report. I was
fearful lest he should have been entrapped by false appearances.
To be more certain of my bliss, I determined on speaking in
person to the fair Antonia. I therefore went to Basil's house,
and confirmed to him what my ambassador had announced. This
honest peasant, of patriarchal simplicity and golden-aged
frankness, after having heard me through, did not hesitate to own
that it would be the greatest happiness of his life to give me
his daughter; but, added he, you are by no means to suppose that
it is because you are lord of the manor. Were you still steward
to Don Caesar and Don Alphonso, I should prefer you to all other
suitors who might apply: I have always felt a sort of kindness
towards you: and nothing vexes me, but that Antonia has not a
thumping fortune to bring with her. I want not the vile dross,
said I; her person is the only dowry that I covet. Your humble
servant for that, cried he; but you will not settle accounts with
me after that fashion; I am not a beggar, to marry my daughter
upon charity. Basil de Buenotrigo is in circumstances, by the
blessing of Providence, to portion her off decently; and I mean
that she should set out a little supper, if you are to be at the
expense of dinners. In a word, the rental of this estate is only
five hundred ducats: I shall raise it to a thousand on the
strength of this marriage.

Just as you please, my dear Basil, replied I; we are not likely
to have any dispute about money matters. We are both of a mind;
all that remains is to get your daughter's consent. You have
mine, said he, and that is enough. Not altogether so, answered I;
though yours may he absolutely necessary, no business can be done
without hers. Hers follows mine of course, replied he; I should
like to catch her murmuring against my sovereign commands.
Antonia, rejoined I, with dutiful submission to paternal
authority, is ready without question to obey your will implicitly
in all things; but I know not whether in the present instance she
would do so without violence to her own feelings; and should that
be the case, I could never forgive myself for being the occasion
of unhappiness to her; in short, it is not enough that I obtain
her hand from you, if her heart is to heave a sigh at the
decision of her destiny. Oh, blessed virgin! said Basil, all
these fine doctrines of philosophy are far above my reach; speak
to Antonia your own self, and you wilt find, or I am very much
mistaken, that she wishes for nothing better than to be your
wife. These words were no sooner out of his mouth than he called
his daughter, and left me with her for a few short minutes.

Not to trifle with so precious an opportunity, I broke my mind to
her at once: Lovely Antonia, said I, it remains with you to fix
the colour of my future days. Though I have your father's
consent, do not think so meanly of me as to suppose that I would
avail myself of it to violate the sacred freedom of your choice.
Rapturous as must be the possession of your charms, I waive my
pretensions if you but tell me that your duty and not your will
complies. It would be affectation to put on such a repugnance,
answered she; the honour of your addresses is too flattering to
excite any other than agreeable sensations, and I am thankful for
my father's tender care of me, instead of demurring to his will.
I am not sure whether such an acknowledgment may not be contrary
to the rules of female reserve in the polite world; but if you
were disagreeable to me, I should be plain-spoken enough to tell
you so; why, then, should I not be equally free in owning the
kind feelings of my heart?
At sounds like these, which I could not bear without being
enraptured, I dropped on my knee before Antonia, and in the
excess of my tender emotions, taking one of her fair hands,
kissed it with an affectionate and impassioned action. My dear
Antonia, said I, your frankness enchants me; go on, let nothing
induce you to depart from it; you are conversing with your future
husband; let your soul expand itself, and reveal all its inmost
emotions in his presence. Thus, then, may I entertain the
flattering hope that you will not frown on the union of our
destinies! The coming in of Basil at this moment prevented me
from giving further vent to the delightful sensations which
thrilled through me. Impatient to know how his daughter had
behaved, and ready primed for scolding in case she had been
perverse or coy, he made up to me immediately. Well, now! said
he, are you satisfied with Antonia? So much so, answered I, that
I am going this very moment to set forward the preparations for
our marriage. So saying, I left the father and daughter, for the
purpose of taking counsel with my secretary thereupon.



CH. IX. -- Nuptials of Gil Blas with the fair Antonia; the style
and manner of the ceremony; the persons assisting thereat; and
the festivities ensuing there upon.


THOUGH there was no occasion to consult with the lords of Leyva
about my marriage, yet both Scipio and myself were of opinion
that I could not decently do otherwise than communicate to them
my purpose of connecting myself with Basil's daughter, and just
pay them the compliment of asking their advice, after the act was
finally determined on.

I immediately went off for Valencia, where my visit was a matter
of surprise, and still more the purport of it Don Caesar and Don
Alphonso, who were acquainted with Antonia, having seen her more
than once, wished me joy on my good fortune in a wife. Don
Caesar, in particular, made his speech upon the occasion with so
much youthful fire, that if there had not been reason to suppose
his lordship weaned, by that icy moralist, time, from certain
naughty propensities, I should have suspected him of going to
Lirias now and then, not so much to look after his concerns
there, as after his little empress of the dairy. Seraphina, too,
with the kindest assurances of a lively interest in whatever
might befall me, said that she had heard a very favourable
character of Antonia; but, added she, with a malicious fling, as
if to taunt me with my supercilious reception of Sephora's
amorous advances, even though her beauty had not been so much the
talk of the country, I could have depended on your taste, from
former experience of its delicacy and fastidiousness.

Don Caesar and his son did not stop at cold approbation of my
marriage, but declared that they would defray all the expenses of
it. Measure back your steps, said they, to Lirias, and stay
quietly there till you hear further from us. Make no preparation
for your nuptials, for we shall make that our concern. To meet
their kind intentions with becoming gratitude, I returned to my
mansion, and acquainted Basil and his daughter with the projected
kindness of our patrons. We determined to wait their pleasure
with as much patience as falls to the lot of poor human nature
under such circumstances. Eight long days dragged out their
tedious measure, and brought no tidings of our bliss. But the
rewards of self-control are not the less assured for being slow:
on the ninth, a coach drawn by four mules drove up, with a cargo
of mantua-makers for the bride, and an assortment of rich silks
on which to exercise their art. Several livery servants, mounted
on mules, accompanied the cavalcade. One of them brought me a
letter from Don Alphonso. That nobleman sent me word that he
would be at Lirias next day with his father and his wife, and
that the marriage ceremony should he performed on the day after
that, by the vicar-general of Valencia. And just so it came to
pass: Don Caesar, his son, and Seraphina, with that venerable
dignitary, were punctual to their appointment; all four of them
in a coach and six; none of your mules, like the mantua-makers!
preceded by an other coach and four, with Seraphina's women; and
the rear was brought up by a company of the governor's guards.

The governor's lady had hardly entered the house before she
testified an ardent longing to see Antonia, who on her part no
sooner knew that Seraphina was arrived, than she ran forward to
bid her welcome, with a respectful kiss upon her hand, so
gracefully and modestly impressed, that all the company were
enchanted at the action. And now, madam! said Don Caesar to his
daughter-in-law, what do you think of Antonia? Could Santillane
have made a better choice? No, answered Seraphina, they are
worthy each of the other; there can be no doubt but their union
will be most happy. In short, every one was lavish in the praise
of my intended; and if they felt her beams so powerfully under
the eclipse of a stuff gown, what must they not have endured from
her brightness, in the meridian sunshine of her wedding finery?
One would have fancied she had been clothed in silks, jewels, and
fine linen from her cradle, by the dignity of her air and the
ease of her deportment.

The happy moment which was to unite two fond lovers in the bands
of Hymen being arrived, Don Alphonso took me by the hand and led
me to the altar, while Seraphina conferred the like honour on the
bride elect. Our procession had marched in fit and decent order
through the hamlet to the chapel, where the vicar-general was
waiting to go through the service; and the ceremony was performed
amidst the heartfelt congratulations of the inhabitants, and of
all the wealthy farmers in the neighbourhood, whom Basil had
invited to Antonia's wedding. Their daughters too came in their
train, tricked out in ribbons and in flowers, and dancing to the
music of their own tambourines. We returned to the mansion under
the same escort: and there, by the provident attentions of
Scipio, who officiated as high steward and master of the
ceremonies, we found three tables set out; one for the principals
of the party, another for their household, and the third, which
was by far the largest, for all invited guests promiscuously.
Antonia was at the first, the governor's lady having made a point
of it; I did the honours of the second, and Basil was placed at
the head of that where the country people dined. As for Scipio,
he never sat down, but was here, there, and everywhere, fetching
and carrying, changing plates and filling bumpers, urging the
company to call freely for what they wanted, and egging them on
to mirth and jollity.

The entertainment had been prepared by the governor's cooks; and
that is as much as to say, that there were all the delicacies
imaginable, in season or out of season. The good wines laid in
for me by master Joachim, were set running at a furious rate; the
guests were beginning to feel their jovial influence, pleasantry
and repartee gave a zest and conviviality, when on a sudden our
harmony was interrupted by an alarming occurrence. My secretary,
being in the hall where I was dining with Don Alphonso's
principal officers and Seraphina's women, suddenly fainted. I
started up and ran to his assistance; and while I was employed in
bringing him about, one of the women was taken ill also. It was
evident to the whole company that this sympathetic malady must
involve some mysterious incident, as in effect it turned out
almost immediately, that thereby hung a tale; for Scipio soon
recovered, and said to me in a low voice, Why must one man's meat
be another man's poison, and the most auspicious of your days the
curse of mine? But every man bears the bundle of his sins upon
his back, and my pack-saddle is once more thrown across my
shoulders in the person of my wife.

Powers of mercy! exclaimed I, this can never be; it is all a
romance. What! you the husband of that lady whose nerves were so
affected by the disturbance? Yes, sir, answered he, I am her
husband; and fortune, if you will take the word of a sinner,
could not have done me a dirtier office than by conjuring up such
a grievance as this. I know not, my friend, replied I, what
reasons you may have for thus belabouring your rib with wordy
buffets, but however she may be to blame, in mercy keep a bridle
on your tongue; if you have any regard for me, do not displace
the mirth and spoil the pleasure of this nuptial meeting, by
ominous disorder or enraged questions of past injuries. You shall
have no reason to complain on that score, rejoined Scipio; but
shall see presently whether I am not a very apt dissembler.

With this assurance he went forward to his wife, whom her
companions had also brought back to life and recollection; and,
embracing her with as much apparent fervour as if his raptures
had been real, Ah, my dear Beatrice, said he, heaven has at
length united us again after ten years of cruel separation! But
this blissful moment is well purchased by whole ages of torturing
suspense! I know not, answered his spouse, whether you really are
at all the happier for having recovered a part of yourself: but
of this at least I am fully certain, that you never had any
reason to run away from me as you did. A fine story indeed! You
found me one night with Signor Don Ferdinand de Leyva, who was in
love with my mistress Julia, and consulted me on the subject of
his passion; and only for that, you must take it into your stupid
head, that I was caballing with him against your honour and my
own: thereupon that poor brain of yours was turned with jealousy;
you quitted Toledo in a huff, and ran away from your own flesh
and blood as you would from a monster of the deserts, without
leaving word why or wherefore. Now which of us two, be so good as
to tell me, has most reason to take on and be pettish? Your own
dear self, beyond all question, replied Scipio. Beyond all
question, re-echoed she, my own ill-used self. Don Ferdinand,
very shortly after you had taken yourself off from Toledo,
married Julia, with whom I continued as long as she lived; and,
after we had lost her by sudden death, I came into my lady her
sister's service, who, as well as all her maids, and I would do
as much for them, will give me a good character; honest and
sober, and a very termagant among the impertinent fellows.

My secretary, having nothing to allege against such a character
from my lady and her maids, was determined to make the best of a
bad bargain. Once for all, said he to his spouse, I acknowledge
my bad behaviour, and beg pardon for it before this honourable
assembly. It was now time for me to act the mediator, and to move
Beatrice for an act of amnesty, assuring her that her husband
from this time forward would make it the great object of his life
to play the husband to her satisfaction. She began to see that
there was reason in roasting of eggs, and all present were loud
in their congratulations, on the triumph of suffering virtue, and
the renovated pledge of broken vows. To bind the contract firmer,
and make it memorable, they were seated next to one another at
table; their healths were drank according to the laws of
toasting; wish you joy! many returns of this happy day! rang
round on every side: one would have sworn that the dinner was
given for their reconciliation, and not on account of my
marriage.

The third table was the first to be cleared. The young villagers
jumped up in a body; the lads took out their blooming partners;
the tambourines struck up a merry beat; spectators flocked from
the other tables, and caught the enlivening spirit from the gay
bustle of the scene. Every limb and muscle of every individual
was in motion: the household of the governor and his lady formed
a set, apart from the rustics of the company, while their
superiors did not disdain to mingle with the homelier dancers.
Don Alphonso danced a saraband with Seraphina, and Don Caesar
another with Antonia, who afterwards took me for her partner. She
did not perform much amiss, considering that she never got much
further than the five positions, in learning which she had her
ankles kicked to pieces by a provincial dancing-master at
Albarazin, while on a visit to a tradesman's wife, one of her
relations. As for me, who, as I have already said, had taken
lessons at the Marchioness de Chaves's, I figured away as the
principal man in this rural ballet. With regard to Beatrice and
Scipio, they preferred a little private conversation to dancing,
that they might compare notes on the subject of war and tear
during the painful period of separation: but their billing and
cooing was interrupted by Seraphina, who, having been informed of
this dramatic discovery, sent for them to pay the customary
compliments of congratulation. My good people, said she, on this
day of general joy, it gives me additional pleasure to see you
two restored to one another. My friend Scipio, I return you your
wife under a firm belief that she has always conducted herself as
became a woman; take up your abode with her here, and be a good
husband to her. And you, Beatrice, attach yourself to Antonia,
and let her be as much the object of your devoted service as
Signor de Santillane is that of your husband. Scipio, who could
not possibly, after this, think of Penelope as fit to hold a
candle to his own wife, promised to treat her with all the
deference due to such a paragon of conjugal fidelity.

The country people, having kept up the dance till late, withdrew
to their own homes; but the rejoicings were prolonged by the
company in the house. There was a grand supper, and at bed-time
the vicar-general pronounced the
blessing of consummation. Seraphina undressed the bride, and the
lords of Leyva did me the same honour. The ridiculous part of the
business was, that Don Alphonso's officers and his lady's
attendants took it into their heads, by way of diverting
themselves, to perform the same ceremony: they also undressed
Beatrice and Scipio, who, to render the scene supremely farcical,
gravely allowed themselves to be untrussed, and put to bed with
all nuptial pomp and state.



CH. X. -- The honey-moon (a very dull time for the reader as a
third person) enlivened by the commencement of Scipio's story.


"'Tis heaven itself, 'tis ecstacy of bliss,
Uninterrupted joy, untired excess;
Mirth following mirth, the moments dance away;
Love claims the night, and friendship rules the day."

ON the day after the wedding the lords of Leyva returned to
Valencia, after having lavished on me a thousand marks of
friendship. There was such a general clearance, that my secretary
and myself, with our respective wives, and our usual
establishment, were left in undisturbed possession of our own
home.

The efforts which we both made to please our ladies were not
thrown away: I breathed by degrees into the partner of my joys
and sorrows as much love for me as I entertained for her; and
Scipio made his better part forget the woes and privations he had
occasioned her. Beatrice, who had very winning ways with her, and
was all things to all women, had no difficulty about worming
herself into the good graces of her new mistress, and gaining her
complete confidence. In short, we all four agreed admirably well
together, and began to enjoy a bliss above the common lot of
humanity. Every day rolled along more delightfully than the last.
Antonia was pensive and demure; but Beatrice and myself were
enlisted in the crew of mirth; and even though we had been
constitutionally sedate, Scipio was among us, and he was of
himself a pill to purge melancholy. The best creature in the
world for a snug little party! one of those merry drolls who have
only to shew their comical faces, and set the table in a roar of
inextinguishable laughter.

One day, when we had taken a fancy to go after dinner, and doze
away the usual interval in the most sequestered spot about the
grounds, my secretary got into such exuberant spirits, as to
chase away the drowsy god by his exhilarating sallies. Do hold
your tongue, my loquacious friend, said I: or else, if you are
determined to wage war against this lazy custom of our
afternoons, at least tell us something which we shall he the
wiser for hearing. With all my heart and soul, sir, answered he.
Would you have me go through all fabulous histories of wandering
knights, distressed damsels, giants, enchanted castles, and the
whole train of legendary adventures? I had much rather hear your
own true history, replied I; but that is a pleasure which you
have not thought fit to give me so long as we have lived
together, and I seem likely to go without it to the end of the
chapter. How happens that? said he. If I have not told you my own
story, it is because you never expressed the slightest wish to be
troubled with the recital: therefore it is not my fault if you
are in the dark about my past life; but if you are really at all
curious to be let into the secret, my loquacity is very much at
your service on the occasion. Antonia, Beatrice, and myself,
unanimously took him at his word, and arranged ourselves for
listening like an attentive audience. The speculation was a safe
one on our parts; for the tale was sure to answer, either as a
stimulant or a soporific.

I certainly ought to have been descended, said Scipio, from some
family of the highest rank and earliest antiquity; or in default
of such parentage, from the most distinguished orders of personal
merit, such as that of St James or Alcantara, if a man may be
permitted to decide on the fittest circumstances his own birth:
but as it is not among the privileges of human nature to elect
one's own father, you are to know that mine, by name Torribio
Scipio, was a subaltern myrmidon of the Holy Brotherhood. As he
was going back and fore on the king's highway, and looking after
business in his own line, he met once on a time, between Cuença
and Toledo, with a young Bohemian babe of chance, who appeared
very pretty in his eyes. She was alone, on foot, and carried her
whole patrimony at her back in a kind of knapsack. Whither are
you going, my little darling? said he in a philandering tone of
voice, unlike the natural hoarseness of his accents. Good worthy
gentleman, answered she, I am going to Toledo, where I hope to
gain an honest livelihood by hook or by crook. Your intentions
are highly commendable, retorted he; and I doubt not but you have
many a hook and many a crook among the implements of your trade.
Yes, with a blessing on my endeavours, rejoined she: I have
several little ways of doing for myself: I know how to make
washes and creams for the ladies' faces, perfumes for their noses
and their chambers; then I can tell fortunes, can search for
things lost with a sieve and shears, and erect figures for the
taking in of shadows with a glass.

Torribio, concluding that so well-provided a girl would be a very
advantageous match for a man like himself, who could scarcely
scrape wherewithal to support life by his own profession, though
he was as good a thief-taker as the best of them, made her an
offer of marriage, and she was nothing loth, nor prudishly coy.
They flew on the wings of inclination and convenience to Toledo,
where they were joined together; and you behold in me the happy
pledge of holy and lawful matrimony. They fixed themselves in a
shop on the outskirts of the town, where my mother commenced her
career by selling the said washes, creams, tapes, laces, silk,
thread, toys, and pedlar's ware; but trade not being brisk enough
to live comfortably by it, she turned fortune-teller. This drew
her customers, got her countenance, credit, crowns, and pistoles:
a thousand dupes of either sex soon trumpeted up the reputation
of Coselina; for so my gipsy mamma had the honour to be named.
Some one or other came every day to bargain for the exercise of
her skill in the black art: at one time a nephew at his wit's and
purse's end, wanting to know how soon his uncle was to set off
post for the other world, and leave behind him wherewithal to
piece his worn-out fortunes: at another, some yielding, love-sick
girl, to inquire whether the swain who kept her company, and had
promised to marry her, would keep his word or be false-hearted.

You will take notice, if you please, that my mother always sold
good luck for good money; if the accomplishment trod on the heels
of the prediction, well and good; if it was fulfilled according
to the rule of contraries, she was always cool, though the
parties were ever so violently in a passion, and told them
plainly that it was her familiar's fault, not hers; for though
she paid him the highest wages, and bound him by potent spells to
stir up the cauldron of futurity from the bottom, like earthly
cooks, he would sometimes be careless or out of humour, and
apportion the ingredients wrongly.

When my mother thought the conjuncture momentous enough to raise
the devil without cheapening him in the eyes of the vulgar,
Torribio Scipio enacted his infernal majesty, and played the part
just as if he had been born to it, humouring the hideous features
of the character by a very small aggravation of his own natural
face, and practising the pandemonian note of elocution in the
lower octave of his voice. A person in the slightest degree
superstitious would
be scared out of his senses at my father's figure. But one day,
as his satanic prototype would have it, there came a savage
rascal of a captain, who asked to see the devil, for no earthly
purpose but to run him clean through the body. The Inquisition, 
having received notice of the devil's death, sent to take charge
of his widow, and administer to his effects; as for poor little
me, just seven years old at the time, I was sent to the foundling
hospital. There were some charitable ecclesiastics on that
establishment, who, being liberally paid for the education of the
poor orphans, were so zealous in their office as to teach them
reading and writing. They fancied there was something
particularly promising about me, which made them pick me out from
all the rest, and send me on their errands. I was letter-carrier,
messenger, and chapel clerk. As a token of their gratitude, they
undertook to teach me Latin; but their mode of tuition was so
harsh, and their discipline so severe, though I was a sort of pet
with them, that, not being able to stand it any longer, I ran
away one morning while out on an errand; and, so far from
returning to the hospital, got out of Toledo through the suburbs
on the Seville side.

Though I had not then completed my ninth year, I already felt the
pleasure of being free, and master of my own actions. I was
without money and without food; no matter! I had no lessons to
say by heart, no themes to hammer out. After having pushed on for
two hours, my little legs began to refuse their office. I had
never before made so long a trip. It became necessary to stop and
take some rest. I sat myself down at the foot of a tree close by
the high. way; there, by way of amusement, I took my grammar out
of my pocket, and began conning it over by way of a joke; but at
length, coming to recollect the raps on the knuckles, and the
castigations on the more classical seat of punishment which it
had cost me, I tore it leaf by leaf with an apostrophe of angry 
import. Ah! you odious thing of a book! you shall never make me
shed tears any more. While I was assuaging my vindictive spirit,
by strewing the ground about me with declensions and
conjugations, there passed that way a hermit with a white beard,
with a large pair of spectacles on his nose, and altogether an
outside of much sanctity. He came up to me; and, if I was an
object of speculation to him, he was no less so to me. My little
man, said he with a smile, it should seem as if we had both taken
a sudden liking to each other, and in that case we cannot do
better than to live together in my hermitage, which is not two
hundred yards distant. Your most obedient for that, answered I
pertly enough; I have not the least desire to turn hermit. At
this answer, the good old man set up a roar of laughter, and said
with a kind embrace: You must not be frightened at my dress; if
it is not becoming, it is useful; it gives me my title to a
charming retreat, and to the good-will of the neighbouring
villages, whose inhabitants love or rather idolize me. Come this
way, and I will clothe you in a jacket of the same stuff as mine.
If you think well of it, you shall share with me the pleasures of
the life I lead; and, if it does not hit your fancy, you shall
not only be at liberty to leave me, but you may depend on it that
in the event of our parting, I shall not fail to do something
handsome by you.

I suffered myself to be persuaded, and followed the old hermit,
who put several questions to me, which I answered with a truth-
telling simplicity, not always to be found in a more advanced
stage of morality. On our arrival at the hermitage he set some
fruit before me, which I devoured, having eaten nothing all day
but a slice of dry bread, on which I had breakfasted at the
hospital in the morning. The recluse, seeing me play so good a
part with my jaws, said: Courage, my good boy, do not spare my
fruit; there is plenty of it, Heaven be praised. I have not
brought you hither to starve you. And indeed that was true
enough; for an hour after our coming in, he kindled a fire, put a
leg of mutton down to roast; and while I turned the spit, laid a
small table for himself and me, with a very dirty napkin upon it.

When the meat was done enough he took it up, and cut some slices
for our supper, which was no dry bargain, since we quaffed a
delicious wine, of which he had laid in ample store. Well! my
chicken, said he, as he rose from table, are you satisfied with
my style of living? You see how we shall fare every day, if you
fix your quarters here. Then with respect to liberty, you shall
do just as you please in this hermitage. All I require of you is
to accompany me whenever I go begging to the neighbouring 
villages; you will be of use in driving an ass laden with two
panniers, which the charitable peasants usually fill with eggs,
bread, meat, and fish. I ask no more than that. I will do, said
I, whatever you desire, provided you will not oblige me to learn
Latin. Friar Chrysostom, for that was the old hermit's name,
could not help smiling at my school-boy frowardness, and assured
me once more that he should not pretend to interfere either with
my studies or my inclinations.

On the very next day we went on a foraging party with the donkey,
which I led by the halter. We made a profitable gleaning; for all
the farmers took a pleasure in throwing somewhat into our
panniers. One chucked in an uncut loaf; another a large piece of
bacon; here a goose, there a pair of giblets, and a partridge to
crown the whole. But without entering further into particulars,
we carried home provender enough for a week; and hence you may
infer the esteem and friendship in which the country people held
the holy man. It is true that he was a great blessing to the
neighbourhood: his advice was always at their service when they
came to consult him: he restored peace where discord had reigned
in families, and made up matches for the daughters; he had a
nostrum for almost any disease you could mention, with an
assortment of pious rituals, to avert the curse of barrenness.

Hence you perceive that I was in no danger of starving in my
hermitage. My lodging, too, was none of the worst: stretched on 
good fresh straw, with a cushion of ratteen under my head, and a
coverlet over me of the same stuff I made but one nap of it all
night. Brother Chrysostom, who had promised me a hermit's dress,
made up an old gown of his own for me, and called me little
brother Scipio. No sooner did I appear in my religious uniform,
than the ass's back suffered for my genteel appearance in the
eyes of the villagers. It was who should give most to the little
brother! so much were they delighted with his spruce figure.

The easy, slothful life I led with the old hermit could not be
very revolting to a boy of my age. On the contrary, it suited my
taste so exactly, that I should have continued it to this time,
but that the fates and destinies were weaving a more complicated
tissue for my future years. It was cast in the figure of my
nativity, early to rouse myself from the effeminacy of a
religious life, and to take leave of brother Chrysostom after the
following manner.

I often observed the old man at work upon his pillow, unsewing
and sewing it up again; and one day, I saw him put in some money.
This circumstance excited a tingling curiosity, which I promised
myself to satisfy the first time he went to Toledo, as he
generally did once a week. I waited impatiently for the day, but
as yet, without any other motive than the mere desire of prying.
At last the good man went his way, and I unpicked his pillow,
where I found, among the stuffing, the amount of about fifty
crowns in all sorts of coin.

This treasure must have accumulated from the gratitude of the
peasantry, whom the hermit had cured by his nostrums, and of
their wives, who had be come pregnant by virtue of his spiritual
interference. But however it got there, I no sooner set my eyes
on the money, which might be mine without any one near me to say
nay, than the gipsy voice of nature and pedigree spoke within me.
An inextinguishable itch of pilfering tingled in my veins, and
proved that we come into the world with the mark of our descent,
and with our characters about us. I yielded to the temptation
without a struggle; tied up my booty in a canvas bag where we
kept our combs and night-caps: then, having laid aside the
hermit's and resumed my foundling's dress, got clear off from the
hermitage, and hugged my bag as though it had contained the
boundless treasure of the Indies.

You have heard my first exploit, continued Scipio; and I doubt
not but you will expect a succession of similar practices. Your
anticipations will not be disappointed; for there are many such
evidences of genius behind, before I come to those of my actions
which prove me good as well as clever; but I shall come to them,
and you will be convinced by the sequel, that a scoundrel born
may be licked into virtue, as the cub of a bear into shape.

Child as I was, I knew better than to take the Toledo road; it
would have been exposing myself to the hazard of meeting friar
Chrysostom, who would have balanced accounts with me on a very
thriftless principle. I therefore travelled in another direction
leading to the village of Galves, where I stopped at an inn, kept
by a landlady who was a widow of forty, and hung out the bunch of
grapes to a very good purpose. This good woman no sooner kenned
me, than, judging by my dress that I must be a truant from the
orphan school, she asked who I was and whither I was going. I
answered that, having lost my father and mother, I was looking
for a place. Can you read, my dear? said she. I assured her that
I could read, and write too, with the best of them. In point of
fact, I could just form my letters, and join them so as to look a
little like writing; and that was clerkship enough for a village
pothouse. Then I will take you into my service, replied the
hostess. You may earn your board easily enough, by scoring up the
customers, and keeping my ledger. I shall give you no wages,
because this inn is frequented by very genteel company, who never
forget the waiters. You may reckon upon very considerable
perquisites.

I clenched the bargain, reserving to myself, as you may suppose,
the right of emigration whenever my abode at Galves should cease
to be pleasant. No sooner was I settled in my place, than a 
weight lay heavy on my mind. I did not wish it to be known that I
had money; and it was no easy matter to devise where it could be
hidden, so as that what was sauce for the goose should not be
sauce for the gander. I was not yet well enough acquainted with
the house to trust the places obviously most proper for such a
deposit. What a source of embarrassment is great wealth! I
determined, however, on a corner of our granary under some straw;
and believing it to be safer there than anywhere else, made
myself as easy about it as I well could.

The household consisted of three servants: a lubberly ostler, a
young Galician chambermaid, and myself. Each of us spunged what
we could upon travellers, whether on foot or on horseback. I
always came in for some small change, when the bill was paid.
Then the equestrians gave something to the ostler, for taking
care of their beasts: but as for our female fellow-servant, the
muleteers who passed that way chucked her under the chin, and
gave her more crowns than we got farthings. I had no sooner
realized a penny, than away it went to the granary, and slept
with its precursors; so that the higher rose my heap, the more
greedy did my little heart become. Sometimes would I kiss the
hallowed images of my idolatry, and look at them with a
devotional glow, which few worshippers feel, but those whose
religion is their gold.

This inordinate passion sent me back and fore to gratify it, at
least thirty times a day. I often met the landlady on the
staircase. She, being naturally of a suspicious temper, had a
mind to find out one day what could carry me every minute to the
corn-loft. She therefore went up and began rummaging about
everywhere, supposing perhaps that it was my receptacle for
articles purloined in the house. Of course she did not forget to
pull the straw about; and behold, there was my bag! Two hands in
a dish and one in a purse, was not one of her proverbs; so that
finding the contents in crowns and pistoles, she thought, or
seemed to think, that the money was lawfully and honestly hers.
At least she had possession, and that is nine points of the law,
though scarcely one of honesty. But to do the thing decently,
after calling me little wretch, little rascal, and so forth, she
ordered the ostler, a fellow without any will but hers, to give
me a hearty flogging; and then turn me out of doors, with this
salt eel for my breakfast, and a lady-like oath that no light-
fingered gentry should ever darken her doors. In vain did I
protest and vow that I never wronged my mistress: she affirmed
the direct contrary, and her word would go further than mine at
any time. Thus were friar Chrysostom's savings transferred from
one thief to a greater thief in the thief-taker.

I wept over the loss of my money, as a father over the death of
his only son: and though my tears could not bring back what I had
lost, they at least answered the purpose of exciting pity in some
people, who saw how bitterly they flowed, and among others in the
parson, who was accidentally going by. He seemed affected by my
sad plight, and took me home with him. There, to gain my
confidence, or rather to pump me, he began soothing my sorrows.
How much this poor child is to be pitied! said he. Is it any
wonder if, thrown upon the wide world at so tender an age, he has
committed a bad action? Grown up men are not always proof against
the flesh or the devil. Then, addressing me, Child, added he,
front what part of Spain do you come, and who are your parents?
You have the look of family about you. Open your heart to me
confidentially, and depend upon it, I never will desert you.

His reverence, by this kind and insinuating language, engaged me
by degrees to tell him all my history, without falsification or
reserve. I owned everything; and thus he moralized on the leading
article of my confession: My little friend, though hermits ought
to lay up such treasures as neither force nor fraud can wrest
from them, that was no excuse for your taking the measure of
punishment into your own hands: by robbing brother Chrysostom,
you nevertheless sinned against that article of the decalogue,
which tells you not to steal; but I will engage to make the
hostess return the money, and will punctually remit it to the
reverend friar at his hermitage: you may therefore make your
conscience perfectly easy on that score. Now, between ourselves,
my conscience was perfectly callous to everything like
compunction with respect to the crime in question. The parson,
who had his own ends to answer, had not done with me yet. My lad,
pursued he, I mean to take you by the hand, and find a good berth
for you. I shall send you to-morrow morning, by the carrier, to
my nephew, a canon of Toledo. He will not refuse, at my request,
to admit you upon his establishment, where they live like so many
sons of the church, rosily, merrily, and fatly, upon the rents of
his prebendal stall: you will be perfectly comfortable there,
take my word for it.

Patronage like this gave me so much encouragement, that I did not
throw away another thought either upon my bag or my whipping. My
mind was wholly occupied with the idea of living rosily, merrily,
and fatly, like a son of the church. The following day, at
breakfast-time, there came, according to orders, a muleteer to
the parsonage, with two mules saddled and bridled. They helped me
to mount one, the muleteer flung his leg over the other, and we
trotted on for Toledo. My fellow-traveller was a good, pleasant
companion, arid desired nothing better than to indulge his humour
at the expense of his neighbour. My little volunteer, said he,
you have a good friend in his reverence, the minister of Galves.
He could not give you a better proof of his kindness, than by
placing you with his nephew the canon, whom I have the honour of
knowing, far beyond all question or comparison, to be the cock of
the chapter, and a hearty one he is. None of your lantern-jawed
saints, with Lent in his face, a cat-of-nine-tails on his back,
and a cholera morbus in his belly. No such thing! Our doctor is
rubicund in the jowl, efflorescent on the nose, with a wicked eye
at a bumper or a girl militant against no earthly pleasure, but
most addicted to the good things of the table. You will be as
snug there as a bug in a blanket.

This hangman of a muleteer, perceiving with what exquisite
satisfaction I took in all this, went on tantalizing me with the
joys of an ecclesiastical life. He never dropped the subject till
we got to the village of Obisa, and stopped there to refresh our
mules. Then, while bustling about the inn, he accidentally
dropped a paper from his pocket, which I was cunning enough to
pick up without his seeing me, and took an opportunity of reading
while he was in the stable. It was a letter addressed to the
governors and superintendents of the orphan school, conceived in
these terms: "Gentlemen, I consider it as an act at once of
charity and of duty, to send you back a little truant; he seems a
shrewd lad enough, and may do very well with good looking after.
By dint of hard and frequent chastisement, I doubt not but you
will ultimately bring him to a sense of his own unworthiness and
your benevolence. May a blessing be vouchsafed on your pious and
charitable labours, for the early extirpation of sin and
wickedness! (Signed) "THE MINISTER OF GALVES."

When I had finished reading this pleasant letter, which let me
into the good intentions of his reverence the rector, it required
little deliberation to determine what I was to do: from the inn
to the banks of the Tagus, a space of three good miles, was but a
hop, step, and jump. Fear lent me wings to escape from the
governors of the foundling hospital, whither I was absolutely
resolved never to return, having formed principles of taste
diametrically opposite to their method of teaching the classics.
I went into Toledo with as light a heart as if I had known where
to get my daily bread. To be sure, it is a town of ways and
means, where a man who can live by his wits need never die of
hunger. Scarcely had I reached the high street, when a well-
dressed gentleman by whom I brushed, caught me by the arm,
saying: My little fellow, do you want a place? You are just such
a smart lad as I was looking for. And you are just the master for
my money, answered I. Since that is the case, rejoined he, you
are mine from this moment, and have only to follow me, which I
did without asking any more questions.

This spark, about the age of thirty, and bearing the name of Don
Abel, lodged in very handsome ready-furnished apartments. He was
by profession a blacklegs; and the following was the nature of
our engagement. In the morning I got him as much tobacco as would
smoke five or six pipes; brushed his clothes, and ran for a
barber to shave him and trim his whiskers; after which he made
the circle of the tennis-courts, whence he never returned home
till eleven or twelve at night. But every morning, at going out,
he gave me three reals for the expenses of the day, leaving me
master of my own time till ten o'clock in the evening; and
provided I was within-doors by his return, all was well. He gave
me a livery besides, in which I looked like a little lackey of
illicit love. I took very kindly to my condition, and certainly
could not have met with any more congenial with my temper.

Such and so happy had been my way of life for nearly a month,
when my employer inquired whether I liked his service; and on my
answer in the affirmative, Well, then, resumed he, to-morrow we
shall set out for Seville, whither my concerns call me. You will
not be sorry to see the capital of Andalusia. "He that hath not
Seville seen," says the proverb. "Is no traveller I ween." I
engaged at once to follow him all over the world. On that very
day, the Seville carrier fetched away a large trunk with my
master's wardrobe, and on the next morning we were on the road
for Andalusia.

Signor Don Abel was so lucky at play, that he never lost but when
it was convenient; but then it was seldom convenient to stay long
in a place, because those who are always losers find out at last,
that though chance is a dangerous antagonist, certainly it is a
desperate one; and that accounted for our journey. On our arrival
at Seville, we took lodgings near the Cordova gate, and resumed
the same mode of life as at Toledo. But my master found some
difference between the two towns. The Seville tennis-courts could
produce players equally in fortune's good graces with himself; so
that he sometimes came home a good deal out of humour. One
morning, when he was biting the bridle for the loss of a hundred
pistoles the day before, he asked why I had not carried his linen
to the laundress. I pleaded forgetfulness. Thereupon, flying into
a passion, be gave me half-a-dozen boxes on the ear, in such a
style, as to kindle an illumination in my blinking eyes, to which
the glories of Solomon's temple were no more to be compared, than
the torches in a Candlemas procession to a rushlight. There is
for you, you little scoundrel! said he; take that, and learn to
mind your business. Must I be eternally at your heels to remind
you of what you are to do? Are your brains in your belly, and all
your wits in your grinders? You are not a downright idiot! Then
why not prevent my wants and anticipate my orders? After this
experimental lecture, he went out for the day, leaving me in high
dudgeon, at a reprimand so much in the manner of my friend the
ostler, for such a trifle as not getting up his things for the
wash.

I could never learn what happened to him a short time after at a
tennis-court; but one evening he came home in a terrible heat.
Scipio, said he, I am bent on going to Italy, and must embark the
day after to-morrow on board a vessel bound for Genoa. I have my
reasons for making this little excursion; of course you will be
glad to attend me, and to profit by so fine an opportunity of
seeing the loveliest country on the face of the earth. My tongue
gave consent; but with a salvo in my heart and a bargain with my
revenge, to give him the slip just at the moment of embarkation.
This was so delightful a scheme, that I could not help imparting
it to a bully by profession, whom I met in the street. During my
abode in Seville, I had picked up some awkward acquaintance, and
this was one of the most ungainly. I told him how and why my ears
had been boxed, and then communicated my project of running away
from Don Abel just before the ship was to sail, begging to know
what he thought of the plan.

My bluff adviser puckered his eyebrows while he listened, and
fiddled with his fingers about his whiskers: then, blaming my
master very seriously, My little hero, said he, you are eternally
disgraced, can never shew your face again, if you sit down
quietly with so paltry a satisfaction as what you propose. To let
Don Abel go off by himself, would be a poor revenge for wrongs
like yours; the punishment should be proportioned to his crime.
Let us fine him to the full amount of his purse and effects,
which we will share like brothers after he is gone. Now it is to
be noted, that though thieving fell in very naturally with the
bent of my genius, the proposal rather startled me, as the
robbery was upon a large scale for so young an apprentice.

And yet the arch deceiver of my innocence found the means of
working me up to the perpetration, so that the result of our
enterprise was as follows. This glorious ruffian, a tall, brawny
fellow, came in the evening about twilight to our lodging. I
shewed my master's travelling trunk ready packed, and asked him
whether he could carry so heavy a load upon his shoulders. So
heavy as that! said he: shew me where a transfer of property is
to be made in my favour, and I could run with Noah's ark to the
top of Mount Ararat. To prove his words, he felt the trunk, flung
it carelessly over his back, and scampered down-stairs, I
followed nimbly; and we had just got to the street door, when Don
Abel, brought home in the nick of time by the ascendancy of his
lucky stars, stood like an apparition, to appal our guilty souls.

Whither are you going with that trunk? said he. I was so taken by
surprise that my assurance failed me; and broad-shoulders,
finding that he had drawn a blank in the lottery, threw down his
booty, and took to his heels, rather than be troubled for an
explanation. Once more, whither are you going with that trunk?
said my master. Sir, answered I, with all the honest simplicity
of a criminal, pleading in arrest of judgment, I was going to put
it on board the vessel, that we might have the less to do to-
morrow, before we embark ourselves. Indeed! Then you know,
retorted he, in what ship I have taken my passage? No, sir,
replied I! but those who can talk Latin may always find their way
to Rome: I should have inquired at the port, and somebody would
have informed me. At this explanation, which left his opinion
where it found it, he darted a furious glance at me. I thought
for all the world, he was going to cuff me again about the head.
Who ordered you, cried he, to take my trunk out of this house?
You, your own self; said I. Can you possibly have forgotten how
you rated me but a few days ago? Did you not tell me, with a flea
in my ear, that you would have me prevent your wants, and do
beforehand from my own head whatever your service might require?
Now, not to be threshed a second time for want of forethought, I
was seeing your trunk safe and soon enough on board. On this the
gamester, finding that I had cut my teeth of wisdom sooner than
suited his purpose, turned me off very coolly, saying: Go about
your business, master Scipio, and speed as you may deserve. I do
not like to play with folks who are in the habit of revoking. Get
out of my sight, or I shall set your solfeggio in a crying key.

I spared him the trouble of telling me to go twice. Off I shot
like an arrow, for fear he should unfledge me, by taking away my
livery. When distant enough to slacken my pace, I walked along in
the streets, musing whither I might betake myself for a night's
lodging, with only two reals in my pocket. The gate of the
archbishop's palace at length stared me in the face; and, as his
grace's supper was then dressing, a savoury odour exhaled from
the kitchens, impregnating the gale with soup and sauce for a
mile round. Ods haricots and cutlets! thought I, it would be no
hard matter for me to dispense with one of those little side
dishes, which will be of no use to the archbishop but to make out
the figure of his table: nay, I would be contented only just to
dip in my four fingers and thumb, and then to sup like a bear
upon suckings. But how to accomplish it! Is there no way of
bringing these choice morsels to a better test than that of
smell? And why not? Hunger, they say, will break through stone
walls. On this idea did I set my wits to work; and, by dint of
conning over the subject, a stratagem struck me, which set my
lungs as well as appetite in motion, just as the old carpenter
kept bawling, "I have found it," like a madman, when he had hit
the right nail of his proposition on the head. I ran into the
court of the palace, and made the best of my way to the kitchens,
calling out with all my might, "Help! help!" as if some assassin
had been at my heels.

At my reiterated cries master Diego, the archbishop's cook, ran
with three or four kitchen drudges to learn what was the matter;
and seeing only me, asked why I roared so loud. Ah! good sir,
answered I, with every token of exquisite distress, for mercy's
sake and for St Polycarp's! save me, I beseech you, from the fury
of a blusterer, who swears he will kill me. But where is this
disturber of the public peace? cried Diego. You have no one to
quarrel with but yourself; for I do not see so much as a cat to
spit at you. Go your ways, my little man, and do not be afraid;
it is evidently some wag who has been playing upon your cowardice
for his diversion; but he knew better than to follow you within
these walls, for we would have cut his ears off at the least. No,
no, said I, it was for no laughing matter that he ran after me.
He is a noted footpad, and meant to rob me; I am certain that he
is now waiting for me at the corner of the street. Then he may
wait long enough, replied the knight of the iron spit; for you
shall stay here till to-morrow. You shall sup with us, and we
will give you a bed.

I was out of my little wits with joy at the mention of these last
tidings; and it was like the turnpike road to paradise after
crossing an Arabian desert, when being led by master Diego
through the kitchens, I there saw my lord archbishop's supper,
and the stew-pans in the last throes of parturition. There were
fifteen accountable souls, for I reckoned them up, in attendance
on the labour; but the litter of dishes far out-numbered the
fecundity of nature in her most prolific mood: so much more
gracious and bountiful is providence to the heads of the church
in the indulgence of their appetites, than mindful of the
worthless brute creation in the propagation of its kind. Here it
was, at the fountain-head of prelacy, inhaling an atmosphere of
gravy, instead of just snuffing the scent as it lay upon the
breeze, that I first shook hands with sensuality. I had the
honour of supping with the scullions, and of sleeping in their
room; an initiation of friendship so sincere and strong, that on
the following day, when I went to thank master Diego for his
goodness in vouchsafing me a refuge, he said: Our kitchen lads
have been with me in a body, to declare how excessively delighted
they are with your manners, and to propose having you among them
as a fellow-servant. How should you, on your part, like to make
one of the society? I answered that, with such a feather in my
cap, I should be the vainest and the happiest of mortals. Then so
be it, my friend, replied he; consider yourself henceforth as a
buttress of the hierarchy. With this invitation, he introduced me
to the major-domo, who thought he saw talent enough in me for a
turnspit.

No sooner was I in possession of so honourable an office, than
master Diego, following the practice of cooks in great houses,
who pamper up their pretty dears in private with all sorts of
good things, selected me to supply a lady in the neighbourhood
with a regular table of butcher's meat, poultry, and game. This
good friend of his was a widow on the right side of thirty, very
pretty, very lively, and to all appearance contenting herself
with cupboard love for her cook. His generous passion was not
confined to furnishing her with bread, meat, and garnish; she
drank her wine too, and the archbishop was her wine-merchant.

The improvement of my parts kept pace with that of my carnal
condition in his grace's palace: where I gave a specimen of 
rising genius, still ringing on the trump of fame at Seville. The
pages and some others of the household had a mind to get up a
play on my lord archbishop's birthday. They chose a popular
Spanish tragedy; and wanting a boy about my age to personate the
young King of Leon, cast me for the part. The major-domo, a great
spouter, undertook to train me for the stage; and after a few
lessons, pronounced that I should not be the worst actor of the
company. His grace not wishing to starve so handsome a compliment
to himself, no expense was spared in getting it up magnificently.
The largest hall in the palace was fitted up as a theatre, with
appropriate decorations. At the side scene there was a bed of
turf, on which I was to be discovered asleep, when the Moors were
to rush in and take me prisoner. When we had got so forward with
our rehearsals as to be sure of being ready by the time fixed,
the archbishop sent out cards of invitation to all the principal
families in the city.

At length the great, the important day arrived; and each
performer was big with the contrivance and adjustment of his
dress. Mine was brought by a tailor, accompanied by our major-
domo, who, after taking the trouble of drilling me at rehearsal,
wished to see justice done to my outward appearance. The tailor
put me on a rich robe of blue velvet, with hanging sleeves, gold
lace, fringe, and buttons: the major-domo himself crowned me with
a pasteboard crown, studded with false diamonds and real pearls.
Moreover, they gave me a sash of pink silk worked in silver; so
that every new ornament was like a quill-feather in the wing of a
bird. At last, about dusk, the play began. The curtain drew up
for my soliloquy; the purport of which was to express, in a
roundabout, poetical way, that not being able to defend myself
from the influence of sleep, I was going to lie down and take it
as it came. To suit the action to the word, I sidled off to the
corner between the flat and the wings, and squatted down on my
bed of turf, but instead of going to sleep, according to promise,
I was hammering upon the means of getting into the street, and
running away with my coronation finery. A little private
staircase, leading under the theatre into the lower saloon,
seemed to furnish the probability of success. I slid away slily,
while the audience were considering some necessary question of
the play, and ran down the staircase, through the saloon, to the
door, calling out, "Make way! make way! I must change my dress,
and run up again in a moment!" They all made a lane, for fear of
hindering me; so that in less than two minutes I got clear out of
the palace, under cover of the darkness, and scampered to the
house of my friend who saw gentlemen's trunks safe on board.

He stared like a stuck pig at my equipment l But when I let him
into the why and the wherefore, he laughed ready to split his
sides. Then, shaking hands in the sincerity of his heart, because
he flattered himself with the hope of a pension on the King of
Leon's civil list, he wished me joy of so successful a first
appearance, and joined issue with the major-domo in the
prognostic, that with encouragement and practice I should turn
out a first-rate actor, and make no little noise in the world.
After we had diverted ourselves for some time at the expense of
my manager and audience, I said to the bully -- What shall we do
with this magnificent dress? Do not make yourself uneasy about
that, answered he. I know an honest broker, without an atom of
curiosity in his composition, who will buy or sell anything with
any person, provided that he gets the turn of the market upon the
transaction. I will fetch him to you to-morrow morning. The
knowing fellow was as good as his word; for he went out early the
next day, leaving me in bed, and returned two hours afterwards
with the broker, carrying a yellow bundle under his arm. My
friend, said he, give me leave to introduce Signor Ybagnez of
Segovia, who, in spite of the bad example set him by the trade in
general, trusts to fair dealing and small profits for a moderate
pittance and an unblemished character. He will tell you to a
fraction what the dress you want to part with is really worth,
and you may take his calculation as the balance of justice,
between, man and man. Oh yes I to a nicety, said the broker. Else
wherefore live I in a Christian land, but to appraise for my
neighbour as for myself? To take a mean advantage never was,
thank heaven! and at these years never shall be, imputed to
Ybagnez of Segovia. Let us look a little at those articles! You
are the seller; I am the buyer! We have only to agree upon an
equitable price. Here they are, said the bully, pulling them out:
now own the truth, was there ever anything more magnificent? You
do not often see such velvet: and then the trimming! You cannot
say too much of it, answered the salesman, examining the suit
with the prying eye of a dealer, it is of the very first quality.
And what think you of the pearls upon this crown? resumed my
friend. A little rounder, observed Ybagnez, and there would be no
setting a price upon them! however, take them as they are, it is
a very fine set, and I do not want to find fault about trifles.
Now your common run of appraisers, under my circumstances, would
affect to disparage the goods for the sake of getting them
cheaper; one of those fellows would have the conscience to offer
twenty pistoles; but there is nothing like bargaining with an
upright, downright man! I will give forty at a word; take them or
leave them!

Had Ybagnez ventured up to a hundred, he would not have burned
his fingers; for the pearls alone would have fetched two hundred
anywhere. The bully, who went snacks, then said -- Now only look!
what a mercy it is, to fall into the hands of a man not of this
world. Signor Ybagnez estimates money as dross, in comparison of
his principles and his soul. He may die to-night, and yet not be
taken unprepared! That is too much! You make me blush, said the
salesman of principle and soul; but so far is true, that my price
is always fixed. Well, now, is it a bargain? The money down upon
the nail too! Stop a moment! answered the bully; my little friend
must first try on the clothes you have brought for him by my
order: I am very much mistaken if they will not just fit him. The
salesman then, untying his bundle, shewed me a second-hand suit
of dark cloth with silver buttons. I got up, and got into it; too
big for me every way! but these gentlemen could have sworn it had
been made to my measure. Ybagnez put it at ten pistoles; and as
he was an upright, downright man, of fixed principle and soul,
estimating money as dross in comparison of integrity, his first
price was of course his last. He therefore took out his purse,
and counted down thirty pistoles upon a table; after which he
packed up the King of Leon's regalia, and went his way.

When he was gone, the bully said -- I am very well satisfied with
that broker. And so he well might be; for I am certain he must
have received at least a hundred pistoles as hush-money. But
there was no reason why the broker's benevolence should pay the
debts of my gratitude: so he took half the money on the table,
without saying with your leave or by your leave, and suffered me
to pocket the remainder, with the following advice: My dear
Scipio, with that balance of fifteen pistoles, I would have you
get out of this town as fast as you can; for you may suppose that
my lord archbishop will ferret you out if you are above-ground.
It would grieve me to the heart if, after having risen so
superior to the prejudice of honesty, you had the weakness to
fall foul of what alone keeps it afloat, the house of correction.
I answered that it was my fixed purpose to make myself scarce at
Seville, and accordingly, after buying a hat and some shirts, I
travelled through vineyards and olive groves to the ancient city
of Carmona; and in three days afterwards arrived at Cordova.

I put up at an inn close by the market-place, giving myself out
for the heir of a good family at Toledo, travelling for his
pleasure. My appearance did not belie the story, and a few
pistoles, which I contrived carelessly to chink within the
landlord's hearing, pinned his faith upon my veracity. Probably
my unfledged youth might lead him to take me for some graceless
little truant who had robbed his parents and run away. But that
was no concern of his: he took the thing just as I gave it him,
for fear lest his curiosity should clash with my continuance at
his house. For six reals a day one could live like a gentleman at
this inn, where there was generally a considerable concourse of
company. About a dozen people sat down at supper. It was
whimsical enough; but the whole party plied their knives and
forks without speaking a word, except one man, who talked
incessantly, right or wrong, and made up for the silence of the
rest by his eternal babble. He affected to be a wit, to tell a
good story, and took great pains to make the good folks merry by
his puns; and accordingly they did laugh most inextinguishably;
but it was at him, not with him.

For my part, I paid so little attention to the talk of this
rattle, that I should have got up from table without knowing what
it was all about, if he had not brought it home to my business
and my bosom. Gentlemen, cried he, just as supper was over, I
have kept my best story for the last; a very droll thing happened
within these few days at the archbishop of Seville's palace. I
had it from a young fellow of my acquaintance, who assures me
that he was present at the time. These words made my heart jump
up into my throat, for I had no doubt of this being my exploit --
and so it turned out This pleasant gentle man related the facts
as they actually happened, and even carried the adventure to its
conclusion, of which I was as yet ignorant: but now you shall be
made as wise as myself.

No sooner had I absconded, than the Moors, who were, according to
the progress of the fable and the rising of the interest, to lay
violent hands on me, appeared upon the stage, for the fell
purpose of surprising me on my bed of turf, where the author had
given them reason to expect me fast asleep; but when they thought
they were just going to capot the King of Leon, they found, to
their surprise, that both the king and the knave made a trick
against them. Here was a hole in the ballad! The actors all lost
their cue; some of them called me by name, others ran to look for
me; here is a fellow bawling as though his bellows would burst,
there stands another, muttering to himself about the devil, just
as if that reptile could stand upright in such a presence! The
archbishop, perceiving trouble and confusion to lord it behind
the scenes, asked what was the matter. At the sound of the
prelate's voice, a page, who was the fiddle of the piece, came to
the front and spoke thus: My lord archbishop, ladies, and
gentlemen! We are extremely sorry to inform you, as players, but
extremely glad, as men and Christians, that the King of Leon is
at present in no danger whatever of being taken prisoner by the
Moors: he has adopted effectual measures for the security of his
royal person; and to the royal person, as liberty avails little
without property, he has irrevocably attached the crown,
insignia, and robes. And a happy deliverance for himself and
Christendom! exclaimed the archbishop. He has done perfectly
right to escape from the enemies of our religion, and to burst
from the bonds in which their malice would have laid him. By this
time, probably, he has reached the confines of his kingdom, or
may have entered the capital. May no unlucky accident have
retarded him on his journey! And that the sin of none such may
lie heavy on my conscience, I beg leave very positively to make
my pleasure known, that he may proceed unmolested by any
interruption from this quarter; I should be highly mortified
indeed, if his majesty's pious endeavours were to be frustrated
by the slightest indignity from the ministers of that religion in
whose cause he labours and suffers. The prelate, having thus
declared his acquiescence in the motives of my flight, ordered my
part to be read, and the play to be resumed.



CH. XI. -- Continuation of Scipio's story.


As long as I had money in my purse, my landlord was cap in hand;
but the moment he began to suspect that the funds were low, he
became high and mighty, picked a German quarrel with me, and one
morning, before breakfast, begged it as a favour of me to march
out of his house. I followed his counsel as proudly as you
please, and betook me to a church belonging to the fathers of St
Dominic, where, while mass was performing, an old beggar accosted
me on the usual topic of alms. I dropped some small change into
his hat, which was truly the orphan's mite, saying at the same
time: My friend, remember in your prayers to mention a situation
for me; if your petition is heard with favour, it shall be all
the better for you; hearty thanks, and a handsome poundage!

At these words, the beggar surveyed me up and down from head to
foot, and answered in a grave tone: What place would you wish to
have? I should like, replied I, to be footman in some family
where I should do well. He inquired whether the matter pressed.
With all possible importunity, said I, for unless I have the good
luck to get settled very soon, the alternative will be horrible;
death by the gripe of absolute famine, or a livelihood in the
ranks of your fraternity. If the latter were, after all, to be
your lot, resumed he, it certainly would be rather hard upon you,
who have not been brought up to our habits of life; but, with a
little use and practice, you would prefer our condition to
service, which, partiality apart, is far less respectable than
the beggar's vocation. Nevertheless, since you like a menial
occupation better than leading a free and independent life like
me, you shall have a berth without more ado. Mean as my
appearance, is, you must not measure my power by it. Meet me here
at the same hour to-morrow.

I took care to keep the appointment. Though at the spot before
the time, I had not long to wait before the beggar joined me, and
told me to follow him. I did so. He led me to a cellar not far
from the church where he resided. We went in together; and
sitting down on a long bench, at least a hundred years the worse
for wear, the conversation took this turn on his part: A good
action, as the proverb says, always meets with its reward: you
gave me alms yesterday, and that has determined me to get you a
place, which shall be soon done, with a blessing on my
endeavours. I know an old Dominican, by name Father Alexis, a
holy monk, a ghostly confessor. I have the honour to do all his
little odd jobs, performing my task with so much discretion and
good faith, that he always lends his interest to me and my
friends. I have spoken to him about you, and in such terms as to
prepossess him in your favour. You may be introduced to his
reverence whenever you please.

There is not a moment to be lost, said I to the old beggar; let
us go to the good monk immediately. The mendicant agreed, and led
me by the arm to Father Alexis, whom we found in his room, hard
at work, writing spiritual letters. He broke off to talk with me.
As it was the wish of the mendicant, he would do all in his power
to serve me. Having learnt, pursued be, that Signor Balthasar
Velasquez is in want of a footboy, I wrote to him this morning on
your behalf; and he just sent me for answer, that he would take
you without further inquiry on my recommendation. This very day
you may call on him from me; he is one of my flock, and my very
good friend. Thereupon the monk preached to me for three quarters
of an hour on my moral and religious duties, and how to fulfil
them in conscience and honour. He enlarged principally on the
obligation of serving Velasquez with diligence and devotion; and
then assured me that he would take care and keep me in my place,
provided my master had no very material fault to find with me.

After having thanked the holy person for his goodness towards me,
I left the convent with the beggar, who told me that Signor
Balthasar Velasquez was an old woollen-draper, but with much
simplicity and good nature in his character. I doubt not, added
he, but you will be perfectly comfortable in his house. I begged
to know his place of residence, and repaired thither immediately,
after promising to make my gratitude manifest, as soon as I had
taken root in my new soil. I went into a large shop, where two
fashionable young apprentices were walking up and down,
practising new grimaces against the entrance of the next
customer. I inquired whether their master was at home, saying
that I wanted to speak with him from Father Alexis. At that
venerable name they shewed me into the counting-house, where
their principal was turning over the ledger. I made a low bow,
and coming up to him, Sir, said I, Father Alexis ordered me to
call here and offer myself as a servant to your honour. Ah! my
smart lad, answered he, you are heartily welcome. It is enough
that the holy man sent you; and I shall take you in preference to
three or four others who have been recommended. It is a clear
case; your wages begin from this day.

A very short time in the family convinced me that the head of it
was just such a man as he had been described, In point of
simplicity, be was everything that could be wished; so exquisite
a subject for imposition, that it seemed next to an impossibility
not to exercise my craft upon such a handle. He had been a
widower four years, and had two children, a son five-and-twenty,
and a daughter in her eleventh year. The girl, brought up by a
severe duenna, under the spiritual conduct of Father Alexis,
walked in the high road of virtue; but her brother, Gaspard
Velasquez, though no pains had been spared to make a good man of
him, picked out for himself all the vices of a young profligate.
Sometimes he stayed away from home two or three days together;
and if, on his return, his father ventured to remonstrate in the
least against his proceedings, Gaspard shut his mouth at once,
with a haughty toss of the head, and an impertinent answer.

Scipio, said the old man one day, my son is the plague of my
life. He is over head and ears in all kinds of debauchery: and
yet there is no accounting for it, since his education was by no
means neglected. I have given him the very best masters; and my
friend Father Alexis has done his utmost to train him up in the
way he should go; but there was no breaking him in; Master
Gaspard ran restive, and bolted into downright libertinism. You
may perhaps tell me, that I spared the rod and spoiled the child.
Quite otherwise! he was punished whenever the occasion seemed to
demand it; for, though good-tempered at bottom, I am not to be
played upon. I have even gone so far as to lock him up, but that
only made hint more headstrong than before. In short, he is one
of those impracticable beings, on whom good example, good advice,
and a good horsewhip, are equally thrown away. If ever he makes
any figure in the world, it must be by a miracle from heaven.

Though my heart was not grievously wrung by the sorrows of this
unhappy father, sympathy was expected from me, and I condoled
with him accordingly. How much to be pitied you are, sir! said I.
Virtues like yours deserved to have been handed down in your
progeny. The event is quite the reverse, my good lad, answered
he. Heaven heard my prayer, and gave me a son, but converted the
blessing into an affliction. Among other grounds of complaint
against Gaspard, I may tell you in confidence, there is one which
gives me a great deal of uneasiness; a vast longing to rob his
old father, which he too often finds the means of satisfying, in
spite of all my caution. Your predecessor played into his hands,
and was turned away in consequence. As for you, I flatter myself
that my son will never be able to tamper with your honesty. You
will take my side of the question; for doubtless Father Alexis
has given you your lesson on that head. You may rest assured of
that, said I; for a good long hour did his reverence lecture me
on doing your will and pleasure without let or hindrance; but I
can assure you, there was no need of his saying anything about
the matter. I feel within myself a sort of call to serve you
faithfully, and I promise to do it with a zeal beyond all the
temptations of the world to shake or lessen.

He who only hears one side is in danger of deciding partially.
Young Velasquez, a mixture of the fribble and the braggart,
concluding from the cut of my countenance that I was made up of
mortal frailty like my dear predecessor, drew me aside to a snug
corner, and there talked to me after this fashion. Now mind what
is said to you, my dear fellow; you may think I do not know that
you are set as a spy upon me by my father; but take especial care
how you proceed, for I can assure you most sincerely, that the
office is not without very considerable inconvenience to those
who undertake it. If ever I find that you tell tales out of
school, I will give you such a basting as you never had in your
life; but if you will make common cause with me, and a fool of my
father, you may buy golden returns of gratitude from your humble
servant. Do you wish me to deal with you upon the nail? You shall
go snacks in at that we can squeeze out of the old fellow. You
have only to take your choice: fall at once into the ranks either
of father or son; for neutrals will come worse off, where the
contending parties fight for their existence.

Sir, answered I, you make the shoe pinch very tight; it is self-
evident that there is nothing for me to do but to enlist under
your banners, though in my conscience it seems like a crying sin
to betray Signor Velasquez. That is no concern of yours, rejoined
Gaspard; he is an old hunks, who wants to keep me under his
thumb; a curmudgeon who refuses me the rights of nature, in
refusing to stand to the expenses and repairs of my pleasures;
for pleasures are the necessaries of life at five-and-twenty. It
is in this point of view that you must form your opinion of my
father. If that is the case, so be it, sir, said I; there is no
standing against so just a subject of complaint. I am quite at
your service to play second fiddle in all your laudable
enterprises; but let us take especial care to conceal our good
understanding, for fear your faithful, humble servant should be
kicked out of doors. It will not be amiss, in my poor opinion,
for you to affect an extreme antipathy against me: some good
round of abuse would have a very pretty effect; you need not be
nice; all the blackguard terms in the dictionary will come at
your call. Nay, a box on the ear now and then, or a kick on the
breech, will break no squares; on the contrary, the more you
express your thorough dislike, the more Signor Balthasar will pin
his faith upon my sleeve. My cue will be, apparently to avoid
speaking to you if possible. In waiting at table, I shall perform
my little attentions to you at arm's length; and whenever your
honour may happen to be called over the coals by the shopmen, you
must not take it amiss if I abuse you worse than a pick-pocket.

As plain as chalk from cheese! cried young Velasquez at this last
hint; this is admirable, my friend; at your early age, it is
uncommon to meet with such a talent for intrigue; I consider it
as a most happy omen for my purpose. With such a performer to
play up to me, I flatter myself the old codger will be pinched to
the bone and left penniless. You really carry your good opinion
of me beyond what my merit will justify, said I; some industry
may fall to my share, but not such exalted genius. But I shall do
my utmost; and if my honest endeavours fail, your candour most
find excuses for my imbecility.

It was not long before Gaspard had proof positive that I was to a
hair's breadth the very man he wanted; and the following was
precisely the first trick I played into his hand. Balthasar's
strong box was in the good man's chamber, by his bed-side, a sort
of oratory, with a prayer-book always lying upon it. Every time I
looked that way, my eyes glistened with hope and pleasure; my
heart chuckled over the very idea of what might happen: Fair,
sweet, cruel box, will you for ever be coy to my addresses? May I
never experience the heart-felt delight of possessing all your
charms for better, for worse? As I went into the room at
pleasure, and only Gaspard was warned off the premises, it
happened one day that I watched his father. The old gentleman,
fancying himself unobserved of human eye, after having opened his
treasury and closed it fast again, hid the key behind the
hangings. I took an accurate observation of the place, and
communicated the discovery to my young master, who said with an
improving hug: Ah! my dear Scipio, what glorious news you bring!
Our fortune is made, my dear fellow. I will furnish you with wax;
you shall take the impression of the key, and then our business
is done, There will be no difficulty in finding a benevolent
locksmith in Cordova, where, to do the place justice, there are
as many rogues as in any part of Spain.

Well! but why, said I to Gaspard, do you want a false key? We may
find our account in the proper one. Yes, answered he; but I am
afraid lest my father, through mistrust or whim, should take a
fancy to hiding it elsewhere; and the safest way is, to have one
of our own. I commended his precaution, and falling in with all
his principles, got ready for taking the impression of the key:
this was effected one morning early, while my old master was
paying a visit to Father Alexis, with whom he for the most part
held very long conferences. I did not stop here; but availed
myself of the key to open the strong box, wherein an ample range
of large and small bags threw me into the most delightful
perplexity imaginable. I did not know which to choose, there was
such a family likeness among them; nevertheless, as the fear of
being caught did not allow of any long deliberation, I laid
hands, haphazard, on the largest. Then, locking the box
carefully, and putting the key back again behind the hangings, I
got away out of the chamber with my booty, and hid it under my
bed, in a small closet where I lay.

Having performed this exploit so successfully, I ran back as fast
as my legs would carry me to young Velasquez, who was waiting at
a house where he had given me notice to meet him, and his delight
was extreme at the recital of what I had just done. He was so
fully satisfied with me, as to lavish caresses without number,
and to offer me thrice, in the fulness of his heart, half the
contents of the bag, which I did thrice refuse. No, no, sir, said
I, this first bag is yours and yours only; apply it to your own
uses and occasions. I shall return forth with to the strong box,
where, as our lucky stars have contrived it, there is money
enough for both of us. Accordingly, three days afterwards I
carried off a second bag, containing, like the first, five
hundred crowns, of which I would only handle the fourth part, let
Gaspard be as pressing as he pleased to force upon me a brotherly
division, share and share alike.

As soon as this young man found himself so flush of money, and
consequently in a condition to gratify his hankering after women
and play, he gave himself up entirely to the devices of his own
imagination; nay, his evil genius pursued him so far, as to make
him fall desperately in love with one of those female harpies,
who devour without remorse or intermission, and swallow up the
largest fortunes. His disbursements at her instigation were
frightful; and thus it became necessary for me to pay so many
visits to the strong box, that old Velasquez at length found out
he had been robbed. Scipio, said he one morning, I must give you
a piece of information; some one robs me, my friend; my strong
box has been opened; several bags have been taken out, that is a
certain fact. Whom ought I to accuse of this theft? or rather,
who else but my son can have committed it? Gaspard must have got
by stealth into my chamber, or else you yourself must have played
booty with him; for I am tempted to believe you are in league
with him, though to outward appearance you do not set up your
horses together. And yet I am unwilling to harbour that
suspicion, because Father Alexis undertook to answer for your
honesty. I gave him to understand that, by the blessing of heaven
on a good natural disposition, my neighbours' goods had no
temptation in my sight; and I so happily suited the action to the
lie, and the lie to the action, that my judge pronounced a
verdict of acquittal on the evidence of grimace and hypocrisy.

Accordingly the old man dropped the subject; but for all that,
there was a general misgiving in his breast, and it would
sometimes light upon me; taking precautions, therefore, against
our further attacks, he had a new lock put to his strong box and
always carried the key in his pocket By these means, an embargo
being laid on our traffic with the bags, we looked excessively
foolish, especially Gaspard, who, being unable any longer to keep
his nymph in her usual style, knew very well that he was likely
to be tossed out of her window. He had, however, invention enough
to devise an expedient for keeping his head above water a few
days longer, and that was neither more nor less than to get into
his clutches, in the form of a loan, my dividend on the joint
stock of the strong box. I refunded to the last farthing; and
this restitution, it is to be hoped, may be set off as an
anticipated act of justice to the old draper, in the person of
his heir.

The young man, having exhausted this scanty supply, and desperate
of any other, fell into a deep melancholy, and into ultimate
derangement. He no longer looked on his father in any other light
than as the bane of his life. His frenzy broke out into the most
dreadful projects; so that, without listening to the voice of
consanguinity or nature, the wretch conceived the impious design
of poisoning him. He was not content with making me privy to the
atrocious design, but even proposed to render me the instrument
of parricide. At the very thought, my blood ran cold within me.
Sir, said I, is it possible that you are so rejected of heaven as
to have formed this horrid plot? What! is it in your nature to
murder the author of your existence? Shall Spain, the favoured
abode of the Christian faith, bear witness to the commission of a
crime, at the first blush of which transatlantic savages would
recoil with horror? No, my dear master, added I, throwing myself
on my knees, no, you will not be guilty of an action which would
raise the hand of all mankind against you, and be overtaken by an
infamous punishment

I pressed many arguments beside on Gaspard, to dissuade him from
so fearful an enterprise. How the deuce I came by all the moral
and religious topics, which I brought to act against the fortress
of his despair, is more than I can account for; but it is certain
that I preached like a doctor of Salamanca, though a mere
stripling, born of a gipsy fortune-teller. And yet it was to no
purpose that I suggested the duty of communing with his own
better resolutions, and stoutly wrestling with the fiend, who was
lying in wait for his immortal soul; my pious eloquence was
dissipated into air. His head hung sullenly on his bosom, and his
tongue uttered no sound, in answer to all my mollifying
exhortations, so that there was every reason to conclude he would
not swerve from his purpose.

Hereupon, taking my own measures, I requested a private interview
with my old master; and being closeted with him, Sir, said I,
allow me to throw myself at your feet, and to implore your pity.
In pathetic accord with my moving accents, I prostrated myself
before him, with my face all bathed in tears. The merchant,
surprised at what he saw and heard, asked the cause of my
distress. Remorse of conscience and repentance, answered I; but
neither repentance nor remorse can ever wash out my guilt. I have
been weak enough to give ear to your son, and to be his
accomplice in robbing you. To this confession I added a sincere
acknowledgment of all that had happened, with the particulars of
my late conversation with Gaspard, whose design I laid open
without the least reserve.

Bad as was the opinion which old Velasquez entertained of his
son, he could scarcely believe his ears. Nevertheless, finding no
good reason to distrust the truth of my account, Scipio, said he,
raising me from the ground, where I had till now been prostrate
at his feet, I forgive you in consideration of the important
notice you have communicated. Gaspard! pursued he, raising his
voice up to the loudness of anguish, does Gaspard aim a blow at
my life! Ah l ungrateful son, unnatural monster! better thou
hadst never been born, or stifled at thy birth, than to have been
reared for the destruction of thy father! What plea, what object,
what palliation of the atrocious deed? I furnished thee annually
with a reasonable allowance for thy pleasures, and what wouldst
thou have more? Must I have drained my fortune to the dregs to
support thee in thy extravagance? Having vented his feelings in
this bitter apostrophe, he enjoined secrecy on me, and told me to
leave him alone, while be considered how to act in so delicate a
conjuncture.

I was very anxious to know what resolution this unhappy father
would take, when on that very day he sent for Gaspard, and
addressed hint thus without betraying the inward emotions of his
heart: My so; I have received a letter from Merida, purporting
that if you are disposed to marry, you may make a match with a
very fine girl of fifteen, with a handsome fortune in her pocket.
If you have not forsworn that happy and holy estate, we will set
out to-morrow morning by daybreak for Merida: you will see the
lady in question, and if she hits your fancy, the business may
soon be settled, Gaspard, pricking up his ears at a handsome
fortune, and already fingering the cash by anticipation, answered
unhesitatingly that he was ready to undertake the journey; and
accordingly they departed the following day at sun-rise, without
attendants, mounted on good mules.

Having reached the mountains of Fesira, in a delightful spot for
the operations of banditti, but terror-stirring to the timid 
souls of travellers, Balthasar dismounted, and desired his son to
do likewise. The young man obeyed, but expressed his surprise at
such a requisition, in so lonely a place. I will tell you the
reason presently, answered the old man, darting at him a look of
mingled grief and anger: We are not going to Merida; and the
alleged courtship was only an invention of mine, for the purpose
of drawing you hither. I am not ignorant, ungrateful and
unnatural son, I am not uninformed of your meditated crime. I am
aware that a poison, prepared by your hands, was to have been
administered to me; but, mad as you are, could it enter into your
contemplation that my life could have been invaded with impunity
by such means? How fatally mistaken! Your crime would soon have
been detected, and you would have perished under the hands of the
executioner. There is a safer way of glutting your fell malice,
without exposing yourself to an ignominious death; we are here
without witnesses, and in a place where daily murders are
perpetrated; since you are so thirsty after my blood, plunge your
dagger into my bosom: the assassination will naturally be laid at
the door of some banditti. After these words, Balthasar, laying
his breast bare, and pointing to his heart, ended with this
challenge: Here, Gaspard, strike deep enough, strike home; make
me pay that forfeit for having engendered such a disgrace to
human nature, and no more than what is due to so monstrous a
production,

Young Velasquez, struck by this reproach as by a thunderbolt, far
from pleading in his own justification, fell instantly lifeless
at his father's feet. The good old man, hailing the germ of
repentance in this unfeigned testimony of shame, could not help
yielding to paternal weakness; he made all possible haste to give
his assistance; but Gaspard had no sooner recovered the use of
his senses, than unable to stand in the presence of a father so
justly offended, he made an effort to raise himself from the
ground, then sprang upon his mule, and galloped out of sight
without saying one word. Balthasar suffered him to take his own
course, and returned to Cordova, little doubting but conscience
would play its part in revenging his wrongs. Six months
afterwards it appeared that the culprit had thrown himself into
the Carthusian convent at Seville, there to pass the remnant of
his days in penance.



CH. XII. -- Conclusion of Scipio's story.


BAD example sometimes produces the converse of itself. The
behaviour of young Velasquez made me think seriously on my own
predicament. I began to wrestle with my thievish propensities,
and to live like one of the better sort. A confirmed habit of
pouncing upon money wherever I could get it, had been contracted
by such a long succession of individual acts, that it was no easy
matter to say where it should stop. And yet I was in hopes to
accomplish my own reformation, under the idea that to become
virtuous a man had nothing to do but to contract the desire of
being so. I therefore undertook this great work, and heaven
seemed to smile upon my efforts: I left off eyeing the old
draper's strong box with the carnal regard of avaricious longing:
nay, I verily believe, that if it had depended on my own will and
pleasure to have turned over the contents to my own use, I should
have abstained from the crime of picking and stealing. It must,
however, be admitted, that it would have been an unadvisable
measure to tempt my new-born integrity with meats too strong for
its stomach: and Velasquez was nurse enough to keep me on a
proper diet.

Don Manriquez de Medrano, a young gentleman, knight of Alcantara,
was in the habit of coming backwards and forwards to our house.
He was a customer, one of our principal in point of rank, if not
punctual in point of pay. I had the happiness to find favour with
this knight, who never met me without that sort of notice which
encouraged conversation, and with that conversation he appeared
always to be very much pleased. Scipio, said he, one day, if I
had a footman of your kidney, it would be as good as a fortune to
me, and if you were not in the service of a man who stands so
high in my regards, I should make no scruple about enticing you
away. Sir, answered I, you would have very little trouble in
succeeding; for I am distractedly partial to people of fashion;
it is my weak side; their free and easy manners fascinate me to
the extreme of folly. That being the case, replied Don Manriquez,
I will at once beg Signor Balthasar to turn you over from his
household to mine: he will scarcely refuse me such a request.
Accordingly Velasquez was kind and complying, with so much the
less violence to his own private feelings, as there seemed no
reason to think, that if a man parted with one knavish servant,
he might not easily get another in his place. To me the change
was all for the better, since a tradesman's service appeared but
a beggarly condition in comparison with the office of own man to
a knight of Alcantara.

To draw a faithful likeness of my new master, I must describe him
as a gentleman possessing every requisite of person, figure,
manners, and disposition. Nor was that all; for his courage and
honour were equal to his other qualities: the goods of fortune
were the only good things he wanted, but being the younger son of
a family more distinguished by descent than opulence, he was
obliged to draw for his expenses on an old aunt living at Toledo,
who loved him as her own child, and administered to his occasions
with affectionate liberality. He was always well dressed, and
everywhere well received. He visited the principal ladies in the
city, and among others the Marchioness of Almenara. She was a
widow of seventy-two, but the centre of attraction to all the
fashionable society of Cordova, by the elegance of her manners
and the sprightliness of her conversation: men as well as women
laid themselves out for an introduction, because her parties
conferred at once on the frequenters the patent of good company.

My master was one of that lady's most assiduous courtiers. After
leaving her one evening, his spirits seemed to be more elevated
than was natural to him. Sir, said I, you are evidently in a good
deal of agitation; may your faithful servant ask on what account?
Has anything happened out of the common way? The young gallant
smiled at so home a question, and owned candidly that he had just
been engaged in a serious conversation with the Marchioness of
Almenara. I will lay a wage; said I, laughing outright, that this
moppet of threescore and ten, this girl in her second childhood,
has been unfolding to you all the secret movements of a tender,
susceptible heart. Do not make a jest of it, answered he; for the
fact is, my friend, that the Marchioness is seriously in love
with me. She told me that the narrowness of my circumstances was
as well known to her as the nobility of my birth; that she had
taken a liking to me, and was determined to place me at my ease
by marriage, since she could not decently lay her fortune at my
feet on any other terms. That this marriage would expose her to
public ridicule, she professed to have considered; that scandal
would be busy at her expense; in short, that she should pass for
an old fool with an ambitious eye and a liquorish constitution.
No matter for that! She was not to be awed from the career of her
humour by quips and sentences: her only alarm was, lest I should
either make sport of her intentions, or torment her more
grievously by my aversion.

Such, continued the knight, was the substance of the
Marchioness's declaration, and I am the more astonished at it,
because she is the most prudent and sensible woman in Cordova;
wherefore I answered by expressing my surprise at her honouring
me with the offer of her hand, since she had hitherto persisted
in her resolution of remaining in a state of widowhood. To this
she replied, that having a considerable fortune, it would give
her pleasure to share it in her life-time with a man of honour to
whom she was attached. To all appearance then, rejoined I, you
have made up your mind to take a lover's leap. Can you doubt
about that? answered he. The Marchioness is immensely rich, with
excellent qualities both of head and heart. It would be the
extreme of folly and fastidiousness to let so advantageous a
settlement slip through my fingers.

I entirely approved my master's purpose of profiting by so fine
an opportunity to make his fortune, and even advised him to bring
the matter to a short issue, for fear of a change in the wind.
Happily the lady had the business more at heart than myself; her
orders were given so effectually, that the necessary forms and
ceremonies were soon got over. When it became known in Cordova
that the old Marchioness of Almenara was getting herself ready to
be the bride of young Don Manriquez de Medrano, the wits began
breaking their odd quirks and remnants in derision of the widow;
but though she heard her own detractions, she did not put them to
mending; the town might talk as they pleased; for when she said
she would die a widow, she did not think to live till she were
married. The wedding was solemnized with a publicity and
splendour which furnished fresh food for evil tongues. The bride,
said they, might at least have had the modesty to dispense with
noise and ostentation, so unbecoming in an old widow who marries
a young husband.

The Marchioness, far enough from yielding to the suggestions of
shame at her own inconsistency, or the disparity of their ages,
yielded herself up without constraint to the expression of the
most lively joy. She gave a grand concert and supper, with a ball
afterwards, and invited all the principal families in Cordova.
Just before the close of the ball, the new-married couple
disappeared, and were shewn to an apartment, where, with no other
witnesses but her own maid and myself she spoke to my master in
these terms: -- Don Manriquez, this is your apartment; mine is in
another part of the house: we will pass the night in separate
rooms, and will live together by day like mother and son. At
first the knight did not know what to make of this; he thought 
that the lady was only trying his temper, as if her coldness must
be wooed to kindness, and her love, like her pardon, not
unsought, be won. Imagining, therefore, that good manners
required, at least, the shew of passion, he made his advances,
and offered, according to the laws of amorous suit enacted in
such cases, to assist in the disencumbering duties of her toilet;
but, so far from allowing him to interfere with the province of
her servant, she pushed him back with a serious air, saying:
Hold, Don Manriquez; if you take me for one of those sweet-
toothed old women who marry a second time from mere incontinence,
you do me a manifest injustice: my proposals were not fraught
with conditions of hard service as the tenure of our nuptial
contract; the gift of my heart was unmixed with sensual dross,
and your gratitude is only drawn upon for returns of pure and
platonic friendship. After this explanation, she left my master
and me in our apartment, and withdrew to her own with her 
attendant, forbidding the bridegroom, in the most positive
manner, to attempt retiring with her.

After her departure, it was some time before we recovered from
our surprise at what we had just heard. Scipio, said my master,
could you ever have believed that the Marchioness would have
talked in such a strain? What think you of so philosophic a
bride? I think, sir, answered I, that she is a phoenix among the
brood of Hymen. It is for all the world like a good living
without parochial duties. For my part, replied Don Manriquez,
there is nothing so much to my taste as a wife of modest
pretensions; and I mean to make her amends for the trophy she has
raised to unadulterated esteem, by all the delicate attentions in
my power to pay. We kept up the subject of the lady's moderation
till it was full time to separate. My quarters were fixed in an
ante room with a book-case bedstead; my master's in an elegant
bed-chamber with every appurtenance except one: but however
necessary it might be to play the disappointed bridegroom, I am
much mistaken if in the bottom of his soul he was half so much
afraid of sleeping by himself as of being encumbered with a bed-
fellow.

The rejoicings began again on the following day, and the bride
was so jocund on the occasion, that the bolts of the fools among
her visitors were not soon shot. She was the first to laugh at
all their pointless jokes; nay, she even set the little wits to
work, by giving them an example of pleasantry, which they were
very little able to follow. The happy man, on his part, seemed to
be very little less happy than his partner; and one would have
sworn, judging by the glance of satisfaction which accompanied
his language and deportment, that he liked mutton better than
lamb. This well-matched pair had a second conversation in the
evening; and then it was decided that without interfering in the
least with one another, they should live together just on the
same footing as they had lived before marriage. At all events,
much credit must be given to Don Manriquez on one account: he
did, from delicate consideration towards his wife, what few
husbands would have done under his circumstances, for he
discarded a little sempstress of whom he was very fond, and who
was very fond of him, because he did not choose to keep up a
connection insulting to the feelings of a lady so studious of
his.

While he was furnishing such unusual testimonies of gratitude to
his elderly benefactress, she overpaid and doubly paid her debt
of obligation, even without diving into its nature or extent. She
gave him the master key of her strong box, which was better
provided than that of Velasquez. Though she had reduced her
establishment during widowhood, it was now replaced upon the same
footing as in the lifetime of her first husband; the complement
of household servants was enlarged, the stud and equipages were
in the very first style; in a word, by her generosity and
kindness, the most beggarly knight belonging to the order of
Alcantara became the most monied member of the fraternity. You
may perhaps be disposed to ask me, how much I was in pocket by
all that; and my answer is, fifty pistoles from my mistress, and
a hundred from my master, who, moreover, appointed me his
secretary, with a salary of four hundred crowns; nay, his
confidence was so unbounded, that I was fixed on to fill the
office of treasurer.

Treasurer! cried I, interrupting Scipio at the very idea, and
bursting into an immoderate fit of laughter. Yes, sir, replied
he, with a cool, unflinching seriousness; you are perfectly
right, treasurer was the word; and I may venture to say that the
duties of the office were executed without the slightest occasion
for a committee of inquiry. True it is that the balance may be
somewhat against me, for I was always in the habit of overdrawing
my wages; and as the firm was dissolved somewhat suddenly, it is
by no means impossible that the balance of my cash account might
be on the wrong side: but, at all events, it was my last slip;
and since that time my ways have been ways of uprightness and
honesty.

Thus was I, continued this son of a gipsy, secretary and
treasurer to Don Manriquez, who, to all appearance, was as happy
in me as I in him, when he received a letter from Toledo,
announcing that his aunt, Donna Theodora Moscoso, was on her last
legs. He was so much affected by the news, as to set out
instantly and pay his duty to that lady, who had been more than a
mother to him for several years. I attended him on the journey
with only two under-servants; we were all mounted on the best
horses in the stable, and reached Toledo without loss of time,
where we found Donna Theodora in a state to warrant our hopes
that she would not, at present, weigh anchor on her outward bound
voyage; and, in fact, our judgment on her case, though point
blank in contradiction to that of an old physician who attended
her, proved by the event that we knew at least as much of the
matter as he did.

While the health of our venerable relative was improving from day
to day, less, perhaps, from the effect of the prescriptions than
in consequence of her dear nephew's presence, your worthy friend
the treasurer passed his time in the pleasantest manner possible,
with some young people whose acquaintance was admirably
calculated to ventilate the confined cash in his pocket.
Sometimes they enticed me to the tennis-court, and took me in for
a game: on those occasions, not being quite so steady a player as
my master, Don Abel, I lost much oftener than I won. By degrees
play became a passion with me; and if the taste had been suffered
to gain complete possession, it would doubtless have laid me
under the necessity of drawing bills of accommodation on the
family bank; but happily love stepped in, and saved the credit
both of the bank and of my principles. One day, passing along
near the church of the Epiphany, I espied through a lattice with
the drapery drawn up, a young girl who might well be called a
thing divine, for nothing natural was ever seen so lovely. I
would lay on my compliment still thicker, if words were not
wanting to express the effect of her first appearance upon my
mind. I set my wits to work, and by dint of diligent inquiry,
learned that her name was Beatrice, and that she was waiting-maid
to Donna Julia, younger daughter of the Count de Polan.

Beatrice broke in upon the thread of Scipio's story by laughing
immoderately: then, directing her speech to my wife, Charming
Antonia, said she, do but just look at me, I beseech you, and
then say truly, whether I could be likened to a thing divine. You
might at that time, to my enamoured sight, said Scipio; and,
since your conjugal faith is no longer under a cloud, my visual
appetite increases by what it feeds on. It was a pretty
compliment! and my secretary, having fired it off, pursued his
narrative as follows.

This intelligence kindled the flame of passion within me; but
not, it must be confessed, a flame which could be acknowledged
without a blush. I took it for granted that my triumph over her
scruples would be easy if my biddings were high enough to command
the ordinary market of female chastity; but Beatrice was a pearl
beyond price. In vain did I solicit her, through the channel of
some intriguing gossips, with the offer of my purse and of my
most tender attentions; she rejected all my proposals with
disdain. I had recourse to the lover's last remedy, and offered
her my hand, which she deigned to accept on the strength of my
being secretary and treasurer to Don Manriquez. As it seemed
expedient to keep our marriage secret for some time, the ceremony
was performed privately, in presence of Dame Lorenza Sephora,
Seraphina's governess, and before some others of the Count de
Polan's household. After our happy union, Beatrice contrived the
means of our meeting by day, and passing some part of every night
together in the garden, whither I repaired through a little gate
of which she gave me a key. Never were man and wife better
pleased with each other than Beatrice and myself: with equal
impatience did we watch for the hour of our appointment; with
congenial emotions of eager sensibility did we hasten to the
spot, and the moments which we passed together, though countless
from their number in the calendar of cold indifference, to us
were few and fleeting, in comparison with that eternity of mutual
bliss for which we panted.

One night, a night which should be expunged from the almanac, a
night of darkness and despair, contrasted with the brightness of
all our former nights, I was surprised on approaching the garden,
to find the little gate open. This unusual circumstance alarmed
me; for it seemed to augur something inauspicious to my
happiness: I turned pale and trembled, as if with a foreknowledge
of what was going to happen. Advancing in the dark towards a
bower, where our private meetings had usually taken place, I
heard a man's voice. I stopped on the instant to listen, when the
following words struck like the sound of death upon my ear: Do
not keep me languishing in suspense, my dear Beatrice; make my
happiness complete, and consider that your own fortunes are
closely connected with mine. Instead of having patience to hear
further, it seemed as if more had been said than blood could
expiate; that devil, jealousy, took possession of my soul; I drew
my sword, and breathing only vengeance, rushed into the bower.
Ah! base seducer, cried I, whoever you are, you shall tear this
heart from out my breast, rather than touch my honour on its
tenderest point. With these words on my lips, I attacked the
gentleman who was talking with Beatrice. He stood upon his guard
without more ado, like a man much better acquainted with the
science of arms than myself, who had only received a few lessons
from a fencing-master at Cordova. And yet, strong as his sword-
arm was, I made a thrust which he could not parry, or what is
more likely, his foot slipped: I saw him fall; and fancying that
I had wounded him mortally, ran away as hard as my legs could
carry me, without deigning to answer Beatrice, who would have
called me back.

Yes, indeed! said Scipio's wife, resolved to have her share in
the development of the story; I called out for the purpose of
undeceiving him. The gentleman conversing with me in the arbour
was Don Ferdinand de Leyva. This nobleman, who was in love with
my mistress Julia, had laid a plan for running away with her,
from despair of being able to obtain her hand by any other means;
and I had myself made this assignation with him in the garden, to
concert measures for the elopement, and with his fortune he
assured me that my own was closely linked; but it was in vain
that I screamed after my husband; he darted from me as if my very
touch were contamination.

In such a state of mind, resumed Scipio, I was capable of
anything. Those who know by experience what jealousy is, into
what extravagance it drives the best-regulated spirits, will be
at no loss to conceive the disorder it must have produced in my
weak brain. I passed in a moment from one extreme to an other:
emotions of hatred succeeded instantaneously to all my former
sentiments of affection for my wife. I took an oath never to see
her more, and to banish her for ever from my memory. Besides, the
supposed death of a man lay upon my conscience; and under that
idea, I was afraid of falling into the hands of justice; so that
every torment which could be accumulated on the head of guilt and
misery by the fury of despair and the demon of remorse, was the
remediless companion of my wretched flight In this dreadful
situation, thinking only of my escape, I returned home no more,
but immediately quitted Toledo, with no other provision for my
journey but the clothes on my back. It is true, I had about sixty
pistoles in my pocket; a tolerable supply for a young man, whose
views in life pointed no higher than a good service.

I walked forward all night, or rather ran, for the phantom of an
alguazil always dogging me at the heels made me perform wonders
of pedestrian activity. The dawn overtook me between Rodillas and
Maqueda. When I was at the latter town, finding myself a little
weary, I went into the church which was just opened, and having
put up a short prayer, sat down on a bench to rest. I began
musing on the state of my affairs, which were sufficiently out at
elbows to require all my skill in patch-work, but the time for
reflection as well as for repentance were cut short. The church
echoed on a sudden with three or four smacks of a whip, which
made me conclude that some carrier was on the road. I immediately
got up to go and see whether I was right or wrong. At the door I
found a man, mounted on a mule, leading two others by the halter.
Stop, my friend, said I, whither are those two mules going? To
Madrid, answered he. I came hither with two good Dominicans, and
am now setting out on my return.

Such an opportunity of going to Madrid gave me an itching desire
for the expedition: I made my bargain with the muleteer, jumped
upon one of his mules, and away we scampered towards Ilescas,
where we were to put up for the night. Scarcely were we out of
Maqueda before the muleteer, a man from five-and-thirty to forty,
began chanting the church service with a most collegiate twang.
This trial of his lungs began with matins, in the drowsy tone of
a canon between asleep and awake; then he roared out the Belief;
alternately in contralto, tenor, and bass, in all the harmonious
confusion of high mass; and not content with that, he rang the
bell for vespers, without sparing me a single petition or so much
as a bar of the magnificat. Though the scoundrel almost cracked
the drum of my ear, I could not help laughing heartily; and even
egged him on to make the welkin reverberate with his hallelujahs,
when the anthem was suspended a few rests, for the necessary
purpose of supplying wind to the organ. Courage, my friend! said
I; go on and prosper. If heaven has given you a good capacious
throat, you are neither a niggard nor a perverter of its precious
boon. Oh! certainly not for the matter of that, cried he; happily
for my immortal soul, I am not like carriers in general, who sing
nothing but profane songs about love or drinking: I do not even
defile my lips with ballads on our wars against the Moors: such
subjects are at least light and unedifying, if not licentious and
impure. You have, replied I, an evangelical purity of heart which
belongs only to the elect among muleteers. With this excessive
squeamishness of yours about the choice of your music, have you
also taken a vow of continence, wherever there is a young bar-
maid to be picked up at an inn? Assuredly, rejoined he, chastity
is also a virtue by which it is my pride to ward off the
temptations of the road, where my only business is to look after
my mules. I was in no small degree astonished at such pious
sentiments from this prodigy of psalm-singing mule-drivers; so
that looking upon him as a man above the vanities and corruptions
of this nether world, I fell into chat with him after he had gone 
the length of his tether in singing.

We got to Ilescas late in the day. On entering the inn-yard, I
left the care of the mules to my companion, and went into the
kitchen, where I ordered the landlord to get us a good supper,
which he promised to perform so much to my satisfaction, as to
make me remember all the days of my life what usage travellers
meet with at his house As, added he, now only ask your carrier
what sort of a man I am. By all the powers of seasoning! I would
defy the best cook in Madrid or Toledo to make an olio at all to
be compared to mine. I shall treat you this evening with some
stewed rabbit after a receipt of my own; you will then see
whether it is any boast to say that I know how to send up a
supper. Thereupon, shewing me a stew-pan with a young rabbit, as
he said, cut up into pieces: There, continued he, is what I mean
to favour you with. When I shall have thrown in a little pepper,
some salt, wine, a handful of sweet herbs, and a few other
ingredients which I keep for my own sauces, you may depend on
sitting down to such a dish as would not disgrace the table of a
chancellor or an archbishop.

The landlord, having thus done justice to his own merits, began
to work upon the materials he had prepared. While he was
labouring in his vocation, I went into a room, where lying down
on a sort of couch, I fell fast asleep through fatigue, having
taken no rest the night before, in the space of about two hours,
the muleteer came and awakened me, with the information that
supper was ready, and a pressing request to take my place at
table. The cloth was laid for two, and we sat down to the hashed
rabbit. I played my knife and fork most manfully, finding the
flavour delicious, whether from the force of hunger in
communicating a candid mode of interpretation to my palate, or
from the natural effect of the ingredients compounded by the
cook. A joint of roast mutton was next served up. It was
remarkable that the carrier only paid his respects to this last
article; and I asked him why he had not taken his share of the
other. He answered with a suppressed smile, that he was not fond
of made dishes. This reason, or rather the turn of countenance
with which it was alleged, seemed to imply more than was
expressed. You have not told me, said I, the real meaning of your
not eating the fricassee: do have the goodness to explain it at
once. Since you are so curious to be made acquainted with it,
replied he, I must own that I have an insuperable aversion to
cramming my stomach with meats in masquerade, since one evening
at an inn on the road between Toledo and Cuença, they served me
up, instead of a wild rabbit, a hash of tame cat; enough, of all
conscience, ever after to set my intestines in battle-array
against all minces, stews, and force-meats.

No sooner had the muleteer let me into this secret, than in spite
of the hunger which raged within me, my appetite left me
completely in the lurch. I conceived, in all the horrors of
extreme loathing, that I had been eating a cat dressed up as the
double of a rabbit; and the fricassee had no longer any power
over my senses, except by producing a strong inclination to
retch. My companion did not lessen my tendency that way, by
telling me that the inn-keepers in Spain, as well as the pastry-
cooks, were very much in the habit of making that substitution.
The drift of the conversation was, as you may perceive, very much
in the nature of a lenitive to my stomach; so much so, that I had
no mind to meddle any more with the dish of undefinables, nor
even to make an attack upon the roast meat, for fear the mutton
should have performed its duty by deputy as well as the rabbit. I
jumped up from table, cursing the cookery, the cook, and the
whole establishment; then, throwing myself down upon the sofa, I
passed the night with less nausea than might reasonably have been
expected. The day following with the dawn, after having paid the
reckoning with as princely an air as if we had been treated like
princes, away went I from Ilescas, bearing my faculties so
strongly impregnated with fricassee, that I took every animal
which crossed the road, of whatever species or dimensions, for a
cat.

We got to Madrid betimes, where I had no sooner settled with my
carrier than I hired a ready-furnished lodging near the Sun-gate.
My eyes, though accustomed to the great world, were nevertheless
dazzled by the concourse of nobility which was ordinarily seen in
the quarter of the court. I admired the prodigious number of
carriages, and the countless list of gentlemen, pages,
gentlemen's gentlemen, and plain, downright footmen in the train
of the grandees. My admiration exceeded all bounds, on going to
the king's levee, and beholding the monarch in the midst of his
court. The effect of the scene was enchanting, and I said to
myself, It is no wonder they should say that one must see the
court of Madrid to form an adequate idea of its magnificence: I
am delighted to have directed my course hither, and feel a sort
of prescience within me that I shall not come away without taking
fortune by surprise. I caught nothing napping, however, but my
own prudence, in making some thriftless, expensive acquaintance.
My money oozed away in the rapid thaw of my propriety and better
judgment, so that it became a measure of expedient degradation to
throw away my transcendent merit on a pedagogue of Salamanca,
whom some family lawsuit or other concern had brought to Madrid,
where he was born, and where chance, more whimsical than wise,
thrust me within the horizon of his knowledge. I became his right
hand, his prime principal agent; and dogged him at the heels to
the university when he returned thither.

My new employer went by the name of Don Ignacio de Ipigna. He
furnished himself with the handle of don, inasmuch as he had been
tutor to a nobleman of the first rank, who had recompensed his
early services with an annuity for life: he likewise derived a
snug little salary from his professorship in the university; and
in addition to all this, laid the public under a yearly
contribution of two or three hundred pistoles for books of
uninstructive morality, which he protruded from the press
periodically by weight and measure. The manner in which he worked
up the shreds and patches of his composition de serves a notice
somewhat more than cursory. The heavy hours of the forenoon were
spent in muzzing over Hebrew, Greek, and Latin authors, and in
writing down upon little squares of card every pithy sentence or
striking thought which occurred in the morning's reading.
According to the progress of this literary Pam, in winning tricks
from the ancients, he employed me to score up his honours in the
form of an Apollo's wreath: these metaphysical garlands were
strung upon wire, and each garland made a pocket volume. What an
execrable hash of wholesome viands did we cook up! The
commandments set at loggerheads with an utter confusion of
tables; Epicurean conclusions grafted on stoical premises! Tully
quoting Epictetus, and Seneca supporting his antitheses on the
authority of monkish rhyme! Scarcely a month elapsed without our
putting forth at least two volumes, so that the press was kept
continually groaning under the weight of our transgressions. What
seemed most extraordinary of all, was that these literary
larcenies were palmed upon the purchasers for spick and span new
wares, and if, by any strange and improbable chance, a thick-
headed critic should stumble with his noddle smack against some
palpable plagiarism, the author would plead guilty to the
indictment, and make a merit of serving up at second-hand

What Gellius or Stobaeus hash'd before,
Though chewed by blind old scholiasts o'er and o'er.

He was also a great commentator; and filled his notes chuck full
of so much erudition, as to multiply whole pages of discussion
upon what homely common-sense would have consigned to the brief
alternative of a query:

Disputes of Me or Te, or Aut at At,
To sound or sink in cano O or A,
Or give up Cicero to C or K.

As almost every author, ethical and didactic, from Hesiod down to
himself, took his turn to dangle on some one or other of our
manuscript garlands, it was impossible for me not to suck in
somewhat of sage nurture from so copious a stream of philosophy:
it would be rank ingratitude to shift off my obligation. My hand-
writing also became strictly and decidedly legible, by dint of
continual transcription; my estate was more that of a pupil than
of a servant, and my morals were not neglected, while my mind was
polished, and my faculties raised above their former level.
Scipio, he used to say, when he chanced to hear of any serving
lad with more cunning than honesty in his dealings, beware, my
good boy, how you take after the evil example of that graceless
villain. "The honour of a servant is his fidelity; his highest
virtues are submission and obedience. Be studious of thy master's
interests, be diligent in his affairs, and faithful to the trust
which he reposeth in thee. Thy time and thy labour belong unto
him. Defraud him not thereof; for he payeth thee for them." To
sum up all, Don Ignacio lost no opportunity of leading me on in
the path of virtue, and his prudent counsels sank so deep into my
heart, as to keep under anything like even the slightest wish of
playing him a rogue's trick during the fifteen months which I
spent in his service.

I have already mentioned that Doctor de Ipigna was a native of
Madrid. He had a relation there, by name Catalina, waiting-maid
to the lady who officiated as nurse to the heir-apparent. This
abigail, the same through whose intervention I got Signor de
Santillane released from the tower of Segovia, intent on
rendering a service to Don Ignacio, prevailed with her mistress
to petition the Duke of Lerma for some preferment. The minister
named him for the archdeaconry of Grenada, which, as a conquered
country, is in the king's gift. We repaired immediately to Madrid
on receiving the intelligence, as the doctor wished to thank his
patronesses before he took possession of his benefice. I had more
than one opportunity of seeing Catalina, and conversing with her.
The cheerful turn of my temper and a certain easy air of good
company were altogether to her taste; for my part, I found her so
much to my liking, that I could not help saying yes to the little
advances of partiality which she made in my favour: in short, we
got to feel very kindly towards each other. You must not write a
comment with your nails, my dear Beatrice, on this episode in the
romance of my amours, because I was firmly persuaded of your
inconstancy, and you will allow that heresy, though impious,
being also blind, my penance may reasonably be remitted on
sincere conversion.

In the mean time Doctor Ignacio was making ready to set out for
Grenada. His relation and myself, out of our wits at the
impending separation, had recourse to an expedient which rescued
us from its horrors: I shammed illness, complained of my head,
complained of my chest, and made a characteristic wry face for
every pain and ache in the catalogue of human infirmities. My
master called in a physician, who told me with a grave face,
after putting his questions in the usual course, that my
complaint was of a much more serious nature than might appear to
unprofessional observation, and that, according to all present
likelihood, I should keep my chamber a long time. The doctor,
impatient to take possession of his preferment, did not think it
quite so well to delay his departure, but chose rather to hire
another boy; he therefore contented himself with handing me over
to the care of a nurse, with whom he left a sum of money to bury
me if I should die, or to remunerate me for my services if I
should recover.
As soon as I knew Don Ignacio to be safe on the road for Grenada,
I was cured of all my maladies. I got up, made my final bow to
the physician who had evinced so thorough a knowledge of my ease,
and fairly turned my nurse out of doors, who made her retreat
good with baggage and ammunition, to the amount of more than half
the sum for which she ought to have accounted with me. While I
was enacting the sick man, Catalina was playing another part
about the person of her mistress, Donna Anna de Guévra, into
whose conception having by dint of many a wordy process inserted
the notion, that I was the man of all others ready cut and dry
for an intrigue, she induced her to choose me for one of her
agents. The royal and most catholic nurse, whose genius for great
undertakings was either produced or exasperated by the love of
great possessions, having occasion for suitable ministers,
received me among her hangers-on, and lost no opportunity of
ascertaining how far I was for her purpose. She confided some
commissions to my ear; which, vanity apart, called for no little
address, and what they called for was ready at hand: accordingly,
she gave me all possible credit for the diligent execution of my
office, while my discontent swelled high against her for fobbing
me off with the cold recompense of approbation. The good lady was
so abominably avaricious, as not to give me a working partner's
share in the profits of my industry, nor to allow for the wear
and tear of my conscience. She seemed inclined to consider, that
by paying me my wages, all the requisitions of Christian charity
were made good between us. This excess of illiberal economy would
soon have parted us, had it not been for the fascination of
Catalina's gentle virtues, who became more desperately in love
with me from day to day, and completed the paroxysm by a formal
proposal of marriage.

Fair and softly, my pretty friend, said I: we must look before we
leap into that bottomless gulf: the first point to be settled is
to ascertain the death of a young woman, who obtained the refusal
before you, and made me supremely happy, for no other purpose but
to anticipate the purgatory of an intermediate state in the
present. All a mere sham, a put off! answered Catalina: you swear
you are married only by way of throwing a genteel veil over your
abhorrence of my person and manners. In vain did I call all the
powers to witness, that what I said was solemnly true: my sincere
avowal was considered as a mere copy of my countenance; the lady
was grievously offended, and changed her whole behaviour in
regard to me. There was no downright quarrel; but our tender
intercourse became visibly more rigid and unaccommodating, so
that nothing further took place between us but cold formality and
common-place attentions.

Just at the nick of time, I heard that Signor Gil Blas de
Santillane, secretary to the prime minister of the Spanish
monarchy, wanted a servant; and the situation was the more
flattering, as it bore the bell among all the vacancies of the
court register office. Signor de Santillane, they told me, was
one of the first men, high in favour with the Duke of Lerma, and
consequently in the direct road to fortune: his heart, too, was
cast in the mould of generosity: by doing his business, you most
assuredly did your own. The opportunity was too good to be
neglected I went and offered myself to Signor Gil Blas, to whom I
felt my heart grow from the first; for my sentiments were fixed
by the turn of his physiognomy. There could be no question about
leaving the royal and most catholic nurse for him; and it is to
be hoped, I shall never have any other master.

Here ended Scipio's story. But he continued speaking, and
addressed himself to me. Signor de Santillane, do me the favour
to assure those ladies that you have always known me for a
faithful and zealous servant. Your testimony will stand me in
good stead, and vouch for a sincere reformation in the son of
Coselina.

Yes, ladies, said I, it is even so. Though Scipio in his
childhood was a very scape-grace, he has been born anew, and is
now the exact model of a trusty domestic. Far from having any
complaints to make against him, my debt is infinite. On the fatal
night when I was earned off to the tower of Segovia, he saved my
effects from pillage, and refunded what he might have taken to
himself with impunity: not contented with rescuing my worldly
pelf, he came out of pure friendship and shut himself up with me
in my prison, preferring the melancholy sympathies of adverse
fortune to all the charms of lusty, buoyant liberty.




BOOK THE ELEVENTH.



CH. I. -- Containing the subject of the greatest joy that Gil
Blas ever felt, followed up, as our greatest pleasures too
generally are, by the most melancholy event of his life. Great
changes at court, producing, among other important revolutions,
the return of Santillane.


I HAVE observed already that Antonia and Beatrice understood one
another perfectly well; the latter falling meekly and modestly
into the trammels of an humble attendant on her lady, and the
former taking very kindly to the rank of a mistress and superior.
Scipio and myself were husbands too rich in nature's gifts and in
the affections of our spouses, not very soon to have the
satisfaction of becoming fathers: our lasses were as women wish
to be who love their lords, almost at the same moment. Beatrice's
time was up first: she was safely delivered of a daughter; and in
a few days afterwards Antonia completed the general joy, by
presenting me with a son. I sent my secretary to Valencia with
the welcome tidings: the governor came to Lirias with Seraphina
and the Marchioness de Pliego, to be present at the baptismal
ceremony; for he made it his pleasure to add this testimony of
affection to all his former kindnesses. As that nobleman stood
godfather, and the Marchioness godmother to my son, he was named
Alphonse; and the governor's lady, wishing to draw the bonds of
sponsorship still closer in this friendly party, stood for
Scipio's daughter, to whom we gave the name of Seraphina.

The rejoicings at the birth of my son were not confined to the
mansion-house; the villagers of Lirias celebrated the event by
festivities, which were meant as a grateful token, to prove how
much the little neighbourhood partook in all the satisfactions of
their landlord. But, alas! our carousals were of short
continuance; or, to speak more suitably to the subject, they were
turned into weeping, wailing, and lamentation, by a catastrophe
which more than twenty years have not been sufficient to blot
from my memory, nor will future time, however distant, make me
think of it but with the bitterest retrospect. My son died; and
his mother, though perfectly recovered from her confinement, very
soon followed him: a violent fever carried off my dear wife,
after we had been married fourteen months. Let the reader
conceive, if he is equal to the task, the grief with which I was
overwhelmed: I fell into a stupid insensibility; and felt my loss
so severely, as to seem not to feel it at all. I remained in this
condition for five or six days, in an obstinate determination to
take no nourishment; and I verily believe that, had it not been
for Scipio, I should either have starved myself, or my heart
would have burst; but my secretary, well knowing how to
accommodate himself to the turnings and windings of the human
heart, contrived to cheat my sorrows by fitting in with their
tone and tenor: he was artful enough to reconcile me to the duty
of taking food, by serving up soups and lighter fare with so
disconsolate an arrangement of features that it looked as if he
urged me to the revolting employment, not so much to preserve my
life, as to perpetuate and render immortal my affliction.

This affectionate servant wrote to Don Alphonso, to let him know
of the misfortune which had happened to me, and my lamentable
condition in consequence. That tender-hearted and compassionate
nobleman, that generous friend, very soon repaired to Lirias. I
cannot recall the moment when he first presented himself to my
view without even now being sensibly affected. My dear
Santillane, said he, embracing me, I am not come to offer you
impertinent consolation; but to weep over Antonia with you, as
you would have wept with me over Seraphina, had the hand of death
snatched her from me. In good truth, his tears bore testimony to
his sincerity, and his sighs were blended with mine in the most
friendly sympathy. Though overwhelmed with my affliction, I felt
in the most lively manner the kindness of Don Alphonso.

The governor had a long conversation with Scipio respecting the
measures to be taken for overcoming my despair. They judged it
best to remove me for some time from Lirias, where every object
incessantly brought back to my mind the image of Antonia. On this
account the son of Don Caesar proposed carrying me back with him
to Valencia; and my secretary seconded the plan with so many
unanswerable arguments, that I made no further opposition. I left
Scipio and his wife on my estate, where my longer stay could have
produced no other effect but that of aggravating and enhancing
all my sorrows, and took my own departure with the governor. On
my arrival at Valencia, Don Caesar and his daughter-in-law spared
no exertions to divert my sorrows from perpetual brooding; they
plied me alternately with every sort of amusement, the most
proper to turn the current of my thoughts to passing objects;
but, in spite of all their pains, I remained plunged in
melancholy, whence they were incompetent to draw me out. Nor was
it for want of Scipio's kind attentions that my peace of mind was
still so hopeless: he was continually going back and fore between
Lirias and Valencia to inquire after me; and his journey home was
cheerful or gloomy, in proportion as he found more or less
disposition in me to listen to the words of comfort, and to
reward the affectionate solicitude of my friends.

He came one morning into my room. Sir, said he, with a great deal
of agitation in his manner, a report is current about town, in
which the whole monarchy is deeply interested it is said that
Philip the Third has departed this life, and that the prince, his
son, is actually seated on the throne. To this it is added, that
the cardinal Duke of Lerma has lost the premiership, that he is
even forbidden to appear at court, and that Don Gaspard de
Guzman, Count of Olivarez, is actually at the head of the
administration. I felt a little agitated by this sudden change,
without knowing why. Scipio caught at this manifestation, and
asked whether the veering of the wind in the political horizon
might not blow me some good. How is that possible? What good can
it blow me, my worthy friend? answered I. The court and I have
shaken hands once for all: the revolutions which may take place
there are all alike indifferent to me.

For a man at your time of life, replied that cunning son of a
diviner, you are uncommonly mortified to all the uses of this
world. Under your circumstances my curiosity would be all alive;
I should go to Madrid and show my face to the young monarch, just
to see whether he would recollect it, merely for the amusement of
the thing. I understand you, said I; you would have me return to
court and try my fortune again, or rather you would plunge me
back into the gulf of avarice and ambition. Why should such
baleful passions any more take possession of your breast?
rejoined Scipio. Do not so much play the calumniator on your own
virtue. I will answer for your firmness to yourself. The sound
moral reflections which your disgrace has occasioned you to make
on the vanities of a court life, are a sufficient security
against all the dangers to be feared from that quarter. Embark
boldly once again upon an ocean where are acquainted with every
shoal and rock in the dangerous navigation. Hold your tongue, you
flatterer, said I, with a smile of no very positive
discouragement; are you weary of seeing me lead a retired and
tranquil life? I thought my repose had been more dear to you.

Just at this period of our conversation, Don Caesar and his son
came in. They confirmed the news of the king's death, as well as
the Duke of Lerma's misfortune. It appeared, moreover, that this
minister, having requested permission to retire to Rome, had not
been able to obtain it, but was ordered to confine himself to his
marquisate at Denia. On this, as if they had been in league with
my secretary, they advised me to go to Madrid and offer my
congratulations to the new king, as one of his former
acquaintances, with the merit of having rendered him even such
services, as the great are apt to reward more willingly than some
which are performed with cleaner hands. For my part, said Don
Alphonso, I have no doubt but they will be liberally
acknowledged. Philip the Fourth is bound in honour to pay the
Prince of Spain's debts. I consider the affair just in the same
light as you do, said Don Caesar; and Santillane's visit to court
will doubtless prove the occasion of his arriving at the very
first employments.

In good truth, my noble friends, exclaimed I, you do not consider
what you are talking about. It should seem, were one to give ear
to the soothing words of you both, as if I had nothing to do but
to shew my face at Madrid, and receive the key of office, or some
foreign government for my pains; but you are egregiously
mistaken. I am, on the contrary, well persuaded that the king
would pass me over as a stranger, were I to throw myself in his
way. I will make the experiment if you wish it, merely for the
sake of undeceiving you. The lords of Leyva took me at my word,
so that I could not help promising them to set out without loss
of time for Madrid. No sooner did my secretary perceive my mind
fully made up to the prosecution of this journey, than his
ecstasies were wound up to the highest pitch: he was satisfied
within himself that if I did but present my excellent person
before the new monarch, he would immediately single me out from
the crowd of political candidates, and weigh me down under a load
of dignities and emoluments. On the strength of these
conjectures, puffing himself out and amusing his fancy with the
most splendid extravagances of device, he raised me up to the
first offices of the state, and pushed forward his own preferment
in the path of my exaltation.

I therefore made my arrangements for returning to court, without
the most distant intention of again sacrificing at the shrine of
fortune, but merely to convince Don Caesar and his son of their
error, in imagining that I was at all likely to ingratiate myself
with the sovereign. It is true that there was some little lurking
vanity at the bottom of all my philosophy, sprouting up in the
shape of a desire to ascertain whether my royal master would
throw away a thought on me, now in the spring time of his new and
blushing honours. Led out of that course solely by that tempter,
curiosity, without a dream of hope, or any practical contrivance
for tuning the new reign to my own individual advantage, I set
out for Madrid with Scipio, consigning the management of my
household to Beatrice, who was well skilled in all the arts of
domestic economy.



CH. II. -- Gil Blas arrives in Madrid, and makes his appearance
at court: the king is blessed with a better memory than most of
his courtiers, and recommends him to the notice of his prime
minister. Consequences of that recommendation.


WE got to Madrid in less than eight days, Don Alphonso having
given us two of his best horses, that we might lose no time on
the road. We alighted at a ready-furnished lodging, where I had
lived formerly, kept by Vincent Ferrero, my old landlord, who was
uncommonly glad to see me again.

As this man prided himself on being in the secret of whatever was
going forward either in court or city, I asked him after the best
news. There is plenty of it, whether best or worst, answered he.
Since the death of Philip the Third, the friends and partisans of
the Cardinal Duke of Lerma have been moving heaven and earth to
support his Eminence on the pinnacle of ministerial authority,
but their efforts have been ineffectual: the Count of Olivarez
has carried the day, in spite of all their industry. It is
alleged that Spain will be no loser by the exchange, and that the
present premier is possessed of a genius so extensive, a mind so
capacious, that he would be competent to wield the machine of
universal government. New brooms, they say, sweep clean! But, at
all events, you may take this for certain, that the public is
fully impressed with a very favourable opinion of his capacity:
we shall see by and by whether the Duke of Lerma's situation is
well or ill filled up. Ferrero, having got his tongue into the
right train for wagging, gave me all the particulars of all the
changes which had taken place at court since the Count of
Olivarez had taken his seat at the helm of the state vessel.

Two days after my arrival at Madrid, I repaired to the royal
palace after my dinner, and threw myself in the king's way as he
was crossing the lobby to his closet; but his notice was not at
all attracted by my appearance. Next day, I returned to the same
place, but with no better success. On the third day he looked me
full in the face as he passed by, but the stare was perfectly
vacant, as far as my interest or my vanity was concerned. This
being the case, I resolved in my own mind what was proper to be
done: You see, said I to Scipio, who accompanied me, that the
king is grown out of my recollection; or if his memory is not
become more frail with the elevation of his circumstances, he has
some private reasons for not choosing to renew the acquaintance.
I think we cannot do better than make our way back as fast as
possible for Valencia. Let us not be in too great a hurry for
that, sir, answered my secretary: you know better than myself,
having served a long apprenticeship, that there is no getting on
at court without patience and perseverance. Be indefatigable in
exhibiting your person to the prince's regards: by dint of
forcing yourself on his observation, you will oblige him to ask
himself the question who this assiduous frequenter of his haunts
can possibly be, when memory must come to his aid, and trace the
features of his cheapener in the purchase of the lovely
Catalina's good graces.

That Scipio might have nothing to reproach me with, I so far lent
myself to his wishes as to continue the same proceeding for the
space of three weeks; when at length it happened one day that the
monarch, noticing the frequency of my appearance, sent for me
into his presence. I went into the closet, not without some
perturbation of mind at the idea of a private interview with my
sovereign. Who are you? said he: your features are not altogether
strange to me. Where have I seen you? Please your majesty,
answered I trembling, I had the honour of escorting you one night
with the Count of Lemos to the house of  . . . . Ah! I recollect
it perfectly, cried the prince, as if a sudden light had broke in
upon him: you were the Duke of Lerma's secretary; and if I am not
mistaken, your name is Santillane. I have not forgotten that on
the occasion alluded to you served me with a most commendable
zeal, but received a left-handed recompense for your exertions.
Did you not get into prison at the conclusion of the adventure?
Yes, please your majesty, replied I: my confinement in the tower
of Segovia lasted six months; but your goodness was exercised in
procuring my release. That, replied he, does not cancel my debt
to my faithful servant Santillane: it is not enough to have
restored him to liberty, for I ought to make him ample amends for
the evils which he has suffered on the score of his alacrity in
my concerns.

Just as the prince was uttering these words, the Count of
Olivarez came into the closet. The nerves of favourites are
shaken by every breath, their irritability excited by every
trifle: he was as much astonished as any favourite need be at the
sight of a stranger in that place, and the king redoubled his
wondering propensities by the following recommendation -- Count,
I consign this young man to your care, employ him, and let me
find that you provide for his advancement. The minister affected
to receive this order with the most gracious acquiescence, but
looked me over from head to foot, with a glance from the corner
of his eye, and was on tenter-hooks to find out who had been so
strangely saddled upon him. Go, my friend, added the sovereign,
addressing himself to me, and waving his hand for me to withdraw;
the count will not fail to avail himself of your services in a
manner the most conducive to the interests of my government, and
the establishment of your own fortunes.

I immediately went out of the closet and made the best of my way
to the son of Coselina, who, being overrun with impatience to
inquire what the king had been talking about, fumbled at his
fingers' ends, and was all over in an agitation. His first
question was, whether we were to return to Valencia or become a
part of the court. You shall form your own conclusions, answered
I; at the same time delighting him with an account word for word
of the little conversation I had just held with the monarch. My
dear master, said Scipio at once in the excess of his joy, will
you take me for your almanac-maker another time? You must
acknowledge that we were not in the wrong! the lords of Leyva and
myself have our eye-teeth about us! a journey to Madrid was the
only measure to be adopted in such a case. Already I anticipate
your appointment to an eminent post: you will turn out to be some
time or other a Calderona to the Count of Olivarez. That is by no
means the object of my ambition, observed I in return; the
employment is placed on too rugged an eminence to excite any
longings in my mind. I could wish for a good situation where
there could be no inducement to do what might go against my
conscience, and where the favours of my prince are not likely to
be bartered away for filthy lucre. Having experienced my own
unfitness for the possession of patronage, I cannot be
sufficiently on my guard against the inroads of avarice and
ambition. Never think about that, sir! replied my secretary, the
minister will give you some handsome appointment, which you may
fill without any impeachment of your integrity or independence.

Induced more by Scipio's importunity than my own curiosity, I
repaired the following day before sunrise to the residence of the
Count d'Olivarez, having been informed that every morning,
whether in summer or winter, he gave audience by candlelight to
all comers. I ensconced myself modestly in a corner of the
saloon, and from my lurking-place took especial notice of the
count when he made his appearance; for I had marked his person
but cursorily in the king's closet. He was above the middle
stature, and might pass for fat in a country where it is a rarity
to see any but lean subjects. His shoulders were so high, as to
look exactly as if he was hump-backed, but appearances were
slanderous; for his blade-bones, though inelegant, were a pair;
his head, which was large enough to he capacious, dropped down
upon his chest by the unwieldiness of its own weight; his hair
was black and unconscious of a curl, his face lengthened, his
complexion olive-coloured, his mouth retiring inwards, with the
sharp-pointed, turn-up chin of a pantaloon.

This whole arrangement of structure and symmetry did not exactly
make up the complete model of a nobleman according to the ideas
of ancient art; nevertheless, as I believed him to be in a temper
of mind favourable to the gratification of my wishes, I looked at
his defects with an indulgent eye, and found him a man very much
to my satisfaction. One of the best points about him was, that he
received the public at large with the utmost affability and
complacency, holding out his hand for petitions with as much good
humour as if he were the person to be obliged, and this was a
sufficient set-off against anything untoward in the expression of
his countenance. In the mean time, when in my turn I came forward
to pay my respects and make myself known to him, he darted at me
a glance of rude dislike and frightful menace; then turning his
back, without condescending to give me audience, retired into his
closet. Then it was that the ugliness of this nobleman's features
appeared in all the extravagance of caricature: so that I made
the best of my way out of the saloon, thunder-struck at so savage
a reception, and quite at a loss how to conjecture what might be
the consequence.

Having got back to Scipio, who was waiting for me at the door --
Can you guess at all, said I, what sort of a greeting mine was?
No, answered he, not as to the minute particulars; but with
respect to the substance, easily enough: the minister, ready upon
all occasions to fall in with the fancies of his royal master,
must of course have made you a handsome offer of an ostensible
and lucrative situation. That is all you know about the matter,
replied I; and then went on to acquaint him circumstantially with
all that passed. He listened to me with serious attention, and
then said -- The count could not have recollected your person; or
rather, he must have been deceived by a fortuitous resemblance
between you and some impertinent suitor. I would advise you to
try another interview; I will lay a wager he will look on you
more kindly. I adopted my secretary's suggestion, and stood for a
second time in the presence of the minister; but he, behaving to
me still worse than at first, puckered up his features the moment
my unlucky countenance came within his ken, just as if it was
connected with some lodged hate and certain loathing, which of
force swayed him to offend, himself being offended; after this
significant demonstration, he turned away his glaring eyeballs,
and withdrew without uttering a word.

I was stung to the quick by so hostile a treatment, and in a
humour to set out immediately on my return to Valencia; but to
that project Scipio uniformly opposed his steady objections, not
knowing how for the life of him to part with those flattering
hopes which fancy had engendered in his brain. Do you not see
plainly, said I, that the count wishes to drive me away from
court? The monarch has testified in his presence some sort of
favourable intention towards me, and is not that enough to draw
down upon me the thorough hatred of the monarch's favourite? Let
us drive before the wind, my good comrade; let us make up our
minds to put quietly into port, and leave the open sea and the
honours of the flag in the possession of an enemy with whom we
are too feeble to contend. Sir, answered he, in high resentment
against the Count of Olivarez, I would not strike so easily. I
would go and complain to the king of the contempt in which his
minister held his recommendation. Bad advice, indeed, my friend,
said I; to take so imprudent a step as that, would soon bring
bitter repentance in the train of its consequences. I do not even
know whether it is safe for me to remain any longer in this town.

At this hint, my secretary communed a little with his own
thoughts; and, considering that in point of fact we had to do
with a man who kept the key of the tower of Segovia in his
pocket, my fears became naturalized in his breast. He no longer
opposed my earnest desire of leaving Madrid, and I determined to
take my measures accordingly on the very next day.



CH. III. -- The project of retirement is prevented, and Joseph
Navarro brought upon the stage again, by an act of signal
service.


ON my way home to my lodgings I met Joseph Navarro, whom the
render will recollect as on the establishment of Don Balthasar de
Zuniga, and one of my old friends. I made my bow first at a
distance, then went up to him, and asked whether he knew me
again, and if he would still be so good as to speak to a wretch
who had repaid his friendship with ingratitude. You acknowledge
then, said he, that you have not behaved very handsomely by me? 
Yes, answered I; and you are fully justified in laying on your
reproaches thick and threefold: I deserve them all, unless indeed
my guilt may be thought to have been atoned by the remorse of
conscience attendant on it.  Since you have repented of your
misconduct, replied Navarro, embracing me, I ought no longer to
hold it its remembrance. For my part, I knew not how to hug
Joseph close enough in my arms; and we both of us resumed our
original kind feelings towards one another.

He had heard of my imprisonment and the derangement of my
affairs; but of what followed he was totally ignorant I informed
him of it; relating word for word my conversation with the king,
without suppressing the minister's late ungracious reception of
me, any more than my present purpose of retiring into my
favourite obscurity. Beware of removing from the scene of action,
said he: since the sovereign has shown a disposition to befriend
you, there are always uses to be made of such a circumstance.
Between ourselves, the Count of Olivarez has something rather
unaccountable in his character: he is a very good sort of
nobleman, but rather whimsical withal: sometimes, as on the
present occasion, he acts in a most offensive manner, and none
but himself can furnish a clue to disentangle the intricate
thread of his motives and their results. But however this may be,
or whatever reasons might have swayed him to give you so scurvy a
reception, keep your footing here, and do not budge; he will not
be able to hinder you from thriving under the royal shelter and
protection; take my word for that! I will just give a hint upon
the subject this evening to Signor Don Balthasar de Zuniga, my
master; he is uncle to the Count of Olivarez, and shares with him
in the toils and cares of office. Navarro having given me this
assurance, inquired where I lived, and then we parted.

It was not long before we met again; for he came to call on me
the very next day. Signor de Santillane, said he, you are not
without a protector; my master will lend you his powerful
support: on the strength of the good character which I have given
your lordship, he has promised to speak to his nephew, the Count
of Olivarez, in your behalf; and I doubt not but he will 
effectually prepossess him in your favour. My friend Navarro not
meaning to serve me by halves, introduced me two days afterwards
to Don Balthasar, who said with a gracious air: Signor de
Santillane, your friend Joseph has pronounced your panegyric in
terms which have won me over completely to your interest. I made
a low obeisance to Signor de Zuniga, and answered, that to the
latest period of my life I should entertain the most lively sense
of my obligation to Navarro, for having secured to me the
protection of a minister, who was considered, and that for the
best reasons possible, as the presiding genius, the greater
luminary, or, as it were, the eye and mind of the ministerial
council. Don Balthasar, at this unexpected stroke of flattery,
clapped me on the shoulder with an approving chuckle, and
returned my compliment by a more significant intimation: You may
call on the Count of Olivarez again to-morrow, and then you will
have more reason to be pleased with him.

For the third time, therefore, did I make my appearance before
the prime minister, who, picking me out from among the mob of
suitors, cast upon me a look conveying with it a simper of
welcome, from which I ventured to draw a good omen. This is all
as it should be, said I to myself; the uncle has brought the
nephew to his proper bearings. I no longer anticipated any other
than a favourable reception, and my confidence was fully
justified. The count, after having given audience to the
promiscuous crowd, took me with him into his closet, and said
with a familiar address: My friend Santillane, you must excuse
the little disquietude I have occasioned you merely for my own
amusement; it was done in sport, though it was death to you, for
the sole purpose of practising on your discretion, and observing
to what measures your disgust and disappointment would incite
you. Doubtless you must have concluded that your services were
displeasing to me; but on the contrary, my good fellow, I must
confess frankly, that, as far as appears at present, you are
perfectly to my mind. Though the king my master had not enjoined
me to take charge of your fortunes, I should have done so of my
own free choice. Besides, my uncle, Don Balthasar de Zuniga, to
whom I can refuse nothing, has requested me to consider you as a
man for whom he particularly interests himself: that alone would
be enough to fix my confidence in you, and make me most sincerely
your friend.

This outset of my career produced so lively an impression on my
feelings, that they became unintelligibly tumultuous. I threw
myself at the minister's feet, who insisted on my rising
immediately, and then went on to the following effect: Return
hither to-day after dinner, and ask for my steward: he will
acquaint you with the orders which I shall have given him. With
these words his excellency broke up the conference to hear mass,
according to his constant custom every day after giving audience:
he then attended the king's levee.



CH. IV. -- Gil Blas ingratiates himself with the Count of
Olivarez.


I DID not fail returning after dinner to the prime minister's
house, and asking for his steward, whose name was Don Raymond
Caporis. No sooner had I made myself known, than paying his
civilities to me in the most respectful manner, Sir, said he,
follow me if you please: I am to do myself the honour of shewing
you the way to the apartment which is ordered for you in this
family. Having spoken thus, he led me up a narrow staircase to a
gallery communicating with five or six rooms, which composed the
second story belonging to one wing of the house, and were
furnished neatly, but without ostentation. You behold, resumed
he, the lodging assigned you by his lordship, where you will
always have a table of six persons, kept at his expense. You will
be waited on by his own servants; and there will always be a
carriage at your command. But that is not all: his excellency
insisted on it in the most pointed manner, that you should be
treated in every respect with the same attention as if you
belonged to the house of Guzman.

What the devil is the meaning of all this? said I within myself.
What construction ought I to put upon all these honours? Is there
not some humorous prank at the bottom of it? and must it not be
more in the way of diversion than anything else, that the
minister is flattering me up with so imposing an establishment!
While I was ruminating in this uncertainty, fluctuating betweea
hope and fear, a page came to let me know that the count was
asking for me. I waited instantly on his lordship, who was quite
alone in his closet. Well! Santillane, said he, are you satisfied
with your rooms, and with my orders to Don Raymond? Your
excellency's liberality, answered I, seems out of all proportion
with its object; so that I receive it with fear and trembling.
Why so? replied he. Can I be too lavish of distinction to a man
whom the king has committed to my care, and for whose interests
he especially commanded me to provide? No, that is impossible;
and I do no more than my duty in placing you on a footing of
respectability and consequence. No longer, therefore, let what I
do for you he a subject of surprise; but rely on it that
splendour in the eye of the world, and the solid advantages of
accumulating wealth, are equally with in your grasp, if you do
but attach yourself as faithfully to me as you did to the Duke of
Lerma.

But now that we are on the subject of that nobleman, continued
he, it is said that you lived on terms of personal intimacy with
him. I have a strong curiosity to lean the circumstances which
led to your first acquaintance, as well as in what department you
acted under him. Do not disguise or gloss over the slightest
particular, for I shall not be satisfied without a full, true,
and circumstantial recital. Then it was that I recollected in
what an embarrassing predicament I stood with the Duke of Lerma
on a similar occasion, and by what line of conduct I extricated
myself; that same course I adopted once again with the happiest
success; whereby the reader is to understand that throughout my
narrative I softened down the passages likely to give umbrage to
my patron, and glanced with a superficial delicacy over
transactions which would have reflected but little lustre on my
own character. I likewise manifested a considerate tenderness for
the Duke of Lerma; though by giving that fallen favourite no
quarter, I should better have consulted the taste of him whom I
wished to please. As for Don Rodrigo de Calderona, there I laid
about me with the religious fury of a bishop in a battle. I
brought together, and displayed in the most glaring colours, all
the anecdotes I had been able to pick up respecting his corrupt
practices and underhand dealing in the sale of promotions,
military, ecclesiastical, and civil.

What you have told me about Calderona, cried the minister with
eagerness, exactly squares with certain memorials which have been
presented to me, containing the heads of charges still more
seriously affecting his character. He will very soon be put upon
his trial, and if you have any wish to glut your revenge by his
ruin, I am of opinion that the object of your desire is near at
hand. I am far from thirsting after his blood, said I, though had
it depended on him, mine might have been shed in the tower of
Segovia, where he was the occasion of my taking lodgings for a
pretty long term. What! inquired his excellency, was it Don
Rodrigo who procured you that sudden journey? this a part of the
story of which I was not aware before. Don Balthasar, to whom
Navarro gave a summary of your adventures, told me indeed that
the late king gave orders for your commitment, as a mark of his
indignation against you for having led the Prince of Spain
astray, and taken him to a house of suspicious character in the
night: but that is all I know of the matter, and cannot for the
life of me conjecture what part Calderona could possibly have had
to play in that tragicomedy. A principal part, whether on the
stage or in real life, answered I that of a jealous lover, taking
vengeance for an injury, sustained in the tenderest point. At the
same time I related minutely all the facts with which the reader
is already acquainted, and touched his risible propensities,
difficult as they were of access, so exactly in the right place,
that he could not help wagging his under-hung jaw in a paroxysm
of humour-stricken ecstasy, and laughing till he cried again.
Catalina's double cast in the drama delighted him exceedingly;
her sometimes playing the niece and sometimes personating the
grand-daughter seemed to tickle his fancy more than anything; nor
was he altogether inattentive to the appearance which the Duke of
Lerma made in this undignified farce of state. When I had
finished my story, the count gave me leave to depart, with an
assurance that on the next day he would not fail to make trial of
my talents for business. I ran immediately to the family hotel of
Zuniga, to thank Don Balthazar for his good offices, and to
acquaint my friend Joseph with the favourable dispositions of the
prime minister, and my brilliant prospects in con sequence.



CH. V.  --  The private conversation of Gil Blas with Navarro,
and his first employment in the service of the Count d'Olivarez.


As soon as I got to the ear of Joseph, I told him with much
trepidation of spirits what a world of topics I had to deposit in
his private ear, He took me where we might be alone, when I asked
him, after having communicated a key to the whole transaction up
to the present time, what he thought of the business as it stood.
I think, answered he, that you are in a fair way to make an
enormous fortune. Everything turns out according to your wishes:
you have made yourself acceptable to the prime minister; and what
must be taken for some thing in the account, I can render you the
same service as my uncle Melchior de la Ronda, when you attached
yourself to the archiepiscopal establishment of Grenada. He
spared you the trouble of finding out the weak side of that
prelate and his principal officers, by discovering their
different characters to you; and it is my purpose, after his
example, to bring you perfectly acquainted with the count, his
lady countess, and their only daughter, Donna Maria de Guzman.

The minister's parts are quick, his judgment penetrating, and his
talents altogether calculated for the formation of extensive
projects. He affects the credit of universal genius, on the
strength of a showy smattering in general science; so that there
is no subject, in his own opinion, too difficult to be decided on
his mere authority. He sets himself up for a practical lawyer, a
complete general, and a politician of thorough-paced sagacity.
Add to all this, that he is so obstinately wedded to his own
opinions, as unchangeably to persevere in the path of his own
chalking out, to the absolute contempt of better advice, for fear
of seeming to be influenced by any good sense or intelligence,
but what he would be thought to engross in the resources of his
own mind. Between ourselves, this blot in his character may
produce strange consequences, which it may be well for the
monarchy should indulgent heaven for the defect of human means
avert! As for his talents in council, he shines in debate by the
force of natural eloquence; and would write as well as he speaks,
if he did not injudiciously affect a certain dignity of style,
which degenerates into affectation, quaintness, and obscurity.
His modes of thinking are peculiar to himself; he is capricious
in conduct, and visionary in design. Here you have the picture of
his mind, the light and shade of his intellectual merits: the
qualities of his heart and disposition remain to be delineated.
He is generous and warm in his friendships. It is said that he is
revengeful; but would he be a Spaniard if he were otherwise? In
addition to this, he has been accused of ingratitude, for having
driven the Duke of Uzeda and Friar Lewis Aliaga into banishment,
though he owed them, according to common report, obligations of
the most binding nature; and yet even this must not be looked
into so narrowly under his circumstances: there are few breasts
capacious enough to afford house-room for two such opposite
inmates as political ambition and gratitude.

Donna Agnes de Zuniga é Velasco, Countess of Olivarez, continued
Joseph, is a lady to whom it is impossible to impute more than
one fault, but that is a huge one; for it consists in making a
market, and a market the most exorbitant in its terms, of her
natural influence over the mind of her husband. As for Donna
Maria de Guzman, who beyond all dispute is at this moment the
very first match in Spain, she is a lady of first-rate
accomplishments, and absolutely idolized by her father. Regulate
your conduct upon these hints: make your court with art and
plausibility to these two ladies, and let it appear as if you
were more devoted to the Count of Olivarez than ever you were to
the Duke of Lerma before your forced excursion to Segovia; you
will become a leading and powerful member of the administration.

I should advise you, moreover, added he, to see my master, Don
Balthasar, from time to time; for though you have no longer any
occasion for his interest to push you forward, it will not be
amiss to waste a little incense upon him. You stand very high in
his good opinion; preserve your footing there, and cultivate his
friendship; it may stand you in some stead on any emergency. I
could not help observing, that as the uncle and nephew were in a
certain sort partners in the government of the state, there might
possibly be some little symptom of jealousy between brothers near
the throne. On the contrary, answered he, they are united by the
most confidential ties. Had it not been for Don Balthasar, the
Count of Olivarez might probably never have been prime minister;
for you are to know, that after Philip the Third had paid the
debt of nature, all the adherents and partisans belonging to the
house of Sandoval made a great stir, some in favour of the
cardinal, and others on his son's behalf; but my master, a
greater adept in court intrigue than any of them, and the count,
who is nearly as great an adept as himself disconcerted all their
measures, and took their own so judiciously for the purpose of
stepping into the vacant place, that their rivals had no chance
against them. The Count of Olivarez, being appointed prime
minister, divided the duties with his uncle, Don Balthasar;
leaving foreign affairs to him, and taking the home department to
himself; the consequence is, that the bonds of family friendship
are drawn closer between these two noblemen, than if political
influence had no share in their mutual interests: they are
perfectly independent in their respective lines of business, and
live together on terms of good understanding which no intrigue
can possibly affect or alter.

Such was the substance of my conversation with Joseph, and the
advantage to be derived from it was my own to make the most of:
at all events, it was my duty to thank Signor de Zuniga for all
the influence he had the goodness to exert in my favour. He
assured me with infinite good-breeding that he should avail
himself of every opportunity as it arose to promote my wishes,
and that he was very glad his nephew had behaved so as to meet my
ideas, because he meant to refresh his memory in my behalf, being
determined, as he was pleased to say, to place it beyond all
manner of doubt how far he himself participated in all my views,
and to make it evident that, instead of one fast friend, I had
two. In terms like these did Don Balthasar, through mere
friendship for Navarro, take the moulding of my fortunes on
himself.

On that same evening did I leave my paltry lodging to take up my
abode at the prime minister's, where I sat down to supper with
Scipio in my own suite of apartments. There were we both waited
on by the servants belonging to the household, who as they stood
behind our chairs, while we were affecting the pomp and
circumstance of political elevation, were more likely than not to
be laughing in their sleeves at the pantomime they had been
ordered by their manager to play in our presence. When they had
taken away and left us to ourselves, my secretary being no longer
under restraint, gave vent to a thousand wild imaginations which
his sprightly temper and inventive hopes engendered in his fancy.
On my part, though by no means cold or insensible to the
brilliant prospects which were opening on my view, I did not as
yet yield in the least degree to the weakness of being thrust
aside from the right line of my
philosophy by temporal allurements. So much otherwise, that on
going to bed I fell into a sound sleep, without being haunted in
my dreams by those phantoms of flattering delusion which might
have gained admittance with no severe question from a corruptible
door-keeper. The ambitious Scipio, on the contrary, tossed and
tumbled all night in the agitation of restless contrivance.
Whenever he dozed a little imp took possession of his brain, with
a pen behind its ear, working out by all the rules of arithmetic
the bulky sum total of his daughter Seraphina's marriage portion.

No sooner had I got my clothes on the next morning, than a
message came from his lordship. I flew like lightning at the
summons, when his excellency said: Now then, Santillane, suppose
you give us a specimen of your talents for business. You say that
the Duke of Lerma used to give you state papers to bring into
official form; and I have one, by way of experiment, on which you
shall try your skill. The subject you will easily comprehend: it
turns upon an exposition of public affairs, such as to throw an
artificial light on the first appearance of the new ministry, and
to prejudice the public in its favour. I have already whispered
it about by my emissaries, that every department of the state was
completely disorganized, that the talents which preceded us were
no talents at all; and the object at present is to impress both
court and city by a formal declaration with the idea, that our
aid is absolutely necessary to save the monarchy itself from
sinking. On this theme you may expatiate till the populace become
lock-jawed with astonishment, and the sober part of the public
are gravely argued out of all prepossession in favour of the
discarded party. By way of contrast, you will talk of the dignus
vindice nodus, taking care to translate it into Spanish; and
boast of the measures adopted under the new order of things, to
secure the permanent glory of the king's reign, to give perpetual
prosperity to his dominions, and to confer perfect, unchangeable
happiness on his good people.

His lordship, having given out the general subject of my thesis,
left me with a paper containing the heads of charges, whether
just or unjust, against the late administration: and I remember
perfectly well, that there were ten articles, whose lightest
word, even of the lightest article, would harrow up the soul of a
true Spaniard, and make his knotted and combined locks to part.
That the current of my fancy might experience no interruption, he
shut me into a little closet near his own, where the spirit of
poetry might possess me in all its freedom and in dependence. My
best faculties were called forth, to compose a statement of
affairs commensurate with my own concern in the sweeping of the
new brooms. My first object was to lay open the nakedness and
abandonment of the kingdom: the finances in a state of 
bankruptcy, the civil list and immediate resources of the crown
pawned fifty times over, the navy unpaid, dismantled, and in
mutiny. All this hideous delineation was referred for its justice
and accuracy to the wrong-headedness and stupidity of government
at the close of the last reign, and the doctrine most strongly
enforced, that unexampled wisdom and patriotism only could ward
off the fatal consequences. In short, the monarchy could only be
sustained on the shoulders of our political sufficiency and
reforming prudence. The ex-ministry were so cruelly belaboured,
that the Duke of Lerma's ruin, according to the terms of my
syllogism, was the salvation of Spain. To own the truth, though
my professions were in the spirit of Christian charity towards
that nobleman, I was not sorry to give him a sly rub in the
exercise of my function. Oh man! man! what a compound of candour-
breathing satire and splenetic impartiality art thou!

Towards the conclusion, having finished my frightful portraiture
of overhanging evils, I endeavoured to allay the storm my art had
raised by making futurity as bright as the past had been gloomy.
The Count of Olivarez was
brought in at the close, like the tutelary deity of an ancient
commonwealth in the crisis of its fate. I promised more than
paganism ever feigned or chivalry fancied in the wildest of its
crusading projects. In a word, I so exactly executed what the new
minister meant, that he seemed not to know his own hints again,
when drawn out in my emphatic and appropriate language.
Santillane, said he, do you know that this is more like the
composition one might expect from a secretary of state, than like
that of a private secretary? I can no longer be surprised that
the Duke of Lerma was fond of calling your talents into action.
Your style is concise, and by no means inelegant; but it creeps
rather too much in the level paths of nature. At the same time,
pointing out the passages which did not hit his fancy, he
corrected them; and I gathered from the touches he threw in, that
Navarro was right in saying he affected sententious wit, but
mistook for it quaint and stale conceits. Nevertheless, though he
preferred the stately, or rather the grotesque in writing, he
suffered two thirds of my performance to stand without
alteration; and by way of proving how entirely he was satisfied,
sent me three hundred pistoles by Don Raymond after dinner.



CH. VI. The application of the three hundred pistoles, and
Scipio's commission connected with them. Success of the state
paper mentioned in the last chapter.


THIS handsome present of the minister furnished Scipio with a new
subject of congratulation, by reason of our second appearance at
court. You may remark, said he, that fortune is preparing a load
of aggrandizement to lay on your lordship's shoulders. Are you
still sorry for having turned your back on solitude? May the
Count of Olivarez live for ever! he is a very different sort of a
master from his predecessor. The Duke of Lerma, with all your
devotion to his service, left you to live upon suction for months
without a pistole to bless yourself with; and the count has
already made you a present which you could have had no reason to
expect but after a course of long service.

I should very much like, added he, that the lords of Leyva should
be witnesses of your great success, or at least that they should
be informed of it. It is high time indeed, answered I, and I
meant to speak with you on that subject. They must doubtless be
impatient to hear of my proceedings, but I waited till my fate
was fixed, and till I could decide for certain whether I should
stay at court or not. Now that I am sure of my destination, you
have only to set out for Valencia whenever you please, and to
acquaint those noblemen with my present situation, which I
consider as their doing, since it is evident that, but for them,
I should never have resolved on my journey to Madrid. My dear
master, cried the son of Bohemian accident, what joy shall I
communicate by relating what has happened to you! Why am I not
already at the gates of Valencia? But I shall be there forthwith.
Don Alphonso's two horses are ready in the stable. I shall take
one of my lord's livery servants with me. Besides that company is
pleasant on the road, you know very well the effect of official
parade, in making impression on the natives of a provincial town.

I could not help laughing at my secretary's foolish vanity; and
yet, with vanity perhaps more than equal to his own, I left him
to do as he pleased. Go about your business, said I, and make the
best of your way back; for I have an other commission to give
you. I mean to send you to the Asturias with some money for my
mother. Through neglect I have suffered the time to elapse when I
promised to remit her a hundred pistoles, and pledged you to make
the payment in person. Such engagements ought to be held sacred
by a son; and I reproach myself with inaccuracy in the observance
of mine. Sir, answered Scipio, within six weeks I shall bring you
an account of both your commissions; having opened my budget to
the lords of Leyva, looked in at your country-house, and taken a
peep at the town of Oviedo, the recollection of which I cannot
admit into my mind, without turning over three-fourths of the
inhabitants, and one-half of the remaining quarter, to the
corrective discipline of that infernal executioner, who is
supposed to be kept on foot for the purpose of castigating
sinners. I then counted down one hundred pistoles to that same
son of a wandering mother for my honoured parents' annuity, and
another hundred for himself; meaning that he should perform his
long journey without grumbling on my account by the way.

Some days after his departure his lordship sent our memorial to
press; and it was no sooner published than it became the topic of
conversation in every circle throughout Madrid. The people,
enamoured of novelty, took up this well written statement of
their own wretchedness with fond partiality; the derangement and
exhaustion of the finances, painted with a mixture of truth and
poetry, excited a strong feeling of popular indignation against
the Duke of Lerma; and if these paper bullets of the brain, cast
in the political armoury of a rival, failed to carry victory with
them in the opinions of all mankind, they were at all events
hailed with triumph by the most clamorous of our own partisans.
As for the magnificent promises which the Count of Olivarez threw
in, and among others that of keeping the machine of state in
motion, by a system of economy, without adding to the public
burdens, they were caught at with avidity by the citizens at
large, and considered as pledges of an enlightened and patriotic
policy, so that the whole city resounded with the acclamation of
panegyric and congratulation on the opening of new prospects.

The minister, delighted to have gained his end so easily, which
in that publication had only been to draw popularity upon
himself; was now determined to seize the substance as well as
catch at the shadow, by an act of unquestionable credit with the
subject, and high utility to the king's service. For that
purpose, he had recourse to the emperor Galba's contrivance,
consisting in a forced regurgitation of ill-gotten spoils from
individuals who had made large fortunes, hell and their own
consciences knew best how, in the superintendence of the royal
expenditure. When he had squeezed these spunges till they were
dry again, and had filled the king's coffers with the drainings,
he undertook to render the reform permanent by abolishing all
pensions, not excepting his own, and curtailing the gratuities
too frequently bestowed on favourites out of the prince's privy
purse. To succeed in this design, which he could not carry into
effect without changing the face of the government, he charged me
with the composition of a new state paper, furnishing the
substance and the form from his own idea. He then advised me to
raise my style as much as possible above the level of my ordinary
simplicity, and to give an air of more eloquence to my
phraseology. A hint is sufficient, my lord, said I; your
excellency wishes to unite sublimity with illumination, and it
shall be so I shut myself up in the same closet where I had
already worked so successfully, and sat down stiffly to my task,
first calling to my aid the lofty and clear perceptions, the
noble and sonorous expressions, of my old instructor, the
archbishop of Grenada.

I began by laying it down as a first maxim of political
philosophy, that the vital functions, the respiration as it were
of all monarchy, depended on the strict administration of the
finances; that in our particular case that duty became
imperiously urgent, irresistibly impressing on our consciences;
and that the revenue should be considered as the nerves and
sinews of Spain, to hold her rivals in check and keep her enemies
in awe. After this general declamation, I pointed out to the
sovereign, for to him the memorial was addressed, that by cutting
down all pensions and perquisites dependent on the ordinary
income, he would not thereby deprive himself of that truly royal
pleasure, a princely munificence towards those of his subjects
who had established a fair claim to his favours; because without
drawing upon his treasury, he had the means of distributing more
acceptable rewards; that for one branch of service, there were
viceroyalties, lieutenancies, orders of merit, and all sorts of
military commissions: for another, high judicial situations with
salaries annexed, civil offices of magistracy with sounding
titles to give them consequence; and though last, not least, all
the temporal possessions of the church to animate the piety of
its spiritual pastors.

This memorial, which was much longer than the first, occupied me
nearly three days; but as luck would have it, my performance was
exactly to my master's mind, who finding it written with
sententious cogency, and bristled up with metaphors in the
declamatory parts, complimented me in the highest terms That is
vastly well expressed indeed! said he, laying his finger on a
passage here and there, and picking out all the most inflated
sentences he could find that language bears the stamp of fine
composition, and might pass for the production of a classic.
Courage, my friend! I foresee that your services will be worth
their weight in gold. And yet, notwithstanding the applauses he
lavished on my classical composition, a few of his own
heightening touches, he thought, would make it read still better.
He put a good deal of his own stuff into it, and the medley was
manufactured into a piece of eloquence which was considered as
unanswerable by the king and all the court. The whole city joined
in opinion with the higher orders, deriving the most flattering
hopes of the future from these grand promises, and concluding
that the monarchy must re cover its pristine splendour during the
ministry of so illustrious a character. His excellency, finding
that my sermon on economy was fraught with practical inferences
of utility to him, was kind enough to wish that I should profit
by the exercise of my own talents. In conformity therefore with
his new system of patronage, he gave me an annuity of five
hundred crowns on the commandery of Castile; and the acceptance
of it was so much the more palatable, as no dirty work had been
done for it, but it was honestly, though cheaply, earned.



CH. VII. -- Gil Blas meets with his friend Fabricio once more;
the accident, place, and circumstances described; with the
particulars of their conversation together.


NOTHING gave his lordship greater pleasure than to hear the
general decision of Madrid on the conduct of his administration.
Not a day passed but he inquired what they were saying of him in
the political world. He kept spies in pay, to bring him an exact
account of what was going on in the city. They particularized the
most trivial discourses which they overheard; and their orders
being to suppress nothing, his self-love was grazed now and then,
for the people have a way of bolting out home truths, without any
nice calculation where they may glance.

Finding that the count loved political small talk, I made it my
business to frequent places of public resort after dinner, and to
chime in with the conversation of genteel people whenever
opportunity offered. Should the measures of government happen to
be canvassed among them, I pricked up my ears, and greedily took
in their discourse; if anything worth repeating was said, his
excellency was sure to hear of it. It can scarcely be necessary
to hint, that I never carried home anything which was not likely
to pay for the porterage.

One day, returning from one of these little conversational
parties, my road lay in front of an hospital. It occurred to me
to go in. I walked through two or three wards, filled with
diseased patients, and examined their beds to see that they were
properly taken care of. Among these unhappy wretches, whom I
could not look at without the most painful feelings, I observed
one whose features struck me: it surely could be no other than
Fabricio, my countryman and chum! To look at him more closely, I
drew near his bedside, and finding beyond a possibility of doubt
that it was the poet Nunez, I stopped to look at him for a few
seconds without saying a word. He also fixed his regards on me.
At length breaking silence: Do not my eyes deceive me? said I. Is
it indeed Fabricio, and here? It is indeed, answered he, coldly,
and you need not wonder at it. Since we parted, I have been
working indefatigably at the trade of an author: I have written
novels, play; and works of genius in every department. My brain
is fairly spun out, and here I am.

I could not help laughing at such a sketch of literary biography;
and still more at the serious air of the accompanying action.
What! cried I, has your muse brought you to this pass? Has she
played you such a jade's trick as this? Even as you witness,
answered he; this establishment is a sort of halfpay receptacle
for invalids on the muster-roll of disabled wit. You have acted
discreetly, my good friend, to lay yourself out for promotion in
a different line. But they tell me, you are no longer a courtier,
and that your prospects in political life were all blasted; nay,
they went so far as to affirm, that you were committed to close
custody by the king's order. They told you no more than the
truth, replied I: the delightful vision of political eminence
wherein you left me last, soon shifted the scene of my incoherent
dreams to a prison and complete destitution. But for all that, my
friend, here you behold me again in a better plight than ever.
That is quite out of the question, said Nunez: your deportment is
discreet and decent, you have not that supercilious and devil-
take-the-hindermost sort of aspect, which good keep communicates
to the human face. The reverses of this chequered life, replied
I, have brought me down to the level of the more modest virtues;
I have taken a lesson in the school of adversity, to enjoy the 
possession of a good stud without riding the great horse.

Tell me then candidly, cried Fabricio, raising his head upon his
hand with his elbow upon the pillow, what your present occupation
can possibly be. A steward perhaps to some nobleman out at
elbows, or man of business to some rich widow! Something better
than either the one or the other, rejoined I, but excuse me from
saying more at present: another time your curiosity shall be
satisfied. It is enough at present to assure you that my means
are equal to my inclination, and that you may command
independence through me; but then you must submit to an embargo
on your wit, and a non-intercourse act between you and the
faculty of writing, whether in verse or prose. Can you make this 
sacrifice to my friendship? I have already made it to the powers
above, said he, in my last critical sickness. A Dominican made me
forswear poetry, as an amusement bordering on criminality, but at
all events beside the turnpike-road of good sense. I wish you
joy, my dear Nunez, replied I; beware of a revoke. There is not
the least danger on that head, rejoined he: the Muses and I have
agreed on terms of separation: just as you came in at that door,
I was conning over a farewell ode. Good master Fabricio, said I,
with a wise swagging to and fro of my head, it is a doubtful
question whether your vow of abjuration ought to pass current
with the Dominican and myself: you seem over head and ears in
love with those virgins incarnate. No, no, contended he
peevishly, I have cut the connection asunder. Nay more, I have
quarrelled with their keepers, the public. The readers of these
days do not deserve an author of more genius than themselves: I
should be sorry to write down to their comprehension. You are not
to suppose that this is the language of disgust; it is my sincere
and well-weighed opinion. Applause and hisses are just the same
to me. It is a toss up who fails and who succeeds: the wit of to-
day is the blockhead of to-morrow. What cursed fools our
dramatists must be, to care for anything but their poundage when
their plays happen to be received! It is all very well for a few
nights! But only fancy a revival at the end of twenty years, and
what a figure they will cut then! The audiences of the present
day turn up their noses at the stock pieces of the last age, and
it is a question whether their taste will fare better with their
more critical descendants. If that conjecture be probable, the
inventors of clap-traps now will be the butt of cat calls
hereafter. It is just the same with novel writers, and all other
manufacturers of unnecessary literature: they strut and fret for
an hour, and then are no more seen or heard of. The glories of
successful authorship are the mere vapours of a murky atmosphere,
meteors of a marsh, foul coruscations of a dunghill, cathedral
tapers to put out the galaxy, blue flames of coarse paper held
over a candle.

Though these caricatures of rival renown were the mere creations
of jealousy in the poet of the Asturias, it was not my business
to correct his ill temper. I am delighted, said I, that wit and
you have had so serious a quarrel; and that the diarrhoea of your
inventive faculties has been cured by an astringent. You may
depend on it, I will put you in the way of a good livelihood,
without drawing deep upon your intellectual credit. So much she
better, cried he; wit smells like carrion in my nostrils, or
rather like a pungent and deleterious perfume; fragrant to the
sense, but corrosive to the vitals. I heartily wish, my dear
Fabricio, resumed I, that you may always keep in that mind. Only
wash your hands completely of poetry, and you may depend on it, I
will enable you to keep your head above water without picking or
stealing. In the mean while, added I, slipping a purse of sixty
pistoles into his hand, accept this as a slight instance of my
regard.

O friend like the friends in days of yore, cried the son of
barber Nunez, out of his wits with joy and gratitude, it was
heaven itself which sent you into this hospital, whence your
goodness is now discharging me! Before we parted, I gave him my
address, and invited him to come and see me as soon as his health
would permit. He opened his eyes as an oyster does its shell,
when I told him that I lodged under the minister's roof. O
illustrious Gil Blas! said he, great as Pompey and fortunate as
Sylla, whose lot it is to be hand in glove with the dictators of
modern times! I rejoice most disinterestedly in your good
fortune, because it is so very evident what a noble use you make
of it.



CH. VIII. -- Gil Blas gets forward progressively in his master's
affections. Scipio's return to Madrid, and account of his
journey.


THE Count of Olivarez, whom I shall henceforward call my lord
duke, because the king was pleased to confer that dignity on him
about this time, was infested with a weakness which I did not
suffer to pass without taking toll: it was a furious desire of
being beloved. The moment he fancied that any one really liked
him, his heart was caught in a trap. This was not lost upon my
keen sense of character. It was not enough to do precisely as he
ordered; I superadded a zeal in the execution which made him
mine. I laid myself out to his liking in everything, and provided
beforehand for his most eccentric wishes.

By conduct like this, which almost always answers, I became by
degrees my master's favourite; and he, on the other hand, as if
he had got round to my blind side also, wormed himself into my
affections, by giving me his own. So forward did I get into his
good graces, as to halve his confidence with Signor Carnero, his
principal secretary.

Carnero had played my game; and that so successfully, as to be
intrusted with the greater mysteries. We two therefore were the
keepers of the prime minister's conscience, and held the keys of
all his secrets: with this difference, that Carnero was consulted
on state affairs, myself about his private concerns, dividing the
business into two separate departments; and we were each of us
equally pleased with our own. We lived together without jealousy,
and certainly without attachment. I had every reason to be
satisfied with my quarters, where continual intercourse gave me
an opportunity of prying into the duke's inmost soul, which was a
masked battery to all mankind beside, but plain as a pikestaff to
me, when he no longer questioned the sincerity of my attachment
to hint.

Santillane, said he one day, you were witness to the Duke of
Lerma's possession of an authority, more like that of an absolute
monarch than a favourite minister; and yet I am still happier
than he was at the very summit of his good fortune. He had two
formidable enemies in his own son, the Duke of Uzeda, and in the
confessor of Philip the Third: but there is no one now about the
king who has credit enough to stand in my way, or even, as I am
aware, the slightest inclination to do me mischief.

It is true, continued he, that on my accession to the ministry,
it was my first care to remove all hangers-on from about the
prince but those of my own family or connections. By means of
viceroyalties or embassies I got rid of all the nobility who, by
their personal merit, could have interfered with me in the good
graces of the sovereign, whom I mean to engross entirely to
myself; in that I may say at the present moment, no statesman of
the time holds me in check by the ascendancy of his personal
influence. You see, Gil Blas, I open my mind to you. As I have
reason to think that you are mine heart and soul, I have chosen
to put you in possession of everything. You are a clever youth;
with reflection, penetration, and discretion: in short, you are
just the very creature to acquit yourself of all possible little
offices in all possible directions; you are also a young fellow
of very promising parts, and must in the nature of things be in
my interests.

There was no standing the attack which these flattering
representations were calculated to make upon the weakly defended
fortress of my philosophy. Unauthorized whims of avarice and
ambition mounted suddenly into my head, and brought forward
certain sentiments of political speculation which were supposed
to have been in abeyance. I gave the minister an assurance that I
should fulfil his intentions to the utmost of my power, and held
myself in readiness to execute without examination or inference
all the orders it might be his pleasure to give me.

While I was thus disposed to take fortune in her affable fit,
Scipio returned from his peregrination. I have no long story for
you, said he. The lords of Leyva were delighted at your reception
from the king, and at the manner in which the Count of Olivarez
and you came to understand one another.

My friend, said I, you would have delighted them still more, had
you been able to tell them on what a footing I am now with my
lord. My advances since your departure have been prodigious.
Happy man be his dole, my dear master, answered he: my mind
forebodes that we shall cut a figure.

Let us change the subject, said I, and talk of Oviedo. You have
been in the Asturias. How did you leave my mother? Ah, sir!
replied he, with an undertaker's decency of countenance, I have a
melancholy tale to tell you from that quarter. O heaven!
exclaimed I, my mother then is dead! Six months since, said my
secretary, did the good lady pay the debt of nature, and your
uncle, Signor Gil Perez, about the same period.

My mother's death preyed upon my susceptible nature, though in my
childhood I had not received from her those little fondling
indications of maternal love, so necessary to amalgamate with the
more serious convictions of filial duty. The good canon, too,
came in for his share in bringing me up according to the rules of
godliness and honesty. My serious grief was not lasting: but I
never lost sight of a certain tender recollection, whenever the
idea of my dear relations shot across my mind.



CH. IX.. -- How my lord duke married his only daughter, and to
whom: with the bitter consequences of that marriage.


VERY shortly after the son of Coselina's return, my lord duke
fell into a brown study, and it lasted a complete week. I
conceived, of course, that he was brooding over some great
measure of government; but family concerns were the object of his
musings. Gil Blas, said he one day after dinner, you may perceive
that my mind is a good deal distracted. Yes, my good friend, I am
pondering over an affair of the utmost consequence to my
feelings. You shall know all about it.

My daughter, Donna Maria, pursued he, is marriageable, and of
course beset with suitors. The Count de Niéblés, eldest son of
the Duke de Medina Sidonia, head of the Guzman family, and Don
Lewis de Haro, eldest son of the Marquis de Carpio and my eldest
sister, are the two most likely competitors. The latter in
particular is superior in point of merit to all his rivals, so
that the whole court has fixed on him for my son-in-law.
Nevertheless, without entering into private motives for treating
him, as well as the Count de Niéblés, with a refusal, my present
views are fixed upon Don Ramires Nunez de Guzman, Marquis of
Toni, head of the Guzmans d'Abrados, another branch of the
family. To that nobleman and his progeny by my daughter I mean to
leave all my property, and to entail on them the title of Count
d'Olivarez, with the additional dignity of grandee; so that my
grandchildren and their descendants, issue of the Abrados and
Olivarez branch, will be considered as taking precedence in the
house of Guzman.

Tell me now, Santillane, added he, do you not like my project?
Excuse me, my lord, pleaded I, with a shrug, the design is worthy
of the genius which gave birth to it: my only fear is, lest the
Duke of Medina Sidonia should think fit to be out of humour at
it. Let him take it as he list, resumed the minister; I give
myself very little concern about that. His branch is no favourite
with me: they have choused that of Abrados out of their
precedence and many of their privileges. I shall be far less
affected by his ill humours than by the disappointment of my
sister, the Marchioness de Carpio, when she sees my daughter slip
through her son's fingers. But let that be as it may. I am
determined to please myself, and Don Ramires shall be the man; it
is a settled point.

My lord duke, having announced this firm resolve, did not carry
it into effect without giving a new proof of his singular policy.
He presented a memorial to the king, entreating him and the queen
in concert, to do him the honour of taking the choice of a
husband for his daughter on themselves, at the same time
acquainting them with the pretensions of the suitors, and
professing to abide by their election; but he took care, when
naming the Marquis de Toral, to evince clearly whither his own
wishes pointed. The king, therefore, with a blind deference for
his minister, answered thus: "I think that Don Ramires Nunez
deserves Donna Maria: but determine for yourself. The match of
your own choosing will be most agreeable to me." (Signed) THE
KING.

The minister made a point of shewing this answer everywhere; and
affecting to consider it as a royal mandate, hastened his
daughter's marriage with the Marquis de Toral; a death-blow to
the hopes of the Marchioness de Carpio, and the rest of the
Guzmans who had been speculating on an alliance with Donna Maria.
These rival players of a losing game, not being able to break off
the match, put the best face they could upon it, and made the
fashionable world to resound with their costly celebrations of
the event A superficial observer might have fancied that the
whole family was delighted with the arrangement; but the pouters
and ill-wishers were soon revenged most cruelly at my lord duke's
expense. Donna Maria was brought to bed of a daughter at the end
of ten months; the infant was still-born, and the mother died a
few day afterwards.

What a loss for a father who had no eyes, as one may say, but for
his daughter, and in her loss felt the miscarriage of his design
to quash the right of precedence in the branch of Medina Sidonia!
Stung to the quick by his misfortune, he shut himself up for
several days, and was visible to no one but myself; a sincere
sympathiser, from the recollection of my own experience in his
sorrow. The occasion drew forth fresh tears to Antonia's memory.
The death of the Marchioness de Toral, under circumstances so
similar, tore open a wound imperfectly skinned over, and so
exasperated my affliction, that the minister, though he had
enough to do with his own sufferings, could not help taking
notice of mine. It seemed unaccountable how exactly his feelings
were echoed. Gil Blas, said he one day, when my tears seemed to
feed upon indulgence, my greatest consolation consists in having
a bosom friend so much alive to all my distresses. Ah! my lord,
answered I, giving him the full credit of my amiable tenderness,
I must be ungrateful and degenerate in my nature if I did not
lament as for myself. Can I be aware that you mourn over a
daughter of accomplished merit, whom you loved so tenderly,
without shedding tears of fellow-feeling! No, my lord, I am too
much naturalized to you on the side of obligation, not to take a
permanent interest in all your pleasures and disappointments.



CH. X. -- Gil Blas meets with the poet Nunez by accident, and
learns that he has written a tragedy, which is on the point of
being brought out at the theatre royal. The ill fortune of the
piece, and the good fortune of its author.


THE minister began to pick up his crumbs, and myself consequently
to get into feather again, when one evening I went out alone in
the carriage to take an airing. On the road I met the poet of the
Asturias, who had been lost to my knowledge ever since his
discharge from the hospital. He was very decently dressed. I
called him up, gave him a seat in my carriage, and we drove
together to Saint Jerome's meadow.

Master Nunez, said I, it is lucky for me to have met you
accidentally; for otherwise I should not have had the pleasure .
. . . No severe speeches, Santillane, interrupted he with
considerable eagerness: I most own frankly that I did not mean to
keep up your acquaintance, and I will tell you the reason. You
promised me a good situation provided I abjured poetry, but I
have found a very excellent one, on condition of keeping my
talents in constant play. I accepted the latter alternative, as
squaring best with my own humour. A friend of mine got me an
employment under Don Bertrand Gomez Del Ribero, treasurer of the
king's galleys. This Don Bertrand, wanting to have a wit in his
pay, and finding my turn for poetical composition very much in
unison with his own sense of what is excellent, has chosen me in
preference to five or six authors who offered themselves as
candidates for the place of his private secretary.

I am delighted at the news, my dear Fabricio, said I, for this
Don Bertrand must be very rich. Rich indeed! answered he; they
say that he does not know himself how much he is worth. However
that may be, my business under him is as follows. He prides
himself on his turn for gallantry, at the same time wishing to
pass for a man of genius: he therefore keeps up an epistolary
intercourse of wit with several ladies who have an infinite deal,
and borrows my brain to indite such letters as may amplify the
opinion of his sprightliness and elegance. I write to one for him
in verse, to another in prose, and sometimes carry the letters
myself, to prove the agility of my heels as well as the ingenuity
of my head.

But you do not tell me, said I, what I most want to know. Are you
well paid for your epigrammatic cards of compliment? Yes, most
plentifully, answered he. Rich men are not always open-handed;
and I know some who are downright curmudgeons; but Don Bertrand
has behaved in the most handsome manner. Besides a salary of two
hundred pistoles, I receive some little occasional perquisites
from him, sufficient to set me above the world, and enable me to
live on an equal footing with some choice spirits of the literary
circles, who are willing, like myself, to set care at defiance.
But then, resumed I, has your treasurer critical skill enough to
distinguish the beauties of a performance from its blemishes? The
least likely man in the world, answered Nunez: a flippant-tongued
smatterer, with a miserable assortment of materials for judging.
Yet he gives himself out for chief justice and lord president of
Apollo's tribunal. His decisions are adventurous, if not always
lucky; while his opinions are maintained in so high a tone and
with so bullying a challenge of infallibility, that nine times
out of ten the issue of an argument is silence, though not
conviction, on the part of the opponent, as a measure of
precaution against the gathering storm of foul language and
contemptuous sneers.

You may readily suppose, continued he, that I take especial care
never to contradict him, though it almost exceeds human patience
to forbear: for, to say nothing of the unpalatable phrases that
might be hailed down on my defenceless head, I should stand a
very good chance of being shoved by the shoulders out of doors. I
therefore am discreet enough to approve what he praises, and to
condemn without mitigation or appeal whatever he is pleased to
find fault with. By this easy compliance, for poets are compelled
to acquire a knack of knocking under to those by whom they live,
not even excepting their booksellers, I have gained the esteem
and friendship of my patron. He has employed me to write a
tragedy on a plot of his own. I have executed it under his
inspection; and if the piece succeeds, a percentage on the laud
and honour must accrue to him.

I asked our poet what was the title of his tragedy. He informed
me that it was "The Count of Saldagna," and that it would come
out in two or three days. I told him that I wished it all
possible success, and thought so favour ably of his genius, as to
entertain considerable hopes. So do I, said he, but hope never
tells a more flattering tale than in the ear of a dramatic
author. You might as well attempt to fix the wind by nailing the
weathercock, as speculate on the reception of a new piece with an
audience.

At length, the day of performance arrived. I could not go to the
play, being prevented by official business. The only thing to be
done was to send Scipio, that he might bring me back word how it
went off; for I was sincerely interested in the event. After
waiting impatiently for his return, in he came with a long face
which boded no good. Well, said I, how was "The Count of
Saldagna" welcomed by the critics? Very roughly, answered he;
never was there a play more brutally handled; I left the house in
high anger at the injustice and insolence of the pit. It serves
him right, rejoined I. Nunez is no better than a madman, to he
always running his head against the stone walls of a theatre. If
he was in his senses, could he have preferred the hisses and
catcalls of an unfeeling mob, to the ease and dignity he might
have commanded under my patronage? Thus did I inveigh with
friendly vehemence against the poet of the Asturias, and disturb
the even tenor of my mind for an event, which the sufferer hailed
with joy, and inserted among the well-omened particulars of his
journal.

He came to see me within two days, and appeared in high spirits.
Santillane, cried he, I am come to receive your congratulations.
My fortune is made, my friend, though my play is marred. You know
what a mistake they made on the first and last night of "The
Count of Saldagna;" hissed instead of applauding! You would have
thought all the wild beasts of the forest had been let loose,
with their ears fortified against the softening power of poetry:
but the more they bellowed, the better I fared, and they have
roared me into a provision for life.

There was no knowing what to make of this incident in the drama
of our poet's adventures. What is all this, Fabricio? said I: how
can theatrical damnation have conjured up such Elysian ecstacy?
It is exactly so, answered he: I told you before that Don
Bertrand had thrown in some of the circumstances; and he was
fully convinced that there was no defect but in the taste of the
spectators. They might he very good judges; but, if they were, he
was no judge at all! Nunez! said he this morning;

Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni.

[Members of parliament, and the ladies, will probably expect a
translation of these hard words; but I refer the former to their
dictionaries, to which they bade a long farewell on leaving Eton
or Harrow; and the latter to an extended paraphrase of five acts
in the tragedy of Cato. Those of the softer sex who may think the
Stoic philosophy rude and uncouth, will feel their nerves vibrate
in unison with the love scenes. -- Translator.]

Your piece has been ill-received by the public; but against that
you may place my entire approbation; and thus you ought to set
your heart at rest. By way of something to balance the bad taste
of the age, I shall settle an annuity of two thousand crowns on
you: go to my solicitor, and let him draw the deed. We have been
about it: the treasurer has signed and sealed; my first quarter
is paid in advance . . . .

I wished Fabricio joy on the unhappy fate of "The Count of
Saldagna," and probably most authors would have envied his
failure more than all the success that ever succeeded. You are in
the right, continued he, to prefer my fortune to my fame. What a
lucky peal of disapprobation in double choir! If the public had
chosen to ring the changes on my merits rather than my misdeeds,
what would they have done for my pocket? A mere paltry nothing.
The common pay of the theatre might have kept me from starving;
but the wind of popular malice has blown me a comfortable
pension, engrossed on safe and legal parchment.



CH. XI. -- Santillane gives Scipio a situation: the latter sets
out for New Spain.

MY secretary could not look at the unexpected good luck of Nunez
the poet without envy: he talked of nothing else for a week. The
whims of that baggage, Fortune, said he, are most unaccountable:
she delights to turn her lottery wheel into the lap of a sorry 
author, while she deals out her disappointments like a step-
mother to the race of good ones. I should have no objection,
though, if she would throw me up a prize in one of her vertical
progresses. That is likely enough to happen, said I, and sooner
than you imagine. Here you are in her temple; for it is scarcely
too presumptuous to call the house of a prime minister the temple
of Fortune, where favours are conferred by wholesale, and
votaries grow fat on the spoils of her altar. That is very true,
sir, answered he; but we must have patience, and wait till the
happy moment comes. Take my advice while it is worth having,
Scipio, replied I, and make your mind easy: perhaps you are on
the eve of some good appointment. And so it turned out; for
within a few days an opportunity offered of employing him
advantageously in my lord duke's service; and I did not suffer
the happy moment to pass by.

I was engaged in chat one morning with Don Raymond Caporis, the
prime minister's steward, and our conversation turned on the
sources of his excellency's income. My lord, said he, enjoys the
commanderies of all the military orders, yielding a revenue of
forty thousand crowns a year; and he is only obliged to wear the
cross of Alcantara. Moreover, his three offices of great
chamberlain, master of the home, and high chancellor of the
Indies, bring him in nn income of two hundred thousand crowns;
and yet all this is nothing in comparison of the immense sums
which he receives through other transatlantic channels; but you
will be puzzled to guess how. When vessels clear out from Seville
or Lisbon for those parts of the world, he ships wine, oil,
grain, and other articles, the produce of his own estate; and his
consignments are duty free. With that perquisite in his pocket,
he sells his merchandise for four times its current price in
Spain, and then lays out the money in spices, colouring
materials, and other things which cost next to nothing in the new
world, and are sold very dear in Europe. Already has he realized
some millions by this traffic, without detracting from the dues
of his royal master.

You will easily account for it, continued he, that the people
concerned in carrying on this trade return with great fortunes in
their pockets; for my lord thinks it but reasonable that they
should divide their diligence between his business and their own.

That shrewd son of chance and opportunity, of whom we are
speaking, overheard our conversation, and could not help
interrupting Don Raymond to the following purport. Upon my word,
Signor Caporis, I should like to be one of those people; for I am
fond of travelling, and have long wished to see Mexico. Your
inclinations as a tourist shall soon be gratified, said the
steward, if Signor de Santillane will not stand in the way of
your wishes. However particular I may think it my duty to be
about the persons whom I send to the West Indies in that
capacity, and they are all of my appointment, you shall be placed
on the list at all adventures, if your master wishes it. You will
confer on me a particular favour, said I to Don Raymond; be so
good as to do it in kindness to me. Scipio is a young fellow much
in my good graces, very capable in business, and will be found
irreproachable in his conduct. In a word, I would as soon answer
for him as myself.

That being the case, replied Caporis, he has only to repair
immediately to Seville: the ships are to sail for South America
in a month. I shall give him a letter at his departure for a man
who will put him in the way of making a fortune, without the
slightest interference in his excellency's dues and profits,
which ought to be held sacred by him.

Scipio, delighted with his berth, was in haste to set out for
Seville with a thousand crowns with which I furnished him, to
make purchases of wine and oil in Andalusia, and enable him to
trade on his own bottom in the West Indies. And yet, overjoyed as
he was to make a voyage, and as he hoped his fortune therewithal,
he could not part from me without tears: and the separation
raised the waters even from my dry fountains.



CH. XII. -- Don Alphonso de Leyva comes to Madrid; the motive of
his journey a severe affliction to Gil Blas, and a cause of
rejoicing subsequent thereon.


No sooner had I parted with Scipio than one of the minister's
pages brought me a note conceived in the following terms: "If
Signor de Santillane will take the trouble of calling at the sign
of Saint Gabriel, in the Street of Toledo, he will there see a
friend who is not indifferent to him."

Who can this nameless friend possibly be? said I to myself. What
can be the meaning of all this mystery? Obviously to occasion me
the pleasure of a surprise. I attended the summons immediately,
and on my arrival at the place appointed, was not a little
astonished to find Don Alphonso de Leyva there. Is it possible!
exclaimed I: you here, my lord? Yes, my dear Gil Blas, answered
he with a close compression of my hand in his, it is Don Alphonso
himself. Well! but what brings you to Madrid? said I. You will be
not a little startled, rejoined he, and no less vexed at the
occasion of my journey. They have taken my government of Valencia
from me, and the prime minister has sent for me to give an
account of my conduct. For a whole quarter of an hour I was like
a man stupefied; then recovering the powers of speech: Of what,
said I, are you accused? I know nothing at all about it, answered
he; but my disgrace is probably owing to a visit paid about three
weeks ago to the Cardinal Duke of Lerma, who was banished about a
month since to his seat at Denia.

Yes, indeed! cried I in a pet, you may well attribute your
misfortune to that imprudent visit: there is no occasion to look
out for causes and effects else where; but give me leave to say
that you have not acted with your usual good sense, in claiming
acquaintance with that favourite out of favour. The leap is
taken, and the neck broken, said he; and I have nothing to do but
to make the best out of a bad bargain: I shall retire with my
family to our paternal estate at Leyva, where the remnant of my
days will glide away in peace and obscurity. What taunts and
teases me, is the requisition of appearing before a haughty
minister, who may receive me with all the insolence of office.
How humiliating to the pride of a Spaniard! And yet it is a
measure of necessity; but before the degrading ceremony took
place, I wanted to talk it over with you. Sir, said I, do not
announce your arrival to the minister, till I have ascertained
the nature of the reports to your discredit; for there are few
evils without a remedy. Whatever may be your alleged crimes, you
will give me leave, if you please, to act in the affair as
gratitude and friendship shall dictate. With this assurance, I
left him at his inn, and promised to let him hear from me soon.

As I had taken no active part in state affairs since the two
memorials, in which my eloquence was so signally displayed, I
went to look for Carnero, with a view to inquire whether Don
Alphonso's government was really taken from him. He answered in
the affirmative, but professed not to know the reason. Finding
how things stood, I determined to apply at head-quarters, and to
learn the grounds of grievance from his lordship's own mouth.

My spirits were really harassed; so that there was no need of
putting on the trappings and the suits of woe, to attract my lord 
duke's notice. What is the matter, Santillane? said he, as soon
as he saw me. I perceive a marked unhappiness on your
countenance, and tears just ready to trickle down your cheeks.
Has any one behaved ill to you? Tell me, and you shall have your
revenge. My lord, answered I, in a melancholy tone, even though
my grief would seek to hide itself, it must have vent: my despair
is past endurance. The report goes that Don Alphonso is no longer
Governor of Valencia; a severer stroke could not have been
inflicted on me. What say you, Gil Blas? replied the minister in
astonishment: what interest can you take in this Don Alphonso and
his government? On this question, I detailed at length my
obligations to the Lords of Leyva, and modestly stated my own
interference with the Duke of Lerma, to obtain the appointment
for my friend.

When his excellency had heard me through with the most polite and
kind attention, he spoke thus: Make yourself easy, Gil Blas.
Besides my entire ignorance of what you have just told me, I must
own that I considered Don Alphonso as the cardinal's creature.
Only put yourself in my place: was not the visit to his eminence
a most suspicious circumstance? Yet I am willing to believe that
owing his preferment to that minister, he might have remembered
him in his adversity from a motive of pure gratitude. I am sorry
for having displaced a man who owed his elevation to you; but if
I have pulled down your handiwork I can build it up again. I mean
to do still more than the Duke of Lerma for you. Your friend Don
Alphonso was only Governor of Valencia; I appoint him Viceroy of
Arragon: you may send him word so yourself; and order him hither
to take the oaths.
At these words, my feelings changed from extreme grief to an
excess of joy, which completely caricatured the mediocrity of
common sense, and made me utter an incoherent rhapsody of thanks:
but the want of method in the madness of my discourse was not
taken amiss; and on my hinting that Don Alphonso was already at
Madrid, he told me that I might present him this very day. I ran
to the sign of Saint Gabriel, and communicated my own raptures to
Don Caesar's son, by informing him of his new appointment. He
could not believe what I told him; but found it a hard matter to
persuade himself; that the prime minister, though likely enough
to be very well disposed towards me, should attend his friendship
so far as to dispose of viceroyalties at my instance. I carried
him with me to my lord duke, who received him very affably,
complimented him on his uniform good conduct in his government of
Valencia, and finished by saying that the king, considering him
as qualified for a higher station, had named him for the
viceroyalty of Arragon. Besides, added he, your family is of a
rank not to disparage the dignity of the office; so that the
Arragonese nobility will have no plea for excepting against the
choice of the court.

His excellency made no mention of me, and the public was kept in
the dark as to my share in the business; indeed, this prudent
silence was lucky both for Don Alphonso and the minister, since
the tongues of defamers would have been busy in taking to pieces
the pretensions of a viceroy who owed his preferment to my
patronage.

As soon as Don Caesar's son could speak with certainty of his new
honours, he sent off an express for Valencia with the information
to his father and Seraphina, who soon arrived in Madrid. Their
first object was to find me out, and ply me thick and threefold
with acknowledgments. What a proud and affecting sight for me, to
behold the three persons in the world nearest my heart, vying
with each other in their testimonies of affection and gratitude!
The pleasure my zeal seemed personally to give them, was equal to
the dignity conferred on their house by the post of viceroy. They
even talked with me on a footing of equality, and scarcely
remembered my original distance or servitude in the fervour of
their present feelings. But not to dwell on unnecessary topics,
Don Alphonso having taken the oaths and returned thanks, left
Madrid with his family, to take up his abode at Saragossa. He
made his public entry with appropriate magnificence; and the
Arragonese caused it to appear, by their cordial reception, that
I had a very pretty knack at picking out a viceroy.



CH. XIII. -- Gil Blas meets Don Gaston de Cogollos and Don Andrew
de Tordesillas at the drawing-room, and adjourns with them to a
more convenient place. The story of Don Gaston and Donna Helena
de Galisteo concluded. Santillane renders some service to
Tordesillas.


I WAS up to the hilts in joy at having so marvellously
metamorphosed an ex-governor into a viceroy; the Lords of Leyva
themselves were not primed and loaded so near to bursting. But
very soon I had another opportunity of employing my credit in the
beaten track of friendship; and there is the more occasion to
quote these instances, that my readers may clearly discern with
how different a man they are in company, from that graceless Gil
Blas who, under the former ministry, carried on a shameless
traffic in the honours and emoluments of the state.

One day I was waiting in the king's ante-chamber, in conversation 
with some noblemen, who, knowing me to stand well with the prime
minister, were not ashamed of taking me by the hand. In the crowd
was Don Gaston de Cogollos, whom I had left a prisoner in the
tower of Segovia. He was with Don Andrew de Tordesillas, the
warden. I readily quitted my company to go and renew my
acquaintance with my two friends. If they were astonished at the
sight of me, I was no less so to find them here. After mutual
greetings, Don Gaston said: Signor de Santillane, we have many
inquiries to make of each other, and this place affords little
opportunity for private intercourse; allow me to request your
company where we may open our hearts freely. I made no objection;
we pushed our way through the crowd, and left the palace. Don
Gaston's carriage was ready waiting in the street; we all three
got into it, and drove to the great market-place, where the bull-
fights are exhibited. There Cogollos lived in a very handsome
house.

Signor Gil Blas, said Don Andrew on our entrance, at your
departure from Segovia you seemed to have conceived a thorough
hatred against the court, and to have formed a settled purpose of
abandoning it for ever. Such was, in fact, my design, answered I;
nor were my sentiments at all changed during the lifetime of the
late king; but when the prince his son came to the throne, I had
a mind to see whether the new monarch would know me again. He did
so, and received me favourably, with a strong recommendation to
the prime minister, who admitted me to his friendship, and took
me more into his confidence than ever did the Duke of Lerma.
This, Signor Don Andrew, is my story. And now tell me whether you
still hold your office in the tower of Segovia. No, indeed!
answered he; my lord duke has removed me, and put another in my
room. He probably considered me as entirely devoted to his
predecessor. And I, said Don Gaston, was set at liberty for the
contrary reason; the prime minister was no sooner informed that
my imprisonment was by the Duke of Lerma's order, than he ordered
me to be released. The present business, Signor Gil Blas, is to
relate the subsequent particulars of my adventures.

The first thing I did, continued he, after thanking Don Andrew
for his kind attentions during my confinement, was to repair to
Madrid. I presented myself before the Count Duke of Olivarez, who
said: You need not be apprehensive of any blemish on your
character in consequence of your late misfortune; you are
honourably acquitted: nay, your innocence is so much the more
satisfactorily established, as the Marquis of Villareal, with
whom you were supposed to be implicated, was not guilty. Though a
Portuguese, and related to the Duke of Braganza, he is less in
his interests than in those of the king my master. That
connection, therefore, ought not to have been imputed to you as a
crime; but, to repair your wrongs, the king has given you a
lieutenant's commission in the Spanish guards. This I accepted,
begging it as a favour of his excellency to allow me, before I
joined my regiment, to go and see my aunt, Donna Eleonora de
Laxarilla, at Coria. The minister gave me leave of absence for a
month, and I departed with only one servant

We had got beyond Colmenar, and were threading a narrow pass
between two mountains, when we came within sight of a gentleman
defending himself bravely against three men, who all fell upon
him together. I did not hesitate about going to his aid; but
hastened forward and planted myself by his side. I remarked while
we were fighting, that our enemies were masked, and that we had
to do with expert swordsmen. But we triumphed over the united
advantages of their skill and disparity. I ran one of the three
through the body; he fell from his horse, and the two others
immediately betook themselves to flight. The victory indeed was
scarcely less fatal to us than to the wretch whom I had killed,
for we were both dangerously wounded. But conceive my surprise,
when I discovered the gentleman to be Combados, the husband of
Donna Helena. He was no less astonished at recognizing me as his
defender. Ah, Don Gaston! exclaimed he, was it you, then, who
came to my assistance? When you took my part so generously, you
little thought it was the person who had snatched your mistress
from you. I really did not know it, answered I; but though I had,
do you think I could have wavered about doing as I have done? Can
you entertain so ill an opinion of me, as to believe my soul so 
sordid? No, no, replied he; I think better of you; and should I
die of my wounds, it will be my prayer that yours may not disable
you from profiting by my death. Combados, said I, though I have
not yet forgotten Donna Helena, know that I do not pant after the
possession of her charms at the expense of your life; so far from
it, that I congratulate myself on having contributed to your
rescue from assassination, since by so doing I have performed an
acceptable service to your wife

While we were communing together, my servant dismounted; and
drawing near to the gentleman stretched at his length, took off
his mask, when Combados, with sensations of gratitude for his
deliverance, distinctly traced the features. It is Caprara,
exclaimed he; that treacherous cousin who, in mere disgust at
having missed a rich inheritance which he had unjustly disputed
with me, has long since cherished a murderous design against my
life, and fixed on this day to put it in execution; but heaven
has turned him over to its determined vengeance, and made him the
victim of his own attempt.

While this conversation was going on, our blood was flowing at
the same rate, and we were becoming more exhausted every minute.
Nevertheless, disabled as we were, we had strength enough to
reach the town of Villaréjo, which lies within gun-shot or two
from the field of battle. At the very first house of call we sent
for surgeons. The most expert came at our summons. He examined
our wounds, and reported them as dangerous. After taking off the
bandages and dressing them a second time, he pronounced those of
Don Blas to be mortal. Of mine he thought more favourably, and
the event corresponded with his prognostic.

Combados, finding himself consigned to the grave, thought only of
due preparation for a most serious event. He sent an express to
his wife, with an account for what had happened, particularizing
his present sad condition. Donna Helena soon arrived at
Villaréjo. Her mind was drawn different ways by two opposite
occasions of distress; the hazard of her husband's life, and the
fear of feeling the revival of a half-extinguished flame at the
sight of me. This sight occasioned her to experience a terrible
agitation. Madam, said Don Blas, when she appeared in his
presence, you are come just in time to receive my farewell. I am
at the point of death, and I consider my fate as a punishment
from heaven for having taken you from Don Gaston by a feint: far
from murmuring at it, I exhort you with my last breath to restore
to him a heart which I had stolen from him. Donna Helena answered
him only by her tears: and indeed it was the best answer she
could make; for she had neither forgotten her first love, nor the
artifices whereby she had been influenced to renounce her
plighted faith.

It happened as the surgeon had anticipated, that in less than
three days Combados died of his wounds, while mine on the
contrary wore the appearance of convalescence. The young widow,
whom no earthly considerations could detach from the care of
transporting her late husband's remains to Coria, that they might
be deposited with due honours in the family vault, left Villaréjo
on her return, after inquiring, merely as a matter of course, how
I was going on. As soon as I was well enough to be removed, I
bent my course to Coria, where my recovery was soon ascertained.
My aunt, Donna Eleonora, and Don George de Galisteo, were
determined that my marriage with Helena should take place
forthwith, lest some new caprice of fortune should part us once
more. The ceremony was privately performed, on account of the
late melancholy event, and within a few days I returned to Madrid
with Donna Helena. As my leave of absence had expired, I was
afraid lest the minister should have superseded me in my
lieutenancy; but he had not filled up the vacancy, and received
my apologies very graciously.

Thus am I, continued Cogollos, lieutenant of the Spanish guards,
and my situation is exactly to my mind. The circle of my friends
is respectable and pleasant, and I live at my ease among them.
Would I could say as much! exclaimed Don Andrew: but I am very
far from being satisfied with my lot; I have lost my appointment,
which was not without its advantages, and have no friends of
sufficient interest to procure me a better berth. Excuse me,
Signor Don Andrew, cried I, with a sort of upbraiding smile, you
have a friend in me who may chance to be better than no friend at
all. I have told you already that I am a greater favourite with
my lord duke than with the Duke of Lerma; and will you tell me to
my face that you have no interest at court? Have you not already
experienced the contrary? Recollect that, through the archbishop
of Grenada's powerful recommendation, I procured you a nomination
for Mexico, where you would have made your fortune, if love had
not stepped in and marred it at Alicant. My means are now more
extensive, since I have the ear of the prime minister. I give
myself up to you then, replied Tordesillas; but do not send me
into New Spain, though the first appointment in the colonies were
at your disposal.

Here we were interrupted by Donna Helena, who came into the room,
and improved even upon the visions of my fancy by the reality of
her charms. Cogollos introduced me as the companion who had
solaced the tedious hours of his imprisonment. Yes, madam, said I
to Donna Helena, my conversation did indeed soothe his sorrows,
for it turned on you. The compliment was not thrown away, and I
took my leave with repeated congratulations. With respect to
Tordesillas, I assured him that within a week he should know how
far my power as well as will extended.

Nor were these mere words. On the very next day, the opportunity
occurred. Santillane, said his excellency, the place of governor
in the royal prison of Valladolid is vacant: it is worth more
than three hundred pistoles a year; and is yours if you will
accept of it. Not if it were worth ten thousand ducats, answered
I, for it would carry me away from your lordship. But, replied
the minister, you may fill it by deputy, and only visit
occasionally. That is as it may be, rejoined I; but I shall only
accept it on condition of resigning in favour of Don Andrew de
Tordesillas, a brave and loyal gentleman; I should like to give
him this place in acknowledgment of his kindness to me in the
tower of Segovia.

This plea made the minister laugh heartily, and say: As far as I
see, Gil Blas, you mean to make yourself a general patron. Even
so be it, my friend; the vacancy is yours for Tordesillas; but
tell me unfeignedly what fellow-feeling you have in the business,
for you are not such a fool as to throw away your interest for
nothing. My lord, answered I, Don Andrew charged me nothing for
all his acts of friendship, and should not a man repay his
obligations? You are become highly moral and self-mortified,
replied his excellency; rather more so than under the last
administration. Precisely so, rejoined I; then evil communication
corrupted my principles; bargain and sale were the order of the
day, and I conformed to the established practice: now, all
preferment is allotted on the footing of a meritorious free gift,
and my integrity shall not be the last to fall in with the
fashion.



CH. XIV. -- Santillane's visit to the poet Nunez, the company and
conversation.


ONE day, after dinner, a fancy seized me to go and see the poet
of the Asturias, feeling a sort of curiosity to know on what
floor he lodged. I repaired to the house of Signor Don Bertrand
Gomex Del Ribero, and asked for Nunez. He does not live here now,
said the porter, but over the way, in apartments at the back of
the house. I went thither, and crossing a small court, entered an
unfurnished parlour, where my friend Fabricio was sitting at
table, doing the honours to five or six guests from the hamlet
and liberty of Parnassus.

They were at the latter end of a feast, and of course at the
beginning of an affray; but as soon as they perceived me, a dead
silence succeeded to their obstreperous argumentation. Nunez rose
from his seat with much pomp and circumstance of politeness to
receive me, saying: Gentlemen, Signor de Santillane! He does me
the honour to visit me under this humble roof; as the favourite
of the prime minister, you will all join with me in tendering
your humble services. At this introduction, the worshipful
company got up and made their best bows; for my rank could not
fail of procuring me respect from the manufacturers of
dedications. Though I was neither hungry nor thirsty, it was
impossible not to sit down and drink a toast in such society.

My presence appearing to be a restraint, Gentlemen, said I, it
should seem that I have interrupted your conversation: resume it,
or you drive me away. My learned friends, said Fabricio, were
discussing the "Iphigenia" of Euripides. The bachelor, Melchior
de Villégas, a clever man of the first rank in the republic of
letters, resumed the topic by asking Don Jacinto de Romerate
which was the point of interest in that tragedy. Don Jacinto
ascribed it to the imminent danger of Iphigenia. The bachelor
contended, offering to prove his proposition by all the evidence
admissible at the bar of logic or criticism, that the danger of a
trumpery girl had nothing to do with the real sympathy of that
affecting piece. What has to do with it then? bawled the old
licentiate Gabriel of Leon indignantly. It turns with the wind,
replied the bachelor.

The whole company burst into a shout of laughter at this
assertion, which they were far from considering as serious; and I
myself thought that Melchior had only launched it by way of
adding the zest of wit to the severity of critical discussion.
But I was out in my calculation respecting the character of that
eminent scholar: he had not a grain of sprightliness or
pleasantry in his whole composition. Laugh as you please,
gentlemen, replied he, very coolly; I maintain that there is no
circumstance but the wind, unless it be the weathercock, to
interest, to strike, to rouse the passions of the spectator.
Figure to yourselves a multitudinous army, assembled for the
purpose of laying siege to Troy; take into account the eager
haste of the officers and common men to carry their enterprise
into execution, that they may return with their best legs
foremost into Greece, where they have left everything most dear
to them, their household gods, their wives and their children:
all this while a mischievous wind from the wrong quarter keeps
them port-bound at Aulis, and, as it were, drives a nail into the
very head of the expedition; so that till better weather, it was
impossible to go and lay siege to Priam's town. Wind and weather
therefore make up the interest of this tragedy. My good wishes
are with the Greeks: my whole faculties are wrapped up in the
success of their design; the sailing of their fleet is with me
the only hinge of the fable, and I look at the danger of
Iphigenia with somewhat of a self-interested complacency, because
by her death the winding up of the story into a brisk and
favourable gale was likely to be accelerated,

As soon as Villégas had finished his criticism, the laugh burst
out more than ever, at his expense. Nunez was sly enough to side
with him, that a fairer scope and broader mark might be presented
to the shafts of malicious wit which were let fly from all the
quarters in the shipman's card, at this poster of the sea and
land. But the bachelor, eyeing them all with sublime indifference
and supreme contempt, gave them to understand how low in the list
of the ignorant and vulgar they ranked in his estimation. Every
moment did I expect to see these vapouring spirits kindle into a
blaze, and wage war against the hairy honours of each other's
brainless skulls: but the joke was not carried to that length;
they confined their hostilities to opprobrious epithets, and took
their leave when they had eaten and drunk as much as they could
get.

After their departure, I asked Fabricio why he had separated
himself from his treasurer, and whether they had quarrelled.
Quarrelled! answered he: Heaven defend me from such a misfortune!
I am on better terms than ever with Signor Don Bertrand, who gave
his consent to my living apart from him: here therefore I receive
my friends, and take my pleasure with them unmolested. You know
very well that I am not of a temper to lay up treasures for those
who are to come after me; and as it happens luckily, I am now in
circumstances to give my little classical entertainments every
day. I am delighted at it, my dear Nunez, replied I, and once
more wish you joy on the success of your last tragedy: the great
Lope, by his eight hundred dramatic pieces, never made a quarter
of the money which you have got by the damnation of your "Count
de Saldagna."



BOOK THE TWELFTH.


CH I. -- Gil Blas sent to Toledo by the minister. The purpose of
his journey and its success.

For nearly a month his excellency had been saying to me every
day: Santillane, the time is approaching, when I shall call your
choicest powers of address into action; but the time that was
coming never came. It is a long lane, however, where there is no
turning; and his excellency at length spoke to me nearly as
follows: They say that there is, in the company of comedians at
Toledo, a young actress of much note for her personal and 
professional fascinations; it is affirmed that she dances and
sings like all the muses and graces put together, and that the
whole theatre rings with applause at her performance: to these
perfections is added matchless and irresistible beauty. Such a
star should only shine within the circle of a court. The king has
a taste for the stage, for music, and for dancing: nor must he be
debarred from the pleasure of seeing and hearing such a prodigy.
I have determined on sending you to Toledo, that you may judge
for yourself whether she really is so extraordinary an actress:
on your feeling of her merit my measures shall be taken; for I
have unlimited confidence in your discernment.

I undertook to bring his lordship a good account of this
business, and made my arrangements for setting out with one
servant, but not in the minister's livery, by way of conducting
matters more warily; and that precaution relished well with his
excellency. On my arrival at Toledo, I had scarcely alighted at
the inn, when the landlord, taking me for some country gentleman,
said: Please your honour, you are probably come to be present at
the august ceremony of an Auto da Fé to-morrow. I answered in the
affirmative, the more completely to mislead him, and keep my own
counsel. You will see, replied he, one of the prettiest
processions you ever saw in your life: there are said to be more
than a hundred prisoners, and ten of them are to be roasted.

In good truth, next morning, before sun-rise, I heard all the
bells in the town peal merrily; and the design of their bob-
majors was to acquaint the people that the pastime was about to
begin. Curious to see what sort of a recreation it was, I dressed
in a hurry, and posted to the scene of action. All about that
quarter, and along the streets where the procession was to pass,
were scaffolds, on one of which I purchased a standing. The
Dominicans walked first, preceded by the banner of the
Inquisition. These Christian fathers were immediately followed by
the hapless victims of the holy office, selected for this day's
burnt-offering. These devoted wretches walked one by one with
their head and feet bare, each of them with a taper in his hand,
and a fiery, not baptismal godfather by his side. Some had large
yellow scapularies, worked with crosses of St Andrew, in red;
others wore sugar-loaf caps of paper, illustrated with flames,
and diabolical figures of all sorts by way of emblem.

As I looked narrowly at these objects of religious gaze, with a
compassion in my heart which might have been construed criminal,
had it run over from my eyes, I fancied that the reverend Father
Hilary and his companion brother Ambrose were among those who
figured in the sugar-loaf caps. They passed too near for me to be
deceived. What do I see? thought I inwardly: heaven, wearied out
with the wicked lives of these two scoundrels, has given them up
to the justice of the Inquisition! My whole frame trembled at the
thought, and my spirits were scarcely equal to support me from
fainting. My connection with these knaves, the adventure at
Xelva, all our pranks in partnership rushed upon my memory, and I
did not know how sufficiently to thank God for having preserved
me from St Andrew's crosses and the painted devils on the paper
caps.

When the ceremony was over, I returned to the inn, with my heart
sickening at the dreadful sight; but painful impressions soon
wear away, and I thought only of my commission and its due
accomplishment. I waited with impatience for play-time, as the
moment and scene of my commencing operations. On the opening of
the doors I repaired to the theatre, and took my seat next to a
knight of Alcantara. We soon got into chat. Sir, said I, the
players here have been represented to me in very favourable
terms: may I give credit to general report? The company is not
contemptible, replied the knight: they have some first-rate
performers; among the rest, the peerless Lucretia, an actress of
fourteen, who will astonish you: and she plays one of her best
parts to-night.

On the drawing up of the curtain, two actresses came on, with
every advantage of dress and stage effect: but neither of them
could possibly be the object of my search. At length Lucretia
made her appearance at the back scene, and walked forwards amidst
a thunder of applause. Ah! this is she, indeed! thought I! and a
delicate specimen of loveliness, as I am a sinner! In her very
first speech she proved herself a child of nature, with energy
and conception far above her years; and the approbation of a
provincial audience was confirmed by my metropolitan judgment.
The knight was happy to find I liked her, and assured me that if
I had heard her sing, my ears might have rejoiced to the sorrow
of my heart. Her dancing, too, he represented as not less
formidable to the free will of lordly man. I inquired what youth,
blessed as the immortal gods, had the exquisite happiness of
bringing himself to beggary for so sweet a girl. She is under no
avowed protection, said he; and scandal has not coupled her name
with private licence; but Lucretia must take care of herself, for
she is under the wing of her aunt Estella; and there is not an
actress in the company so warmly fledged for hatching the tender
passions into life.

At the name of Estella, I inquired with some eagerness who she
was. One of our best performers, said my informant. She does not
play to-night, to our great loss, for her cast is that of
abigails, and she humours them to perfection. A little too broad,
perhaps, but that is a fault on the right side. From the features
of the description, there could be no doubt but this must be
Laura; that lady so notorious in these memoirs, whom I left at
Grenada.

To make assurance doubly sure, I went behind the scenes after the
play. There she was, in the green-room, flirting with some men of
fashion, who probably endured the aunt for the sake of the niece.
I came up to pay my devotions; but whim, or perhaps revenge for
my cutting and running from Grenada, determined her to put on the
stranger, and receive my compliments with so discouraging a
coldness, as to throw me into some little confusion. Instead of
laughing it off, I was fool enough to be angry, and withdrew in a
choleric determination to return next day. Laura shall smart for
this! said I; her niece shall not appear at court; I will tell
the minister that she dances like a she bear, has formed her
bravura between the scream of a pea-hen and the cackle of a
goose, acts like a puppet, and comprehends like an idiot.

Such was my scheme of revenge, but it proved abortive. Just as I
was going out of town, a footboy brought me the following note:
"Forget and forgive, and follow the bearer." I obeyed, and found
Laura at her dressing-table in very elegant apartments near the
theatre.

She rose to welcome me, saying: Signor Gil Blas, you have every
reason to be offended at your reception behind the scenes, which
was out of character between such old friends, but I really was
most abominably disconcerted. Just as you came up, one of our
gentlemen had brought me some scandalous stories about my niece,
whose honour has always been dearer to me than my own. On coming
to myself, I immediately sent my servant to find you out, with
the intention of making you amends to-day. You have done so
already, my dear Laura, said I, let us therefore talk over old
times. You may remember that I left you in a very ticklish
predicament, when conscience and the fear of punishment drove me
so precipitately from Grenada. How did you get off with your
Portuguese lover? Easily enough, answered Laura: do not you know
that in those cases men are mere fools, and acquit us women
without even calling for our defence?

I faced the Marquis of Marialva out, that you were my very
brother, and drew upon my impudence for the support of my credit.
Do you not see, said I to my Portuguese dupe, that this is all
the contrivance of jealousy and rage? My rival, Narcissa,
infuriated at my possession of a heart which she had vainly
attempted to gain, has bribed the candle-snuffer to assert that
he has seen me as Arsenia's waiting-woman at Madrid. It is an
abominable falsehood; the widow of Don Antonio Coello has always
been too high in her notions, to be the hanger-on of a theatrical
mistress. Besides, what completely disproves the whole
allegation, is my brother's precipitate retreat: if he were here,
it would be a subject of evidence; but Narcissa must have devised
some stratagem to get him out of the way.

These reasons, continued Laura, were not the most convincing in
the world, but they did very well for the marquis; and that good,
easy nobleman continued his confidence till his return to
Portugal. This happened soon after your departure; and Zapata's
wife had the pleasure of seeing me lose what she could not win.
After this, I stayed some years longer at Grenada, till the
company was broken up in consequence of some squabbles, which
will take place in mimic as well as in real life: some went to
Seville, others to Cordova; and I came to Toledo, where I have
been for these ten years with my niece Lucretia, whose
performance you must have seen last night

This was too much to be taken gravely. Laura inquired why I
laughed. Can that be a question? said I. You have neither brother
nor sister, one or other of which is a necessary ingredient in an
aunt. Besides, when I calculate in my mind the lapse of time
since our last separation, and compare that period with the age
of your niece, it is more than possible that your relationship
may be in a nearer degree of kin.

I understand you, replied Don Antonio's widow, with something
like a moral tinge of red in her cheek; you are an accurate
chronologist! There is no garbling facts in defiance of your
memory. Well, then! Lucretia is my daughter by the Marquis of
Marialva: it was extremely wrong, but I cannot conceal it from
you. The confession must indeed be a shock to your modesty, said
I, after telling me yourself what pranks you played with the
hospital steward at Zamora. I must tell you moreover that
Lucretia is an article of so superior a quality as to render you
a public benefactor by having thrown her into the market. It were
to be wished that the stolen embraces of all your fraternity
might be blessed with fruitfulness, if they could secure to
themselves a patent for breeding after your sample.

Should any sarcastic reader, comparing this passage with some
circumstances related while I was the marquis's secretary,
suspect me of being entitled to dispute the honours of paternity
with that nobleman, I blush to say, that my claims are entirely
out of the question.

I laid open my principal adventures to Laura in my turn, as well
as the present state of my affairs. She listened with interest,
and said: Friend Santillane, you seem to play a principal part on
the stage of the world, and I congratulate you most heartily.
Should Lucretia be engaged at Madrid, I flatter myself she will
find a powerful protector in Signor de Santillane. Doubt it not,
answered I: your daughter may have her engagement whenever you
please; I can promise you that, without presuming too much on my
interest. I take you at your word, replied Laura, and would set
out to-morrow, were I not under articles to this company. An
order from court will cut the knot of any articles, rejoined I;
and that I take upon myself: you shall have it within a week. It
is an act of chivalry to rescue Lucretia from Toledo: such a
pretty little actress belongs to the royal court, as parcel of
the manor.

Lucretia came into the room just as I was talking of her. The
goddess Hebe herself never looked better in her best days: it was
nature in the bud, exhaling the sweets of her earliest bloom, but
promising a more luxuriant waste of treasure. She was just up;
and her natural beauty, without the aid of art, communicated the
most rapturous sensations. Come, niece; said her mother, thank
the gentleman for all his kindness to us: he is an old friend of
mine, who ranks high at court, and undertakes to get us both an
engagement at the theatre royal. The little girl seemed to be
much pleased, and made me a low curtsey, saying with an
enchanting smile: I most humbly thank you for your obliging
intention; but, by taking me from a partial audience, are you
certain that I shall not be looked down upon by that of Madrid? I
may but lose by the exchange. I remember hearing my aunt say,
that she has seen players most favourably received in one town,
and hissed off the stage in another; this absolutely frightens
me; beware therefore of exposing me to the derision of the court,
and yourself to its reproaches. Lovely Lucretia, answered I, we
have neither of us anything to fear; I am rather apprehensive
lest, by the havoc you will make among hearts, you should excite
rivalships and kindle discord among the courtiers. My niece's
fears, said Laura, are better founded than yours; but I hope they
will both prove vain: however feeble may be Lucretia's charms of
person, her talents as an actress are at least above mediocrity.

We continued the conversation for some time: and I could gather,
from Lucretia's share in it, that she was a girl of superior
talents. On taking leave, I assured them that they should
immediately receive a summons to Madrid.



CH. II. -- Santillane makes his report to the minister, who
commissions him to send for Lucretia. The first appearance of
that actress before the court.


ON my return, I found my lord duke impatient to be informed of my
success. Have you seen her? said he: is she worth transplanting?
My lord, answered I, fame, which generally runs beyond all
discretion in its report of beauty, has erred on the side of
parsimony in its estimate of the matchless young Lucretia; she is
all that youthful poets fancy when they feign, for personal
attractions, and all that veteran managers seek when they sign
articles, in scenic qualifications.

Is it possible? exclaimed the minister with a satisfaction which
involuntarily peeped out at his eyes, and made me think he had
some selfish hankerings after the article of my marketing at
Toledo; is it possible? and is she really so charming a creature?
When you see her, replied I, you will own that any verbal picture
of her perfections must be altogether inadequate to their due
description. His excellency then requiring a minute account of my
journey, I gave him all the particulars, not excepting Laura's
story, and Lucretia's parentage. His lordship was delighted at
the latter circumstance, and enjoined me, with a cordial
compliment on my skill in such delicate negotiations, to finish
as auspiciously as I had begun my undertaking.

I went to look for Carnero, and told him that it was his
excellency's pleasure he should make out an order for the
admission of Estella and Lucretia, actresses from the Toledo
theatre, into his majesty's company. Say you so, Signor de
Santillane? answered Carnero with a sarcastic leer; you shall not
be kept long in suspense, since you take so marked an interest in
the fortunes of these two ladies. He expedited the order in my
presence, and within a week the mother and daughter sent me
notice of their arrival. I immediately hastened to their lodging
near the theatre, and after an interchange of thanks on their
part, and assurances of continued support on mine, left them with
my best wishes for a bnlliant career of success.

Their names were announced in the bills as two new actresses,
engaged by the special mandate of the court. They made their
first appearance in a play, which they had been accustomed to
perform in at Toledo with loud and unanimous applause.

Novelty is the very life and soul of theatrical entertainments.
The house was uncommonly crowded, and I of course was among the
audience. I was rather frightened before the curtain drew up.
Prejudiced as I was in favour of the candidates, my alarm was in
proportion to my interest. But when once they were fairly on the
boards, the din of welcome quieted all my apprehensions. Estella
was considered as a first-rate actress in comic parts, and
Lucretia as a female Roscius in heroines and love-sick damsels.
But the love which she feigned herself, she really kindled in the
hearts of the spectators. Some admired the beauty of her eyes,
others were touched with the plaintive sweetness of her voice,
and all, bowing to the triumph of youth, vivacity, and elegance,
went away in raptures with her person.

My lord duke, who took an uncommon interest in this theatrical
event, was at the play that evening. I saw him leave his box at
the end of the piece, with evident approbation of our new
performers. Curious to know whether they equalled his
expectations, I followed him home, and into his closet, saying:
Well, my lord, is your excellency well pleased with little
Marialva? My excellency, answered he with a sly smile, must be
very difficult to be pleased, not to confirm the public voice:
yes, indeed, my good friend, I am enraptured with your Lucretia,
and firmly believe that the king will not see her without 
emotion.



CH. III. -- Lucretia's popularity; her appearance before the
king; his passion, and its consequences.


GREAT was the noise about the court on this double acquisition to
the theatre; it became the topic of conversation next day at the
king's levee. The young Lucretia was most in the mouths of the
nobility, who described her so feelingly, that his majesty could
not but imbibe the impression, though he was too politic to
express his interest either in words or by looks.

To make amends for that restraint, he questioned the minister as
soon as he was alone with him, who stated the success of a young
actress from Toledo on the evening before. Her name, added he, is
Lucretia; and it is really a pity that ladies of her profession
should ever have been christened by any less chaste appellative.
She is an acquaintance of Santillane, who spoke so highly of her,
that I thought it right to engage her for your majesty's company.
The king smiled at the mention of my name, recollecting, perhaps,
through what channel he became acquainted with Catalina, and
foreboding a like assistance on the present occasion. Count, said
he to the minister, I mean to see this Lucretia act to-morrow,
and will thank you to let her know it.

I was of course sent with this intelligence to the two actresses.
Great news! said I to Laura, whom I saw first: you will have the
sovereign of the Spanish monarchy among your audience to-morrow,
as the minister has desired me to inform you. I cannot doubt but
you will both of you do your best to prove yourselves worthy of a
royal command; but I would advise you to choose a piece with
music and dancing, that all Lucretia's accomplishments may be
displayed at one view. We will take your counsel, answered Laura,
and it shall not be our faults if his majesty is disappointed.
That can scarcely happen, said I, seeing Lucretia come into the
room in an undress, which shewed her person to more advantage
than all the wardrobe of the theatre: he will be the more
delighted with your lovely niece, because dancing and music are
his principal pleasures: he may even be tempted to throw her the
handkerchief. I do not at all wish, replied Laura, that he should
be that way inclined; all-powerful monarch as he is, he might not
find the accomplishment of his desires so easy. Lucretia, though
brought up behind the scenes, is not without virtuous principles;
whatever pleasure she may take in applause and professional
reputation, she had much rather preserve the character of a good
girl, than establish that of a great actress.

Aunt, said little Marialva, joining in the conversation, why
conjure up monsters only to lay them again? I shall never be at a
loss to repel the king's advances, because his taste is too
refined to stoop so low. But, charming Lucretia, said I, if such
a thing should happen, would you be cruel enough to let him
languish like a common lover? Why not? answered she. Setting
virtue aside, my vanity would he more flattered by my own
resistance than by the tribute of his affection. I was not a
little surprised to hear a pupil of Laura's school talk so
properly, and to find that with so free an education she imbibed
such unusual principles of morality.

The king, impatient to see Lucretia, went to the play next
evening. The piece was got up with music and dancing, to shew our
young actress off to the best advantage. My eyes were fixed on
his majesty; but he completely eluded my penetration by an 
obstinate gravity. On the following day, the minister said:
Santillane, I have just been with the king, who has been talking
about Lucretia, with so much animation, that I doubt not but he
is smitten: and, as I told him that you had sent for her from
Toledo, he expressed a wish to confer with you in private on the
subject: orders are given for your admittance; run, and bring me
back an account of what passes.

I flew to the palace, and found the king alone. He was walking up
and down, in much apparent perplexity. He put several questions
to me about Lucretia, made me relate her history, and then asked
whether the little jade had not been tampering with chastity
already. I boldly assured him to the contrary, though such
pledges were somewhat hazardous in general; but mine was taken,
and gave the prince much pleasure. If so, replied he, I select
you for my agent with Lucretia; let her become acquainted with
her triumph from your lips. He then put a box of jewels into my
hand, worth fifty thousand crowns, with a message begging her
acceptance of them, and promising more substantial proofs of his
affection.

Before I went on my errand, I reported progress to my lord duke.
That minister, I thought, would be more vexed than rejoiced at
it; supposing that he had his own views of gallantry towards
Lucretia, and would learn with regret the rivalship of his
master; but I was mistaken. Far from appearing chagrined, his joy
was so excessive, that it would ooze out at his tongue, in words
which were not quite lost on the hearer. "Indeed, friend Philip!
then I have you in my clutches: while your pleasures lead you,
your business must be left to me!" This side speech explained to
me the plot; an amorous prince, and a long-headed minister! My
orders were to execute my commission as speedily as possible,
with the assurance that the first lord in the land would be proud
to stand in my shoes. Besides, there was no pimp of rank, as in
the former case, to seize the profit and leave the infamy with
me; the honour and emolument were now exclusively my own.

Thus did his excellency relish the ingredients of pandarism to my
palate; and I tasted them with the greediness, but not without
the qualms of an epicure; for since my imprisonment I had become
regenerate, and did not take pride in dirty work, because my
employer washed his hands in perfumed water. But though
conscience was awake, interest was not asleep. I was no longer a
villain for the fun of it; but my compliance would confirm my
footing with the minister, and him it was my duty, at all events,
to please.

My first appeal was to Laura in private. I opened the negotiation
delicately, and presented my credentials in the form of the
jewel-box. The lady was thrown off her guard by the display.
Signor Gil Blas, cried she, you are one of my oldest friends, and
I must not play the hypocrite: strait-laced morals are
inconsistent with the discipline of my sect. Nothing can be more
delightful to me than a conquest, which throws such a game into
our hands. But, between ourselves, I am afraid Lucretia is not so
enlightened as we are; though a daughter of Thalia, she has taken
the better-behaved goddesses for her school-mistresses, and given 
a rebuff to two young noblemen of amiable manners and large
fortunes. They were not kings, you will say, and truly we may
hope that Lucretia's virtue will be too undisciplined to stand a
royal siege; but you must remember the event is hazardous, and I
shall not interpose my authority to compel her. If, far from
thinking herself honoured by the fleeting passion of the king,
she should revolt from his advances with disdain, let not our
illustrious sovereign be offended at her reserve. But do you come
back hither to-morrow, and carry back either the jewels, or a
return of affection.

I had no doubt but Laura would tutor Lucretia in the school of
time-serving morality, and depended much on her instruction. It
was therefore no small surprise to find that Laura worked as much
against wind and tide to launch her daughter into the trade-wind
of evil, as other maternal pilots to set the sails of theirs in
the contrary monsoon of good; and what is still more
unaccountable, Lucretia, after tasting of royal delights, was so
completely surfeited with the banquet as to throw herself at once
into the arms of the church, where she professed, fell sick, and
died of grief. Laura, disconsolate for the loss of her daughter,
and the part she herself had acted in the tragedy, retired into a
convent of female penitents, and did penance for the unhallowed
pleasures of her former life. The king was affected by his sudden
loss, but soon found comfort in some other pursuit. The premier
talked little on the subject, but thought so much the more, as
the reader will easily believe.



CH. IV. -- Santillane in a new office.


MY feelings were all alive to Lucretia's ill fate, and my own
infamy in having contributed to it. The royal wants of the lover
were no excuse for my taking the post of cheapener, and I
determined to resign the staff of office in that department,
entreating the minister to employ me in some other. He was
charmed with my nice sense of honour, and promised to comply with
my scruples, laying open his inmost heart in the following
speech.

Some years before I was in office, chance threw me across a lady
of such shape and beauty as induced me to trace her home. I
learned that she was a Genoese, by name Donna Margarita Spinola,
supporting herself at Madrid on the income arising from her
beauty. It was reported that Don Francisco de Valéasar, an
officer about the court, a rich man, an old man, and a married
man, laid out his money very freely on this hazardous
speculation. These rumours ought to have deterred me; but they
only whetted my desires to share with Valéasar. To gain my end, I
had recourse to a female broker of tenderness, who adjusted the
terms of a private interview with the Genoese; and the price
current being settled, the traffic was frequently repeated; it
was an open market for my rival and me, or possibly for many
other bidders.

Let that be as it may, a choice boy was in the fulness of time
produced to the club, and the mother complimented every member
individually in private with the credit: but we were each of us
too modest to acknowledge a bantling which had so probable a
claim upon a better father; so that the Genoese was compelled to
maintain him on the profits of her profession: this she did for
eighteen years, and dying at the end of that period, has left her
son without a farthing, and what is worse, without an idea or an
accomplishment.

Such, continued his lordship, is the confidence I meant to repose
in you, and I shall now lay open the great design I have formed,
to draw this unfortunate child from his obscurity, reverse the
colour of his fate, raise him to the highest honours, and
acknowledge him as my son.

At so extravagant a project it was impossible not to be open-
mouthed. What, sir, exclaimed I, can your excellency have adopted
so strange a resolution! Excuse my freedom; but my zeal cannot
restrain itself. You will be of my mind, replied he with
eagerness, when I shall have explained to you my motives. I have
no mind that my estates should descend in the collateral line.
You will tell me, that I am not so old as to despair of having
children by Madame d'Olivarez. But every one is best judge of his
own condition: know therefore that there is not a receipt in the
whole extent of chemistry which I have not tried, but without
effect, to appear once again in the character of a father.
Wherefore, since fortune, stepping in to cover the defects of
nature, presents me with a child whose parent after all I may
actually be, he is mine by adoption; that is a settled point.

When I found the minister determined, I no longer argued against
his resolution, as knowing him to be a man who would rather do a
foolish act of his own, than adopt a wise suggestion of another.
It only remains now, added he, to educate Don Henry Philip de
Guzman; for by that name I intend him to be known in the world,
till the time arrives when he may aspire to higher dignities.
You, my dear Santillane, I have chosen to superintend his
conduct: I have full confidence in your talents and friendship,
to regulate his household, direct his studies, and make him an
accomplished gentleman. I would willingly have declined the
office, as never having exercised the craft of a pedagogue, which
required much more genius and solidity than mine; but he shut my
mouth by saying it was his absolute determination that I should
be tutor to this adopted son, whom he designed for the first
offices of the monarchy. As a bribe for my compliance, his
lordship increased my little income with a pension of a thousand
crowns on the commandery of Mambra.



CH. V. -- The son of the Genoese is acknowledged by a legal
instrument, and named Don Henry Philip de Guzman. Santillane
establishes his household, and arranges the course of his
studies.


THE act of adoption was soon legalized with the king's consent
and good pleasure. Don Henry Philip de Guzman, as this descendant
from a committee of fathers was named, became acknowledged
successor to the earldom of Olivarez and the duchy of San Lucar.
The minister, to give the act all possible publicity,
communicated it through Carnero to the ambassadors and grandees
of Spain, who were somewhat startled. The jokers of Madrid were
not insensible to the ridicule, and the satirical poets made
their harvest of so fine a subject for their pen.

I asked my lord duke where my pupil was. Here in town, answered
he, with an aunt from whom I shall remove him as soon as you have
got a house ready. This I did immediately, and furnished it
magnificently. When my establishment was complete in servants and
officers, his excellency sent for this equivocal production, this
spurious offset from the renowned stock of the Guzmans. The lad
was tall and personable. Don Henry, said his lordship, pointing
to me, this gentleman is to be your tutor and introduce you into
the world; he has my entire confidence, and an unlimited
authority over you. After much good advice, and many compliments
to me, the minister retired, and I took Don Henry home.

As soon as we got thither, I introduced him to his household, and
explained the nature of each individual's employment. He did not
seem at all disconcerted at the change of circumstances, but
received the obeisances of his dependants as if he had been a
lord by nature, and not by chance. He was not without mother-wit,
but ignorant in a deplorable degree; he could scarcely read and
write. I gave him masters for the Latin grammar, geography,
history, and fencing. A dancing-master of course was not
forgotten; but in an affair of the first consequence, selection
was difficult, for there were more eminent professors of that art
in Madrid than of all the languages and sciences put together.

While I was pondering on this difficulty, a man gaudily dressed
came into the court-yard and inquired for me. I went down,
supposing him to be at least a knight of some military or
privileged order. Signor de Santillane, said he, with a profusion
of bows which anticipated his line in life, I am come to offer
you my services as Don Henry's governor. My name is Martin
Ligero, and I have, thank heaven, some reputation in the world. I
have no occasion to canvass for scholars; that is all very well
for petty dancing-masters! My custom is to wait till I am sent
for; but being a sort of appendage to the house of Guzman, and
having taught its various branches for a long period, I thought
it a point of respect to wait on you first. I perceive, answered
I, that you are just the man we want What are your terms? Four
double pistoles a month, answered he, and I give but two lessons
a week. Four doubloons a month! cried I, that is an exorbitant
price. Exorbitant! rejoined he with astonishment; why, it is not
more than eight times as much as you would give to a mathematical
master or a Greek professor.

There was no resisting so ludicrous a comparison of merit; I
laughed out right, and asked Signor Ligero whether he really
thought his talents worth more than those of the first
proficients in learning and science. Most assuredly, said he; at
least, if you measure our pretensions by their respective
utility. What sort of machines may those be which are fashioned
under their hands? Jointless puppets, unlicked cubs, open-mouthed
and impenetrable shell-fish; but our lessons supple and render
pliant the intractable stiffness of their component parts, and
bring them insensibly into shape: in short, we communicate to
them a graceful motion, a polite address, the carriage of good
company, and the outward marks of elevated rank.

I could not but give way to such cogent arguments in favour of
the dancing-master's occupation, and engaged him about Dun
Henry's person without haggling as to terms, since those
specified were only at the rate established by the leading
professors of the art.



CH. VI. -- Scipio's return from New Spain. Gil Blas places him
about Don Henry's person. That young nobleman's course of study.
His career of honour, and his father's matrimonial speculation on
his behalf. A patent of nobility conferred on Gil Blas against
his will.


I HAD not yet half arranged Don Henry's household, when Scipio
returned from Mexico. He brought with him three thousand ducats
in cash, and merchandise to double the amount. I wish you joy,
said I; the foundation of your fortune is laid; and if you prefer
a snug berth at Madrid to the risk of going back, you have only
to tell me so. There is no question about that, said the son of
Coselina: a genteel situation at home is far preferable to a
second voyage.

After relating the birth and adventures of the little adopted
Guzman, and my own appointment as tutor, I offered him the
situation of upper servant to this babe of chance: Scipio, who
could have devised nothing better for himself, readily accepted
the office, and within the small space of three or four days got
the length of his new master's foot.

I had taken it for granted that that the verb-grinders and
concord-manufacturers to whom I had given the plant of this
Genoese bastard would lose stock and block, under the idea that
he was of an intractable and profitless age; but my forebodings
were completely reversed. He not only comprehended, but easily
retained the lessons of his masters, and they were very well
satisfied with him. I was in an enormous hurry to greet the ears
of my lord duke with this intelligence, and he received, it with
abundant joy. Santillane, exclaimed he with delight, you give me
new life by the assurance of Don Henry's capacity and
application: it runs in the blood of the Guzmans; and I am the
more confirmed in his being unquestionably my own, because I am
just as fond of him as if Madame d' Olivarez herself had lain in
of the brat in due form under this very roof. The voice of
nature, you perceive, will make itself heard. I thought it
unnecessary to give his lordship any opinion on that subject; but
with a delicate deference to his credulity, left him to enjoy his
fancied paternity in peace, whether well or ill founded.

Though all the Guzmans held this clod of newly turned up nobility
in utter scorn, they were politic enough to smooth over the
corrugations of their contempt; nay, some of them even affected
to languish for his good opinion: the ambassadors and principal
nobility then at Madrid waited on him, with all the ceremony
appertaining to the rank of a legitimate son. The minister,
intoxicated with the fumes of incense offered to his idol, began
to build a temple worthy of the worship. The cross of Alcantara
was the foundation, with a commandery of ten thousand crowns. The
next step was to a high office in the royal household, and the
completion of the whole was matrimony. Wishing to connect him
with a family of the first rank, he picked out Donna Johanna de
Velasco, daughter to the Duke of Castile, and had influence
enough to accomplish the alliance, though against the will of the
duke and of all his kindred.

Some days before the nuptial ceremony, his lordship put some
papers into my hand, saying: Here, Gil Blas, is a patent of
nobility which I have procured as the reward of your services. My
lord, answered I, in much astonishment, your excellency knows
very well that I am the son of an usher and a duenna: it would be
caricaturing the peerage to confer it on me; and besides, of all
the boons in his majesty's power to bestow, it is that which I
deserve and desire the least. Your birth, replied the minister,
is a slight objection. You have been employed on affairs of state
under the Duke of Lerma's administration and under mine: besides,
added he with a smile, have you not rendered some things to
Caesar, which Caesar is bound, on the honour of a prince, to
render back in another shape? To deal candidly, Santillane, you
will make just as good a lord as the best of them; nay, more than
that, your high office about my son is incompatible with plebeian
rank, and therefore have I procured you to be created. Since your
excellency will have it so, replied I, there is no more to be
said. So, saying no more, I put my new-blown honours in my
pocket, and walked off.

Now can I make any Joan a lady! said I to myself when I had got
into the street: but it was not the handy-work of my parents that
made me a gentle man. I may add a foot of honour to my name
whenever I please; and if any of my acquaintance should snuff or
snigger when they call me Don, I may suck my teeth, lean upon my
elbow, and draw out my credentials of heraldry. But let us see
what they contain; and how the corporeal particles, which have
accrued during my artificial contact with the court, are
distinguished by genealogical metaphysics from the native clay of
my original extraction. The instrument ran thus in substance:
That the king in acknowledgment of my zeal in more than one
instance for his service and the good of the state, had been
graciously pleased to confer this mark of distinction on me. I
may safely say that the recollection of the act for which I was
promoted effectually kept down my pride. Neither did the
bashfulness of low birth ever forsake me; so that nobility to me
was like a hair shirt to a penitent: I determined therefore to
lock up the evidences of my shame in a private drawer, instead of
blazoning them to dazzle the eyes of the foolish and corrupt.



CH. VII. -- An accidental meeting between Gil Blas and Fabricio.
Their last conversation together, and a word to the wise from
Nunez.


THE poet of the Asturias, as the reader, if he thought of him,
may have remarked, was very negligent in his intercourse with me.
It was not to be expected, that my employments would leave me
time to go and look after him. I had not seen him since the
critical discussion touching the Iphigenia of Euripides, when
chance threw me across him, as he came out of a printing-house. I
accosted him, saying: So! so! Master Nunez, you have got among
the printers: this looks as if we were threatened with some new
production.

You may indeed prepare yourselves for such an event, answered he:
I have a pamphlet just ready for publication which is likely to
make some noise in the literary world. There can be no question
about its merit, replied I: but I cannot conceive why you waste
your time in writing pamphlets: it should seem as if such squibs
and rockets were scarcely worth the powder expended in their
manufacture. It is very true, rejoined Fabricio: and I am well
aware that none but the most vulgar gazers are caught by such
holiday fire-works: however, this single one has escaped me, and
I must own that it is a child of necessity. Hunger, as you know,
will bring the wolf out of the forest.

What! exclaimed I, is it the author of the "Count of Saldagna"
who holds this language? A man with an annuity of two thousand
crowns? Gently, my friend, interrupted Nunez: I am no longer a
pensioned poet. The affairs of the treasurer Don Bertrand are all
at sixes and sevens: he has been at the gaming table, and played
with the public money: an extent has issued, and my rent-charge
is gone post-haste to the devil. That is a sad affair, said I:
but may not matters come round again in that quarter? No chance
of it, answered he: Signor Gomez Del Ribero, in plight as
destitute as that of his poor bard, is sunk for ever; nor can he,
as they say, by any possible contrivance be set afloat again.

In that case, my good friend, replied I, we must look out for
some post which may make you amends for the loss of your annuity.
I will ease your con science on that score, said he: though you
should offer me the wealth of the Indies as a salary in one of
your offices, I would reject the boon: clerkships are no object
to a partner in the firm of the Muses; a literary berth, or
absolute starvation for your humble servant! If you must have it
plump, I was born to live and die a poet, and the man whose
destiny is hanging, will never be drowned.

But do not suppose, continued he, that we are altogether forlorn
and destitute: besides that we accommodate the requisites of
independence to our finances, we do not look far beyond our noses
in calculating the avenge of our fortunes. It is insinuated that
we often dine with the most abstemious orders of the religious;
but our sanctity in this particular is too credulously imputed.
There is not one of my brother wits, without excepting the
calculators of almanacs, who has not a plate laid for him at some
substantial table: for my own part, I have the run of two good
houses. To the master of one I have dedicated a romance; and he
is the first commissioner of taxes who was ever associated with
the Muses: the other is a rich tradesman in Madrid, whose lust is
to get wits about him; he is not nice in his choice, and this
town furnishes abundance to those who value wit more by quantity
than quality.

Then I no longer feel for you, said I to the poet of the
Asturias, since you are satisfied in your condition. But be that
as it may, I assure you once more, that you have a friend in Gil
Blas, however you may slight him: if  you want my purse, come and
take it: it will not fail you at a pinch; and you must not stand
between me and my sincere friendship.

By that burst of sentiment, exclaimed Nunez, I know and thank my
friend Santillane: in return, let me give you a salutary caution.
While my lord duke is in his meridian, and you are all in all
with him, reap, bind, and gather is your harvest: when the sun
sets, the gleaners are sent home. I asked Fabricio whether his
suspicions were surely founded; and he returned me this answer.
My information comes from an old knight of Calatrava, who pokes
his nose into secrets of all sorts; his authority passes current
at Madrid, much as that of the Pythian newsmongers did through
Greece; and thus his oracle was pronounced in my hearing: My lord
duke has a host of enemies in battle-array against him; he
reckons too securely upon his influence with the king; for his
majesty, as the report goes, begins to take in hostile
representations with patience. I thanked Nunez for his friendly
warning, but without much faith in his prediction: my master's
authority seemed rooted in the court, like the tempest-scoffing
firmness of an oak in the native soil of the forest.


Cu. VIII. -- Gil Blas finds that Fabricio's hint was not without
foundation. The king's journey to Saragossa.

THE poet of the Asturias was no bad politician. There was a court
plot against the duke, with the queen at the bottom; but their
plans were too deeply laid to bubble at the surface. During the
space of a whole year, my simplicity was insensible to the
brewing of the tempest.

The revolt of the Catalans, with France at their back, and the
ill success of the war for their suppression, excited the murmurs
of the people, and whetted their tongues against government. A
council was held in the royal presence, and the Marquis de Grana,
the emperor's ambassador, was specially requested to assist. The
subject in debate was whether the king should remain in Castile,
or go and take the command of his troops in Arragon. The minister
spoke first, and gave it as his opinion that his majesty should
not quit the seat of government All the members supported his
arguments, with the exception of the Marquis de Grana, whose
whole heart was with the house of Austria, and the sentiments of
his soul on the tip of his tongue, after the homely honesty of
his nation. He argued so forcibly against the minister, that the
king embraced his opinion from conviction, though contrary to the
vote of council, and fixed the day when he would set out for the
army.

This was the first time that ever the sovereign had differed from
his favourite, and the latter considered it as an inexpiable
affront. Just as the minister was withdrawing to his closet,
there to bite upon the bridle, he espied me, called me in; and
told me with much discomposure what had passed in debate: Yes,
Santillane, observed he, the king, who for the last twenty years
has spoken only through my mouth, and seen with my eyes, is now
to be wheedled over by Grana; and that on the score of zeal for
the house of Austria, as if that German had a more Austrian soul
in his body than myself.

Hence it is easy to perceive, continued the minister, that there
is a strong party against me, with the queen at the head. Heaven
forbid it, said I. Has not the queen for upwards of twelve years
been accustomed to your paramount authority, and have you not
taught the king the knack of not consulting her? The desire of
making a campaign may for once have enlisted his majesty on the
side of the Marquis de Grana. Say rather that the king, argued my
lord duke, will be surrounded by his principal officers when in
camp; and then the disaffected will find their opportunity for
poisoning him against my administration. But they overreach
themselves; for I shall completely insulate the prince from all
their approaches; and so he did, in a manner which, for example,
deserves not to be passed over.

The day of the king's departure being arrived, the monarch,
leaving the queen regent, proceeded for Saragossa by way of
Aranjuez; a delightful residence, where he whiled away three
weeks. Cuença was the next stage, where the minister detained him
still longer by a succession of amusements. A hunting party was
contrived at Molina in Arragon, and hence there was no choice of
road but to Saragossa. The army was near at hand, and the king
was preparing to review it: but his keeper sickened him of the
project, by making him believe that he would be taken by the
French, who were in force in the neighbourhood; so that he was
cowed by a groundless apprehension, and consented to be a
prisoner in his own court. The minister, from an affectionate
regard to his safety, secluded him from all approach: so that the
principal nobility, who had equipped themselves at enormous
charges to be about his person, could not even procure an
occasional audience. Philip, weary of bad lodgings and worse
recreation at Saragossa, and perhaps feeling himself scarcely his
own master, soon returned to Madrid. Thus ended the royal
campaign, and the care of maintaining the honour of the Spanish
colours was left to the Marquis de los Velez, commander-in-chief.



CH. IX. -- The revolution of Portugal, and disgrace of the prime
minister.


A FEW days after the king's return, an alarming report prevailed
at Madrid, that the Portuguese, considering the Catalan revolt as
an opportunity offered them by fortune for throwing off the
Spanish yoke, had taken arms, and chosen the Duke of Braganza for
their king, with a full determination of supporting him on the
throne. In this they conceived that they did not reckon without
their host; because Spain was then embroiled in Germany, Italy,
Flanders, and Catalonia. They could not in fact have hit upon a
crisis more favourable for their deliverance from so galling a
yoke.

It was a strange circumstance, that while both court and city
were struck with consternation at the news, my lord duke
attempted to joke with the king, and make the Duke of Braganza
his butt; Philip, however, far from falling in with this ill-
timed pleasantry, assumed a serious air, of ill omen to the
minister, who felt his seat to totter under him. The queen was
now his declared enemy, and openly accused him of having caused
the revolt of Portugal by his misconduct. The nobility in
general, and especially those who had been at Saragossa, when
they saw a cloud gathering about the minister, joined the queen's
party: but the decisive blow was the return of the duchess
dowager of Mantua from her government of Portugal to Madrid; for
she proved clearly to the king's conviction that the counsels of
his own cabinet produced the revolution. *[see note at end of
chapter]

His majesty, deeply impressed with what he had heard, was now
completely recovered from every symptom of partiality towards his
favourite. The minister, finding that his enemies were in
possession of the royal ear, wrote for permission to resign his
employments, and retire from court, since all the political
mischances of the time were ascribed to his personal delinquency.
He expected a letter like this to produce a wonderful effect,
reckoning as be did upon the prince's private friendship, which
could scarcely brook a separation: but his majesty's answer
undeceived him, by laconically complying with his ostensible wish
to withdraw.

Such a sentence of banishment in the king's own hand-writing came
like a thunder-storm in harvest; but though destruction to his
long-cherished hopes, he affected the serene look of constancy,
and asked me what I would do in his circumstances. I would drive
before the wind, said I; renounce the ungrateful court, and pass
the remainder of my days in peace on my own estate. You counsel
wisely, replied my master, and I shall set out for Loeches, there
to finish my career, after one more interview with his majesty:
for I could wish just to convince him that I have done what man
can do to support the heavy load of state upon my shoulders, and
that it was not within the compass of possibility to prevent the
unfortunate events which are imputed to me as a crime. It were
equally reasonable to charge the pilot with the wrecking fury of
the storm, and make him answerable for the uncontrolled power of
the elements. Thus did the minister inwardly flatter himself that
he could set things to rights again, and once more fix firm the
seat which was shaking under him; but he could not procure an
audience, and was even commanded to resign his key of private
admission into his majesty's closet.

This last requisition convinced him that there was no hope; and
he now made up his mind in earnest for retirement. He looked over
his papers, and had the prudence to burn a good number, he then
selected a small household for his retreat, and publicly
announced his departure for the next day. Apprehending insult
from the mob, if the time and manner of his setting out were
public, he escaped early in the morning through the kitchens out
at the back door, got in to a shabby, hired carriage, with his
confessor and me, and reached in safety the road leading to
Loeches, a village on his own estate, where his countess had 
founded a magnificent convent of Dominican nuns.

*Note:
At length his sovereign frowns -- the train of state
Mark the keen glance, and watch the sign to hate.
"Johnson's Imitation of Juvenal's Tenth Satire."



CH. X. -- A difficult, but successful, weaning from the world.
The minister's employments in his retreat.


MADAME D'OLIVAREZ stayed behind her husband some few days, with
the intention of trying what her tears and entreaties might do
towards his recall; but in vain did she prostrate herself before
their majesties: the king paid not the least attention to her
pleadings and remonstrances, though artfully adapted for effect;
and the queen, who hated her mortally, took a savage pleasure in
her tears. The minister's lady, however, was not easily
discouraged: she stooped so low as to solicit their good offices
from the ladies of the bed-chamber; but the fruit of all this
meanness was only the sad conviction that it excited more
contempt than pity. Heart-broken at having degraded herself by
supplications so humiliating, and yet so unavailing, she departed
to her husband, and mourned with him the loss of a situation,
which under a reign like that of Philip the Fourth, was little
short of sovereign power.

The accounts her ladyship brought from Madrid were wormwood to
the duke. Your enemies, said she, sobbing, with the Duke of
Medina Coeli at their head, are loud in the king's praises for
your removal; and the people triumph in your disgrace with an
insolent joy, as if the cloud of adversity were to be dispelled
by the breath which dissolved your administration. Madam, said my
master, follow my example; suppress your discontent: we must
drive before the storm, when we cannot weather it. I did think,
indeed, that my favour would only be eclipsed with the lamp of
life: a common illusion of ministers and favourites, who forget
that they breathe but at the good pleasure of their sovereign.
Was not the Duke of Lerma as much mistaken as myself, though
fondly relying on his purple, as a pledge for the lasting tenure
of his authority?

Thus did my lord duke preach patience to the partner of his
cares, while his own bosom heaved under the direst pressure of
anxiety. The frequent dispatches from Don Henry, who was staying
about the court to pick up information, kept him continually on
the fret. Scipio was the messenger; for he was still about the
person of that young nobleman, though I had relinquished my post
on his marriage. Sometimes we heard of changes in the inferior
departments of office, solely for the purpose of wreaking
vengeance on his creatures, and filling up the vacancies with his
enemies. Then Don Lewis de Haro was represented as advancing in
favour, and likely to be made prime minister. But the most
mortifying circumstance of all was the change in the viceroyalty
of Naples, which was taken from his friend, the Duke de Medina de
Las Torres, and bestowed on the High Admiral of Castile, who was
his bitterest enemy. For this there was no other motive but the
pleasure of giving pain to a fallen favourite.

For the first three months, his lordship gave himself up in his
solitude a prey to disappointment and regret: but his confessor,
a holy and pious Dominican, supporting his religious zeal with
manly eloquence, succeeded in pouring the balm of consolation
into his soul. By continually representing to him, with apostolic
energy, that his eternal salvation was now the only object worth
his care, he weaned him gradually from the uses of this world.
His excellency was no longer panting for news from Madrid, but
learning a new and important lesson, how to die. Madame
d'Olivarez too, making a virtue of necessity, sought refuge for
herself in the maternal guardianship of her convent, where
Providence had reared up, for her edification in faith and good
works, a sisterhood of holy maidens, whose spiritual discourses
fed her soul, as if with manna in the wilderness. My master's
peace within his own bosom advanced, as he withdrew more backward
from sublunary things. The employment of his day was thus laid
out: almost the whole morning was devoted to religious duties,
till dinner-time; and after dinner, for about two hours, he
played at different games with me and some of his confidential
domestics: be then generally retired alone into his closet till
sunset, when he walked round his garden, or rode out into the
neighbourhood either with his confessor or me.

One day when I was alone with him, and was particularly struck
with his apparent self-complacency, I took the liberty of
congratulating his lordship on his complete reconciliation to
retirement. Use, however late acquired, is second nature,
answered he: for though I have all my life been accustomed to the
bustle of business, I assure you that I become every day more and
more attached to this calm and peaceful mode of life.



CH. XI.  -- A change in his lordship for the worse. The
marvellous cause, and melancholy consequences, of his dejection.


HIS excellency sometimes amused himself with gardening, by way of
variety. One day as I was watching his progress, he said
jokingly: You see, Santillane, a fallen minister can turn
gardener at last. Nature will prevail, my lord, answered I. You
plant and water something useful at Loeches, while Dionysius of
Syracuse whipped school-boys at Corinth. My master was not
displeased either with the comparison or the compliment

We were all delighted at the castle to see our protector, rising
above the cloud of adversity, take pleasure in so novel a mode of
life: but we soon perceived an alarming change. He became gloomy,
thoughtful, and melancholy. Our parties at play were all given
up, and no efforts could succeed to divert his mind. From dinner-
time till evening he never left his closet. We thought the dreams
of vanished greatness had returned to break his rest; and in this
opinion the reverend Dominican gave the rein to his eloquence;
but it could not outstrip the course of that hypochondriac
malady, which triumphed over all opposition.

It seemed to me there was some deeper cause, which it behoved a
sincere friend to fathom. Taking advantage of our being alone
together, My lord, said I, in a tone of mingled respect and
affection, whence is it that you are no longer so cheerful as
heretofore? Has your philosophy lost ground? or has the world
recovered its allurements? Surely you would not plunge again into
that gulf, where your virtue must inevitably be shipwrecked! No,
heaven be praised! replied the minister: my part at court has
long faded from my memory, and its trappings from my eyes.
Indeed! why then, resumed I, since you have strength enough to
banish false regrets, are you so weak as to indulge a melancholy
which alarms us all? What is the matter with you, my dear master?
continued I, falling at his knees: some secret sorrow preys upon
you: can you hide it from Santillane, whose zeal, discretion, and
fidelity you have so often experienced? Why am I so unhappy as to
have lost your confidence?

You still possess it, said his lordship: but I must own, it is
reluctantly that I shall reveal the subject of my distress: yet
the importunities of such a friend are irresistible. To no one
else could I impart so singular a confidence. Yes, I am the prey
of a morbid melancholy which eats inwardly into my vitals: a
spectre haunts me every moment, arrayed in the most terrific form
of preternatural horror. In vain have I argued with myself that
it is a vision of the brain, an unreal mockery: its continual
presentments blast my sight, and unseat my reason. Though my
understanding teaches me, that in looking on this spectre I stare
at vacancy, my spirits are too weak to derive comfort from the
conviction. Thus much have you extorted from me: now judge
whether the cause of my melancholy is fit to be divulged.

With equal grief and astonishment did I listen to the strange
confession, which implied a total derangement of the nervous
system. This, my lord, said I, must proceed from injudicious
abstinence. So I thought at first, answered he; and to try the
experiment, I have been eating more than usual for some days
past; but it is all to no purpose, the phantom takes his stand as
usual. It will vanish, said I, if your excellency will only
divert your mind by your accustomed relaxations with your
household. Company and gentle occupation are the best remedies
for these affections of the spirits.

In a short time after this conversation, his lordship became
seriously indisposed, and sent for two notaries from Madrid, to
make his will. Three capital physicians followed in their track,
who had the reputation of curing their patients now and then. As
soon as it was noised about the castle that these last
undertakers were arrived, the case was given up for lost; weeping
and gnashing of teeth took place universally, and the family
mourning was ordered. They brought with them their usual 
understrappers, an apothecary and a surgeon*.  The notaries were
suffered to earn their fee first, after which death's notaries
prepared to take a bond of the patient. They practised in the
school of Sangrado, and from their very first consultation,
ordered bleeding so frequently and freely, that in six days they
brought his lordship to the point of death, and on the seventh
delivered him from the terror of his sprite.

After the minister's decease, a lively and sincere sorrow reigned
in the castle of Loeches. The whole household wept bitterly. Far
from deriving consolation from the certainty of being remembered
in his will, there was not a dependent who would not willingly
have saved his life by the sacrifice of the legacy. As for me,
whom he most delighted in, attached to him as I was from
disinterested friendship, my grief was more acute than that of
the rest. I question whether Antonia cost me more tears.

*Translator's Note:
. . . . Behind him sneaks
Another mortal, not unlike himself,
Of jargon full, with terms obscure o'ercharged,
Apothecary call'd, whose foetid hands
With power mechanic, and with charms arcane,
Apollo, god of medicine, has endued. -- BRAMSTON.




CH. XII. -- The proceedings at the Castle of Loeches after his
lordship's death, and the course which Santillane adopted.


THE minister, according to his last injunctions, was buried
without pomp and without procession in the convent, with a dirge
of our lamentations. After the funeral, Madame d' Olivarez called
us together to hear the will read, with which the household had
good reason to be satisfied. Every one had a legacy proportioned
to his claim, and none less than two thousand crowns: mine was
the largest, amounting to ten thousand pistoles, as a mark of his
singular regard. The hospitals were not forgotten, and provision
was made for an annual commemoration in several convents.

Madame d'Olivarez sent all the household to Madrid to receive
their legacies from Don Raymond Caporis, who had orders to pay
them; but I could not be of the party, in consequence of a
violent fever from distress of mind, which confined me to the
castle for more than a week. During that time, the reverend
Dominican paid me all possible attention. He had conceived a
friendship for me, which was not confined to my worldly
interests, and was anxious to know how I meant to dispose of
myself on my recovery. I answered that I had not yet made up my
mind upon the subject: there were moments when my feelings
strongly prompted towards a religious vow. Precious moments!
exclaimed the Dominican, you will do well to profit by them. I
advise you as a friend to retire to our convent at Madrid, for
example; there to become a pious benefactor by the free gift of
your whole fortune, and to die in the livery of Saint Dominic.
Many very questionable Christians have made amends for a life of
sin by so holy an end.

In the actual disposition of my mind, this advice was not
unpalatable; and I promised to reflect upon it. But on consulting
Scipio, who came to see me immediately after the monk, he treated
the very notion as the phantom of a distempered brain. For shame!
said he; does not your estate at Lirias offer a more eligible
seclusion? If you were delighted with it formerly, the charm will
be increased tenfold, now that the lapse of years has moderated
your sense of pleasure, and softened down your taste to the
simple beauties of nature.

It was no difficult matter to operate a change in my
inclinations. My friend, said I, you carry it decidedly against
the advocate of Saint Dominic. We will go back to Lirias as soon
as I am well enough to travel. This happened shortly; for as the
fever subsided, I soon felt myself sufficiently strong to put my
design in execution. We went first to Madrid. The sight of that
city gave me far other sensations than heretofore. As I knew that
almost its whole population held in horror the memory of a
minister, of whom I cherished the most affectionate remembrance,
I could not feel at my ease within its precincts. My stay was
therefore limited to five or six days, while Scipio was making
the necessary arrangements for our rustication. In the meantime I
waited on Caporis, and received my legacy in ready money. I
likewise made my arrangements with the receivers for the regular
remittance of my pensions, and settled all my affairs in due
order.

The evening before our departure, I asked the son of Coselina
whether he had received his farewell from Don Henry. Yes,
answered he, we took leave of each other this morning with mutual
civility; he went so far as to express his regret that I should
quit him; but however well satisfied he might be with me, I am by
no means so with him. Mutual content is like a river, which must
have its banks on either side. Besides, Don Henry makes but a
pitiful figure at court now; he has fallen into utter contempt;
people point at him with their finger in the streets, and call
him a Genoese bastard. Judge, then, for yourself, whether it is
consistent with my character to keep up the connection.

We left Madrid one morning at sunrise, and went for Cuença. The
following was the order of our equipment; we two in a chaise and
pair, three mules, laden with baggage and money, led by two
grooms and two stout footmen, well armed, in the rear; the grooms
wore sabres, and the postilion had a pair of pistols in his
holsters. As we were seven men in all, and six of us determined
fellows, I took the road gaily, without trembling for my legacy.
In the villages through which we passed our mules chimed their
bells merrily, and the peasants ran to their doors to see us
pass, supposing it to be at least the parade of some nobleman
going to take possession of some viceroyalty.



CH. XIII. -- The return of Gil Blas to his seat. His joy at
finding his god-daughter Seraphina marriageable; and his own
second venture in the lottery of love.


WE were a fortnight on our journey to Lirias, having no occasion
to make rapid stages. The sight of my own domain brought
melancholy thoughts into my mind, with the image of my lost
Antonia; but better topics of reflection came to my aid, with a
full purpose to look at things on the brighter side, and the
lapse of two-and-twenty years, which had gradually impaired the
force of tender regret.

As soon as I entered the castle, Beatrice and her daughter
greeted me most cordially, while the family scene was interesting
in the extreme. When their mutual transports were over, I looked
earnestly at my god-daughter, saying: Can this be the Seraphina
whom I left in her cradle? how tall and pretty! we must make a
good match for her. What! my dear god-father, cried my little
girl with an enchanting blush, you have but just seen me, and do
you want to get rid of me at once! No, my lovely child, replied
I, we hope not to lose you by marriage, but to find a husband for
you in the neighbourhood.

There is one ready to your hands, said Beatrice. Seraphina made a
conquest one day at mass. Her suitor has declared his passion,
and asked my consent. I told him that his acceptance depended on
her father and her god-father; and here you are to determine for
yourselves.

What is the character of this village lordling? said Scipio. Is
he not, like his fellows, the little tyrant of the soil, and
insolent to those who have no pedigree to boast? The furthest
from it in the world, answered Beatrice; the young man is gentle
in his temper and polished in his manners; handsome withal, and
somewhat under thirty. You paint him in flattering colours, said
I to Beatrice; what is his name? Don Juan de Jutella, replied
Scipio's wife: it is not long since be came to his inheritance:
he lives on his own estate, about a mile off, with a younger
sister, of whom he takes care. I once knew something of his
family, observed I; it is one of the best in Valencia. I care
less for lineage, cried Scipio, than for the qualities of the
heart and mind; this Don Juan will exactly suit us, if he is a
good sort of man. He is belied else, said Seraphina, with a
blushing interest in our conversation; the inhabitants of Lirias,
who know him well, say all the good of him you can conceive. I
smiled at this; and her father, not less quick-sighted, saw
plainly that her heart had a share in the testimony of her
tongue.

The gentleman soon heard of our arrival, and paid his respects to
us within two days. His address was pleasing and manly, so as to
prepossess us in his favour. He affected merely to welcome us
home as a neighbour. Our reception was such as not to discourage
the repetition of his visit; but not a word of Seraphina! When he
was gone, Beatrice asked us how we liked him. We could have no
objection to make, and gave it as our opinion that Seraphina
could not dispose of herself better.

The next day, Scipio and I returned the visit. We took a guide,
and luckily; for otherwise it might have puzzled us to find the
place. It was not till our actual arrival that it was visible;
for the mansion was situated at the foot of a mountain, in the
middle of a wood, whose lofty trees hid it from our view. There
was an antique and ruinous appearance about it, which spoke more
for the descent than the wealth of its proprietor. On our
entrance, however, the elegance of the interior arrangement made
amends for the dilapidated grandeur of the outer walls.

Don Juan received us in a handsome room, where he introduced his
sister Dorothea, a lady between nineteen and twenty years of age.
She was a good deal tricked out, as if she had primed and loaded
herself for conquest, in expectation of our visit. Thus
presenting all her charms in full force, she did by me much as
Antonia had done before; but I managed my raptures so discreetly,
that even Scipio had no suspicion. Our conversation turned, as on
the preceding day, on the mutual pleasure of good neighbourhood.
Still he did not open on the subject of Seraphina, nor did we
attempt to draw him out. During our interview, I often cast a
side glance at Dorothea, though with all the reserve of delicate
apprehension; whenever our eyes met, the citadel of my heart was
ready to surrender. To describe the object of my love justly, as
well as feelingly, her beauty was not of the most perfect kind:
her skin was of a dazzling whiteness, and her lips united the
colour with the fragrance of the rose; but her features were not
so regular and well-proportioned as might have been wished: yet,
altogether, she won my heart.

In short, I left the mansion of Jutella a different man from what
I was on entering it: so that, returning to Lirias with my whole
soul absorbed in Dorothea, I saw and spoke only of her. How is
this, master! said Scipio with a look of astonishment: you seem
to be very much taken with Don Juan's sister! Can you be in love
with her? Yes, my friend, answered I: to my shame be it spoken.
Since the death of Antonia, how many lovely females have passed
in review before me with indifference: and must my passions be
irresistibly kindled at this time of life? Indeed, sir, replied
the son of Coselina, you may bless your stars, instead of
squabbling with yourself: you are not so old as to make your
sacrifice at the shrine of love a by-word; and time has not yet
ploughed such furrows on your brow, as to render hopeless the
desire of pleasing. When you see Don Juan next, ask him boldly
for his sister: he cannot refuse her to you; and besides, if his
views in her settlement are ambitious, how can he do better? You
have a patent of nobility in your pocket, and upon that your
posterity may ride easy; after five generations, when pedigree
herself shall be lost in the confusion of her materials, it may
exercise the diligence of learned inquiry, to trace the family of
the Santillanes to the beginning of its archives, and consecrate
the fame of its founder by the indistinctness of his story.



CH. XIV. -- A double marriage, and the conclusion of the history.

By this discourse, Scipio encouraged me to declare myself,
without considering bow he exposed me to the danger of a refusal.
My own resolution was taken with fear and trembling. Though I
carried my years well, and might have sunk at least ten, it did
not seem unlikely that a young beauty might turn up her nose at
the disparity. I determined, however, to bolt the question the
first time I saw her brother, who was not without his
trepidations on the subject of my god-daughter.

He returned my call the next morning, just as I had done
dressing. Signor de Santillane, said he, I wish to speak with you
on some serious business. I took him into my closet, where
entering on the subject at once, I imagine, continued he, that
you are not unacquainted with the purpose of my visit: I love
Seraphina; you are all in all with her father; I must request you
therefore to intercede and procure for me the accomplishment of
my heart's desire: then shall I have to thank you for the prime
bliss of my existence. Signor Don Juan, answered I, as you come
to the point at once, you can have no objection to my following
your example: My good offices are fully at your service, and I
shall hope for yours with your sister in return.

Don Juan was agreeably surprised. Can it be possible, exclaimed
he, that Dorothea should have made a conquest of your heart since
yesterday? It is even so, said I, and it would make me the
happiest of men, if the proposal should meet with your joint
approbation. You may rely on that, replied he; though with some
pretensions to family pride, yours is not an alliance to be
despised. You flatter me highly, rejoined I; that you are not
mealy-mouthed about receiving a commoner into your pedigree, is a
mark of good sense; but even if nobility had been a necessary
ingredient in your sister's requisites for a husband, we should
not have quarrelled on that account. I have worked out twenty
years in the trammels of office; and the king, as a reward of my
long labours, has granted me a patent of nobility. This high-
minded gentleman read my credentials over with extreme
satisfaction, and returning them, told me that Dorothea was mine.
And Seraphina yours, exclaimed I.

Thus were the two marriages agreed on between us. The consent of
the intended brides was all that remained; for we neither of us
presumed to control the inclinations of our wards. My friend
therefore carried home my proposal to his sister, and I called
Scipio, Beatrice, and my god-daughter together, for the purpose
of laying open a similar project. Beatrice voted loudly for
immediate acceptance, and Seraphina silently. The father did not
say much against it; but boggled a little at the fortune he must
give to a gentleman whose seat required such immediate and
extensive repairs. I stopped Scipio's mouth by telling him that
was my concern, and that I should contribute four thousand
pistoles to the architect's estimate.

In the evening, Don Juan came again. Your business is going
swimmingly, said I; pray heaven mine may promise as fairly.
Better it cannot, answered he; my influence was quite unnecessary
to prevail with Dorothea; your person had made its impression,
and your manners pleased her. You were afraid she might not like
you; while she, with more reason, having nothing to offer you but
her heart and hand . . . . What would she offer more? interrupted
I, out of my wits with joy. Since the lovely Dorothea can think
of me without repugnance, I ask no more: my fortune is ample, and
the possession of her is the only dowry I should value.

Don Juan and myself, highly delighted at having brought our views
to bear so soon, were for hastening our nuptials, and cutting off
all superfluous ceremonies. I closeted the gentleman with
Seraphina's parents; the settlemeuts were soon agreed on, and he
took his leave, promising to return next day with Dorothea. My
eager desire of appearing agreeable in that lady's eyes,
occasioned me to spend three hours at least in adjusting my
dress, and communicating the air of a lover to my person; but I
could not do it so much to my mind as in my younger days. The
preparations for courtship are a pleasure to a young man, but a
serious business and hazardous speculation to one who is
beginning to be oldish. And yet it turned out better than my
hopes or deserts; for Don Juan's sister received me so
graciously, as to put me in good humour with myself. I was
charmed with the turn of her mind; and foreboded that with
discreet management and much deference, I might really get her to
like me as well as anybody else. Full of this sweet hope I sent
for the lawyers to draw up the two contracts, and for the
clergyman of Paterna, to bring us better acquainted with our
mistresses.

Thus did I light the torch of Hymen for the second time, and it
did not burn blue with the brimstone of repentance. Dorothea,
like a virtuous wife, made a pleasure of her duty; in gratitude
for the pains I took to anticipate all her wishes, she soon loved
me as well as if I had been younger. Don Juan and my god-daughter
were most enthusiastic in their mutual ardour; and what was most
unprecedented of all, the two sisters-in-law loved one another
sincerely. Don Juan was a man in whom all good qualities met: my
esteem for him increased daily, and he did not repay it with
ingratitude. In short, we were a happy and united family: we
could scarcely bear the interval of separation between evening
and morning. Our time was divided between Lirias and Jutella: his
excellency's pistoles made the old battlements to raise their
heads again, and the castle to resume its lordly port.

For these three years, reader, I have led a life of unmixed bliss
in this beloved society. To perfect my satisfaction, heaven has
deigned to send me two smiling babes, whose education will be the
amusement of my declining years; and if ever husband might
venture to hazard so bold an hypothesis, I devoutly believe
myself their father.


THE END



