MONRO HIS EXPEDITION WITH THE WORTHY SCOTS REGIMENT CALLED MAC-KEYES

THE MEMOIRS OF GENERAL MONRO 1626-1634

Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2017
THIS ETEXT IS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN

Introduction to the Ex-Classics Project edition

The Thirty Years' War was one of the great catastrophes of the Seventeenth Century in Europe. It started as an attempt by the Holy Roman Emperor to suppress the Protestants of Bohemia (modern Czech Republic) and metastasized into a war involving most of the countries of continental Europe, who fought, massacred, sacked and plundered back and forth across Germany for decades. In addition to the various German and Austrian states, there were Spaniards and Italians, Swedes and Danes, Poles, Finns and Croats. At a late stage the French became involved, surprisingly on the Protestant side. In addition, there were hired troops of mercenaries from the British Isles. Robert Monro was an officer in such a Scottish regiment, which served first the King of Denmark and afterwards the great King of Sweden Gustavus Adolphus.

Readers of Scott's A Legend of Montrose will have come across references to Monro in Scott's Introduction to that novel; and the character of the swashbuckling cavalier Dugald Dalgetty is based on Monro. The Swedish historian Magnus Bengtsson wrote a long account of Monro in his collection A Walk to an Ant Hill and other essays (Norstedt and Soners, Stockholm, 1950)

Monro's service ran from 1626 to 1634, when he was sent back to Scotland to recruit more soldiers. While he was there, the Swedes and their allies suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Nördlingen. His occupation gone, he turned to the pen, and wrote this account of his adventures which was published in 1637. It is one of the first, if not the first, accounts of the war in English from a participant, unvarnished and showing alike the courage, brutality and atrocity of war.


Bibliographic and Editorial Note

This Ex-classics edition of Monro his Expedition with the Worthy Scots Regiment Called Mac-Keys  has been prepared from a facsimile of the first edition, 1637. Spelling of English words has been modernised, and obsolete words have been standardised at the primary spelling in the Oxford English Dictionary. The glossary has definitions of these obsolete words, as well as translations of Latin tags used by Monro.

Monro was very variable in his spelling of names of people and places. In this edition we have standardised placenames at the spelling used in the early 20th Century, except for those which have long-established English versions e.g. Munich, Elsinore not München, Helsingør. After the First and Second World Wars, many of these names were changed, mostly for nationalistic or political reasons. The modern names of these places are given in the Current Placenames section. Peronal names have for the most part been left as Monro had them except for a few who are very well-known, such as Wallenstein.

 

Title Page of First Edition

MONRO
HIS EXPEDITION
VVITH THE VVORTHY
SCOTS REGIMENT (CALLED
Mac-Keyes regiment) levied in August 1626.
by Sr. Donald Mac-Key Lord Rhees, Colonell for
his Majesties service of Denmark, and reduced
after the battle of Norling, to one Com-
pany in September 1634 at
Wormes in the Paltz.
Discharged in severall duties and observations of service
first under the magnanimous King of Denmark, during his warres
against the Emperour; afterward, under the Invincible King of
Sweden, during his Majesties life time; and since, under the
Directour Generall, the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne and his Generalls.
Collected and gathered together at spare-houres, by Colonell
ROBERT MONRO, at first Lievtenant under the
said regiment, to the Noble and worthy Captaine,
THOMAS MAC-KENYEE, of Kildon, Bro-
ther to the noble Lord, the Lord Earl of
Seafort; for the use of all worthie Cavaliers favouring the laudable
profession of Armes.
To which is annexed the Abridgement of Exercise, and di-
vers practical observations, for the younger officer
his Consideration; ending with the Souldiers
Meditations going on service.
(Printers emblem)
LONDON,
Printed by William Jones in Red-Crosse streete.
1 6 3 7.



Dedication

COLONEL MONRO
TO HIS HIGHNESS
THE PRINCE ELECTOR
PALATINE OF RHINE,
wisheth health, and happiness.

After seven years march in the wars of Germany with one regiment, it
being rent in the battle of Noerdlingen, at last I retired unto
Britain, to levy again, for the further advancement of the good cause,
and being at the Court of England, attending employment, to express my
love, and most humble respects unto your Highness, having been an eye-
witness of the accidents most remarkable, which occurred in Germany,
during those seven years wars, though a rude, and ignorant soldier, I
was bold to set pen to paper, to discharge a long seven years
troublesome expedition, in short duties and observations of service,
containing a true & simple narration of the principal occurrences
which happened in the course of this war, without omitting one day's
march, in three years under the magnanimous King of Denmark, nor
thereafter, in four years march with the royal army, under the
fortunate conduct of his Majesty of Sweden of never dying memory.

Being induced thereto, chiefly, to testify my humble respects unto
your Highness, to whom I have ever vowed my best endeavours of
service: next, to express my love, and thankfulness to my country, and
to my dear comrades, Britons, Dutch and Swedens, (companions, not of
wants, but of valour) eternizing their memory, who after death, like
Phoebean Champions, ride triumphing in spite of envy, being praised by
their enemies, for having valorously resisted their assaults, till
they died standing, serving the public, through their great love to
your Highness' royal mother, the Queen of Bohemia, your Highness'
self, and the remnant of the royal Issue. Hoping therefore (for their
sakes departed of worthy memory) my pains may be acceptable unto your
Highness, for their sakes' alive (that long for a new leader) I have
been bold, to send unto your Highness at this time, worthy
counsellors, whose counsel your Highness may be bold to follow, and
their virtues, being most heroic and exemplary, may be imitated by
your Highness, in going before us, as our new master, captain and
leader, being descended, of the valiant Bruce, and of the first King
of the Stewarts, through your Highness' royal mother Elizabeth, Queen
of Bohemia, jewel of her sex, and the most resplendent in brightness
of mind, for a woman, that the earth doth afford.

That great monarch Alexander the Great showed his humanity (in the
wants of old age) to a poor and decrepit soldier, being weary with
great travail in the way, & lent him his own chair, for to warm him by
the fire: and being upon his death-bed (for all the pangs and pains of
death) he disdained not to shake hands with the meanest and poorest of
all his soldiers. So mighty and illustrious Prince, I, though a poor
soldier, do dedicate unto your Highness, these my dutiful observations
and expeditions. Your Highness being eminent, as your dignity high,
hath made me presume on your Highness' goodness, which, I know, is
full of pardons for those, that reverence your Highness' person, as I
do. That I have prefixed your Highness' name, was my duty, as to my
patron & superior, to whom I am ever most bound, especially in
discharging of this my duty. Neither do I pay this tribute unto your
Highness, as to add anything unto your Highness' knowledge, being
already enriched with notable virtues, but rather to express my love
and dearst respect, in all humility to him, whom I have vowed to
follow (if my breath may last so long) till your Highness' enemies be
overcome.

Deign therefore, noble and illustrious Sir, to let pass this my
tedious expedition, and shallow observations, under the name of your
Highness' patronage, to whom I wish the Roman Empire, for a
possession,  as it was extended of old, from the River Euphrates, at
the East, to the Ocean Sea, at the West, the fertilest part of Africa,
at the South, and the Rhine, and the Danube, at the North; which to 
possess, come, noble Sir, unto the field, and fight before us,
Britons, Irish and Dutch, who long to see your Highness to fight with
good luck and victory, with strength and power, with wisdom and
understanding, &c. against your Highness' enemies, till your Highness'
royal mother's throne be established, after her sacred Majesty, in
your Highness' person.

Vouchsafe then, noble Sir, of your gracious generosity, favourably to
accept of my well-wishing, and of these my observations, and esteem
the author thereof to be for ever

Your Highness' most humble and obedient servitor,

ROBERT MONRO



TO THE READER.

Noble, worthy, courteous, and loving reader, if I could persuade thee
to believe what profit the diligent and serious soldier doth reap by
reading, and what advantage he gaineth above him, who thinketh to
become a perfect soldier by a few years practice, without reading:
Truly, thou wouldst use thy earnest diligence as well in the one as in
the other; for I dare be bold to affirm, that reading and discourse
doth as much or rather more, to the furtherance of a perfect soldier,
than a few years practise without reading.

For out of my own experience, in my profession, having seen as many
rare occurrences, and accidents of war by practise (as hath not been
seen the like in many years before) which shall appear evidently by
the subsequent observations of one regiment's service: Nevertheless, I
must confess, that reading and discourse of wars, enable the mind more
with perfect knowledge, than the bare practice of a few years.
Therefore, what these years past I have collected, by the one and the
other, following the laudable profession of arms, under the mighty and
potent King of Denmark, the space of three years, and since under his
Majesty of worthy memory the Invincible King of Sweden, his crown, 
and confederates, in four years; gathered together for the good,
profit, and furtherance of thee and my country: whereby I hope the
noble and worthy minded reader, shall be allured and animated to
follow the traces of those worthy cavaliers mentioned in my
observations, of most worthy memories: Whereof some, from mean
condition, have risen to supreme honour, wealth, and dignity; though
others perished in the way of preferment; for whose sakes, my sword
shall be ever ready against the common enemy, that ruined the old and
worthy regiment; the memory whereof shall never be forgotten, but
shall live in spite of time; and its virtues and fame be made known to
all those interested in the quarrel. The example of those brave
spirits (noble and worthy reader) I hope, will allure you to follow
their virtues, that you may be partaker of their honour, for the
further credit of our nation. Therefore, worthy reader, what you find
here, if you please, like; but howsoever, remember always to censure
sparingly the writings of the shallow-brained soldier, not adorned
with eloquent phrase; but with truth and simplicity. Pliny saith,
there was no book so little worth, but might be profitable in some
things. Caesar from his youth had his observations: and the bee out of
the most poisonable herbs sucks the honey. Please to read, and thou
shalt find something to delight thee; at least thou shalt see my
thankfulness to my comrades and country, and examples of frequent
mortality, to make thy use of. And as the stars take light from the
sun; even so from histories, men draw knowledge and wisdom. Let me
entreat thee therefore, when thou wouldst avoid care, to look on those
observations, and by our examples amend thy life, and I shall be glad
of thy profit, and not envy thy estate. If you ask; why I wrote these
observations? It was because I loved my comrades. If why I published
them, know it was for my friends, and not for the world, for which I
care not, nor for any that is ungrateful; but those which accept well
of this, will encourage me betime, to take greater pains for their
sakes, if they view them. Farewell.

(Five poems in Latin omitted)



The first Duty discharged in Holstein at Krampe.

The old proverb is, A good beginning makes a good ending, and to lead
a good life, is the way to a happy death. Immediately after our
landing at Glueckstadt on the Elbe, by command of his Majesty of
Denmark, we were quartered in the fat and fertile soil of Holstein,
nothing inferior in fertility to any part of Dutchland, except in
wines, having corn in abundance, to the increase Communibus Annis of
the twenty eight corn, wheat and barley: in milk, nothing inferior to
Holland, and for the most part inhabited by Hollanders, especially the
cities. This soil hath also abundance of fresh and salt-water fishes;
their gentry live like noblemen, and their communalty live like
gentlemen. During our enquartering with them, our entertainment was
answerable to our charges, where some officers had allowance of a
piece a day for keeping good order. Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Forbesse
had the command over the regiment in the absence of the Colonel, being
hindered by sickness. Shortly after our going over, the Lieutenant
Colonel departed this life, being a gentleman of much true worth, and
a valourous commander, much regrated by the whole regiment.
Immediately after his death, Captain Sanders Seaton was by his
Majesty's patent made Lieutenant Colonel to the regiment, who did
bring a strong company of well exercised soldiers, which were joined
to strengthen the regiment. Captain James Dumbarre, who did get
Lieutenant Colonel Forbes his company, was placed sergeant major,
Captain Sinclaire, Captain Boswell, and Captain Ennis' companies were
reduced to strengthen the other companies of the regiment, which being
made complete, were mustered, clothed, and paid of their muster-month.
Who then would disdain to follow wars, might be thought unwise. The
Baron of Fowles coming over a volunteer, was allowed a free table to
entertain an Earl, being ordinarily above sixteen persons at table;
his visitors, horses and servants entertained accordingly.

The regiment mustered received colours, wherein his Majesty would have
the officers to carry the Danes' Cross, which the officers refusing
they were summoned to compeare before his Majesty at Rendsburg, to
know the reasons of their refusals; at the meeting none would
adventure, fearing his Majesty's indignation, to gainestand openly his
Majesty's will, being then his Majesty's sworn servants: and for the
eschewing of greater inconvenience, the officers desired so much time
of his Majesty, as to send Captain Robert Ennis into England, to know
his Majesty of Great Britain's will, whether or no, they might carry
without reproach the Dane' Cross, in Scottish colours: answer was
returned; they should obey their will, under whose pay they were, in a
matter so indifferent.

During the tedious winter, the regiment was well exercised, and put
under good discipline, as well the particular companies, as the whole
regiment, so that mine eyes did never see a more complete regiment,
for bodies of men, and valiant soldiers; as shall be seen in the
discharge of their duties, begun with the sheding of Dutch blood.

A Dutch captain, having out of a mad humour mutilated a soldier of my
captain's company of one finger, the soldier complaining to me, I made
my lieutenant-colonel acquainted with the manner, who sent to the
captain to know his reason; The captain, not repenting of the wrong
done, but rather bragging he would second the first, with a greater:
he coming through my quarters, I being exercising the company, the
sergeant overtakes him, and almost killed him, who made no defence,
neither pressed ever to be repaired of his wrongs. This duty begun
with the shedding of Dutch blood by one of my name, and kindred. In
the continuance of the story, you shall hear much blood shed, of all
nations in Europe, and of ours not the least. But of my friends, and
mine, too much.

The first Observation.

The land of Holstein full of prosperity at this time, having all
things in a golden swim, and waving carelessly in a swallowing plenty,
having her heart full of pleasures, disdaining what was to come, ruin
seized upon this land within six months, after our rising from
quarters, to our first expedition, towards the Weser stream. At our
coming into the land, the proudest sort of them, disdained soldiers,
saying, they had no need of strangers, they were sufficiently able
themselves to hold out the Emperor's forces, their passes were strong,
their power in arms were mighty of horse and foot, as any province in
Germany; notwithstanding whereof, in a short time, they felt the wrath
of Heaven, and were ruinated in the midst of their fortunes. I wish my
country, by a timely prevention to avoid the like, by suspecting the
smooth stream, being ordinarily deepest; lest they should become
subject unto their enemies, their land wasted with fire, and sword,
their buildings, and plantings destroyed, their riches, and jewels
made spoil of, their wives abused, and their daughters deflowered,
themselves banished, and their religion persecuted; in so much that
their pastors flying to the altar for refuge, were cruelly put to
death. Since therefore their enemies are our enemies, we ought to
beware.

We ought also not to deny our betters in things indifferent, lest the
askers' love wax dry, and his revenge grow great: for to a generous
spirit, as it is  hard to beg, so it is harsh to be denied. Our
officers refusing to carry the the Danes' Cross in their colours,
disobliged his Majesty so far, by their denials of a thing
indifferent, that after the death of our worthy Lieutenant Colonel
Arthur Forbesse, Lieutennant-Colonel Seaton was preferred against the
officers' wills, who once placed, would refuse nothing unto his
Majesty he would command.

By his Majesty's authority, against the colonel's will, Captain Duncan
Forbesse, and Captain John Forbesse, for alleged insufficiency, were
put off their command, and their companies given to others, whom his
Majesty favoured. But time that alters all things, having favoured
them, they were restored to their companies again.

When we have good days we slight them, when they are gone, we sink
under the wring of sorrow, for their loss; and want teacheth us the
worth of things more truly: and it is a true saying, Blessings appear
not, till they be vanished. Our officers that were discontented under
the King of Denmark without reason, having had both good quarters, and
money, thereafter in other services would have been contented with
less. We ought then, to make use of the present, preserving that we
have, and if it go, to grieve as little, as we may: yet we ought to
owe a dear respect to the memory of the good we lost.

Certainly, a good resolution is the most fortifying armour a discreet
man can wear; that can defend him against all the unwelcome frowns,
that the poor world puts upon him: with this, we can be servants as
well as lords, and have the same inward pleasantness in the checks of
fortune, that we carried in her softest smiles; It was Xantippe's
observation, that she ever found Socrates return with the same
countenance, that he went abroad withal. I wish no man so spiritless,
as to let all abuses press the dullness of a willing shoulder: for
resolution is always necessary in the wain of fortune, to save us from
discontentments, that usually deject us. A wise man makes the trouble
less by fortitude, when a fool stoops to it. The world hath nothing so
glorious as virtue, which is like the passage of Hannibal over the
Alps, a work of trying toil, of infinite danger, but once performed,
it lets him in unto the world's garden, Italy leaving him a lasting
fame.

My chief and cousin, the Baron of Fowles, being in his travels in
France a little prodigal in his spending, redacted his estate to a
weak point, being advised by his friends timely to look to the wounds
of his house and family, and to foresee the best cure to keep burden
off his estate, having engaged his revenues, for ten years, to pay his
creditors, he went beyond sea a volunteer to Germany with Mac-Keye's
regiment, well accompanied with a part of his nearest friends: and
having the patience to attend his fortune, his first employment was to
be a captain of a company of Scots soldiers, levied by himself, and
thereafter advanced to be a colonel of horse & foot of strangers,
under the invincible King of Sweden of worthy memory.

Thus far of the Baron of Fowles in my first observation, to animate
other cavaliers born of less fortunes to follow his virtues in being
patient, though their preferments come not at first, loving virtue for
her end.

Here also we see by the example of the Dutch captain formerly spoken
of, that pride in a noble nature is as rare to be found, as humility
in an unworthy mind; and arrogancy is a weed that ever grows in a
dunghill, and no circumstance can make the expression of pride
laudable: for the affronting man by his own folly, should be taught
the way to his duty, as the Dutch captain was, who, out of his pride
and arrogancy, would second a first wrong with contempt, was taught
humility, in so much, as he was made beholden to those for his life,
whom out of his pride he had offended.



The second duty discharged, of the rising of the regiment from
quarters going on their first March.

The Colonel recovered of his sickness took shipping from Scotland to
Holland, and from thence over land to Holstein, accompanied with
Captain Mac-Kenyee, and Captain Pomfrey, arrived in the latter end of
March Anno 1627 in Holstein, where he was welcomed by his regiment. At
his coming, orders were given, his regiment should be brought in arms
at Itzehoe, where his Majesty would take their oaths of fidelity. The
regiment being come together at the rendezvous, was drawn up in three
divisions, attending his Majesty's coming, in good order of battle,
all officers being placed according to their stations orderly, colours
flying, drums beating, horses neighing, his Majesty comes royally
forward, salutes the regiment, and is saluted again with all due
respect, and reverence, used at such times; his Majesty having viewed
front, flanks and rear, the regiment fronting always towards his
Majesty, who having made a stand ordained the regiment to march by him
in divisions, which orderly done, and with great respect, and
reverence, as became; his Majesty being mightily well pleased, did
praise the regiment, that ever thereafter was most praiseworthy. The
Colonel, and the principal officers having kissed his Majesty's hand,
retired to their former stations, till the oath was publicly given,
both by officers, and soldiers being drawn in a ring by conversion, as
use is, at such times. The oath finished, the articles of wars read,
and published, by a bank of the drummer major, and his associates, the
regiment remitted marches off orderly by companies, to their quarters,
to remain till orders were given, for their up-breaking. The next day
the Colonel, and Lieutenant colonel, were commanded to march over the
Elbe with seven companies, and to beset the town of Stade with two
companies, and then to march with the other five towards the Weser
stream, to join with the English forces commanded by General Morgan,
being four regiments of foot.

The sergeant Major Dumbarre, with the remnant four companies, was
commanded towards Lauenburg, fearing the enemy was to cross the Elbe:
our orders duly followed, we are thus severed, marching to our
severall rendezvous, entering to take pains, for our former too much
pleasure and riot, used in our winter quarters:

On this expedition towards the Weser stream, unfortunately Captain
Boswell coming after the regiment was killed by a number of villanous
boors, ever enemies to soldiers: the cavalier's death was much
regrated of all that knew him, and no reparation had for his death.
But the boors being fled, the dorp was burnt off.

Being thus joined to General Morgan his forces, where we remained ten
weeks, having had great duty in watching, many alarms, but little
service, so that our soldiers longing for service said, the
Imperialists were no enemies; yet when the service was once offered,
the smart came with it in great.

Our lieutenant colonel and his company did march from us towards
Lauenburg, and joined with the other four companies, and the sergeant
Major Dumbarre was sent to command the Colonel's division on the
Weser, the Colonel being gone to solicit moneys for the regiment,
seeing the English regiment did get weekly means, whereas we were
entertained on proviant bread, beer and bacon.

The second Observation.

Nothing procures more faithful service, than the master's liberality.
This magnanimous King his liberality we could not complain of, having
paid us in money, and with assignation of moneys, on our own King; and
good quarters we had, which were not reckoned unto us; our true
fidelity his Majesty did oft-times commend, and our service both.
Therefore in my opinion, that blood is not to be accounted lost, which
is shed for a noble master. Diligent, and discreet servants, are the
best friends a noble king, or prince can be blest withal: And as our
deserving in this service was good, our respect was more than
answerable; having been many times feasted, and royally entertained,
at his Majesty's table; being of servants, made companions to the King
our master. Let no man then think it bondage, to serve a noble master,
and a bountiful king, as this was; yet he that lacks this ambition, to
be made companion to earthly kings, following this worldly warfare, I
would admonish him, to be thankful to the King of Kings, for his
peace, and quietness at home, and in his prosperity, to make his
acquaintance with God, that if adversity come, he may be the bolder
with his Maker, by prayer, which is the key to open heaven, and the
means to remove our adversity: for to reach unto God, we must humble
ourselves by prayer, uniting us unto him, through the greatness of our
love; for if we love God, we will be painful to seek him, and to find
him, we must enter in the narrow way; and if we will be partakers of
his meat, we must first taste of his continency; if we will follow him
to the breaking of his bread, like valiant soldiers, we must not
faint, till we drink of his cup; and to gain him, we must learn to
lose ourselves, for his sake. Let not then this saying be hard unto
us, Forsake yourselves, take up your cross, and follow me: if we faint
at this, and not prove as resolute soldiers, the next would be harder
(the reward of poltroons) depart from me you cursed unto everlasting
fire, I know you not. While then we have peace, and quietness, I wish
we may be familiar with this King of Kings, the Lord of Hosts, and say
in particular, Thou art my King, O God; enter into his tabernacle, and
salute Jesus Christ thy Saviour, and Redeemer, the head of all
principalities, and powers, and let thy desire be, to be with him, in
the land of the living. Then let the Heavens rejoice, let Satan flee,
and Hell tremble, and let thy conscience cry, Christ is my Saviour;
the world thou must despise, Heaven thou must desire, and in truth
say, Christ is my Saviour; without this assurance, all our knowledge,
all our glory, all our honours, are imperfect, and of no effect: lest
therefore, thou shouldst check me, being but a vain soldier, saying,
it is a good world, when the fox begins to preach, leaving thee  to
God, I will return to my observation, on my regiment's march, the
continuance of it, for nine years successive, in breadth, in length,
in circle, in turning, in returning, in advancing to, and from our
enemies, in weal, and woe, from the Baltic Sea, to the Weser stream,
from the Weser stream, to Ruppin in the Mark, from Ruppin to Wismar on
the Baltic Coast, from Wismar by water unto Holstein toward Oldenburg,
from thence by Sea, to Flensburg in Holstein, from thence to Denmark,
where in two years time, we did circuit the island, with several
marches, by land, and expeditions by water, being alike able for both,
not like to the High Dutch, whose head nor stomach cannot endure the
water. Being thanked of, by his Majesty of Denmark, having made peace
with the Emperor in May 1629, from Denmark our expedition by water
(having taken service anew, under the Lion of the North the invincible
King of Sweden) did continue towards Prussia, from thence to the
Baltic Coast again, and from thence to the River of Danube, that runs
from the foot of the Alps in Schwabenland to the Adriatic Sea, and,
had our master of worthy memory lived, we had crossed the Alps into
Italy, and saluted the Pope within Rome. But the loss of this Lion to
lead us, was the loss of many, and of this old regiment, the remains
whereof are yet on the Rhine, where with twenty thousand Scots like
them, I would wish to be, to do service to the Jewel of Europe, the
Daughter of our King the Queen of Bohemia, and to her princely issue.

My first advancement to preferment (through the love of my colonel,)
was on this first march, being without contradiction, though not
without envy, placed to command, as major over the regiment, in the
major his absence.

So Jacob's blessing, bred Esau's hate, nature having made some as
antipathite to virtue, they were made sick by my health. But for me,
if another excel me in virtue, I will make him my example to imitate,
not my block to stumble on: If in wealth, I'll with him bless God, for
his plenty, seeing God hath enough for me, and him both.

The killing of Captain Boswell on this march, should be an
advertisement to all cavaliers, coming after a regiment, or army, upon
march, to look well unto themselves, not offering any occasion of
offence, being weakest, for the rascal sort of communalty, are ever
soon stirred to mischief, especially an army having passed by, which,
for the most part, never goes through dorp, or village, but some
notorious villain commits some insolency or other, for which oft
times, the innocent doth pay.

Having joined after our march to General Morgan's forces upon the
Weser, being quartered in open dorps, the enemy not far from us, it
was my fortune to have the first night's watch, as captain of the
watch to oversee all guards, the avenue to the dorp on all quarters,
being well beset, with convenient guards, and sentries, under silence
of night General Morgan, accompanied with four gentlemen with fire-
locks to try us, being young soldiers, gave fire on our outer sentry,
our sentry having discharged, retired to the next sentry. I called the
guard to their arms, finding the alarm continuing, caused the sergeant
of the guard, with twelve musketeers, advance to skirmish with them,
to know what for alarm it was, and to see what hinderhalt they had:
the General Morgan finding us discharging the duty of understanding
soldiers, gave presently notice unto the sergeant, what he was, and
desired to speak with the captain of the watch, whereupon the sergeant
conveyed his Excellency unto me, to the place of my guard, being the
rendezvous for the regiment in case of alarm to draw up unto, and
finding the most part of the regiment, on sudden with their colours in
good order, praising them for their good watch-keeping, his Excellency
asked for the colonel, and went to see him.

It is the property of our nation, an enemy being near in time of an
alarm to be in readiness before any other nation, though at other
times, on watches, or repairing to their colours, on marches or in
garrison, they are more careless than others. But once coming to
earnest, or in great extremity of danger; to give them their due, they
are not inferior to any nation, so far, as I did ever see, or learn of
others, older commanders than myself. Yet many false alarms, as we had
on the Weser make soldiers, and the most diligent, at last careless,
till they feel the smart of some sudden surprise, to rouse them, the
better to go readily to their duties.

The want of pay at the Weser made our soldiers a little discontent,
seeing the English get due weekly pay; Nevertheless, I did never hear
of our nation's mutiny, nor of their refusal to fight, when they saw
their enemies, though I have seen other nations call for gilt, being
going before their enemy to fight, a thing very disallowable in either
officer, or soldier, to prefer a little money to a world of credit.

It is a great part of a colonel's duty, timely to foresee for all
things necessary, that may give content to those under his command,
lest being justly discontented, he might be grieved, whilst it were
not in his power to help himself, or others.

The liberality of a colonel and his care in foreseeing, for his
regiment, returns to him oft-times with triple profit, being with
moderation familiar with his officers, making them, as humble friends,
not as servant, under command, and he ought by all means eschew to
come in question, or public hearing with his officers: the only means
to make himself famous, and his regiment of long continuance.



The third duty discharged of our March from the Weser towards
Boizenburg on the Elbe.

Having thus remained the space of ten weeks under the command of
General Morgan on the Weser side, we got orders to break up, and to
continue our march over the Elbe under Hamburg, and from thence,
toward Boizenburg Skonce, to join with the rest of our regiment, the
Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel being absent, Major James Dumbar
commanded then in chief, receiving all necessaries fitting for our
march, as ammunition; proviant, and wagons, for our baggage, our sick
soldiers being cared for, were left behind, and we broke up from the
Weser the tenth of July 1627, a regiment of horse being commanded with
us for our convoy to the Elbe, the first night we quartered at
Rotenburg a strong pass, having a great marsh on both sides,
accessible only by one narrow causeway which leads through the marsh
to the castle, which is well fenced on both sides with moats,
drawbridges, and slaught-booms, without all.

The next day our march continuing, in the morning our fore-troops
having gotten alarm retired on us, whereupon we drawing into battle,
resolved to fight, and provided ourselves accordingly for the enemies'
coming, which being found, but a false conception, nothing followed on
it, but the continuance of our march, without further interruption.

The next night we lying in quarters, our guards orderly disposed,
before day we had another alarm, our duty duly discharged of all, both
horse and foot, if the enemy had come we were provided; But the alarm
proving false, we broke up, continuing our march toward Buxtehude
appointed for our first rendezvous: where we were commanded to send to
his Majesty at Stade, for receiving of further orders, and a company
of horse being directed with me, for my convoy, I was made choice of,
to go to his Majesty for bringing orders unto the regiment. His
Majesty being absent, orders were given to me by a general commissary
to continue our march thorough Buxtehude and to quarter overnight in
the old land by the Elbe side, till the next day we should cross the
River of the Elbe at Blankenese, and from thence to march by Hamburg
through their territories, and pass towards Lauenburg, where we
quartered a mile from it, continuing our march the next morning
towards Boizenburg, where we quartered in the fields, for five nights,
till we knew of his Majesty's further resolution.

The third Observation.

All marches are occasioned by the accidents of the warfare. The reason
of this march was the enemies' army drawing strong to a head in
Lueneburg land, of intention to force a passage over the Elbe to come
the easier to Holstein: his Majesty being weak of foot in this
quarter, having no great fear of his enemy on the Weser, where we lay
before we were therefore called to join with the rest of our regiment
at Boizenburg. Another reason of this march was, the King's forces in
Silesia being also weak of foot, standing in great need of a timely
supply, we being able to endure a long march, his Majesty resolved
after besetting well the pass on the Elbe, to send us for a supply
unto the Silesian army: Nevertheless many times we see in wars, though
things be long advised on, and prosecuted after advice duly, yet the
event doth not always answer to man's conjectures: For it is a true 
old saying; Man proposeth, but God disposeth.

A commander having the charge of a regiment, or party, on a march,
ought in all respects to be as careful and diligent as a general, that
leads an army, being subject to the like inconvenience of fortune.
Wherefore he ought to be well provided of all things fitting for his
march, that, in time of rencounter with the enemy, he might the better
discharge his duty, especially being provided with good store of
ammunition, both for the mouth and service, with sufficient fix arms.

He ought also, for his march ever to have good intelligence, lest his
enemy should circumvent him. He ought also to order his march,
according to the country's situation he marches thorough, appointing
his rendezvous nightly, short, or long, as his quarters may fall in
best security.

He ought also to keep his officers and soldiers in continual good
order of discipline, without suffering the one, or the other to fall
off from their stations, without great and urgent occasions; and if
any of them chance to fall off, he is obliged to foresee to their
timely returns.

Likewise he ought not in any manner of way suffer violence to be used
to boors, or strangers in his march, and if such doth happen, he is
obliged to do justice to all, and to see exemplary punishment done, to
terrify others from the like. He ought also, to be careful to give
none under his command just occasion of complaint, for want of their
dues, either in quarters, or in distributing of their victuals,
according to their strengths. He ought also on his march to be
provident, in causing to bring their proviant timely to their
rendezvous, or halts; seeing it to be rightly distributed, for
avoiding of contentions happening most commonly at such times.

Also he must foresee before he makes a halt, that the ground be
convenient where he draws up, whether he be in fear of an enemy, or
not; and at such times, he must be careful, that sentries be duly
placed, at all parts needful, and that no man be suffered to wander,
or go astray, from the halting part, for fear he be to seek, when
occasion should present either to break up, to march, or otherwise, in
case of alarm, to have his officers, or soldiers wandering, while as 
the enemy should charge, were a gross error.

Likewise, he ought to be of strict command, and authority to punish
those that on a march leave their arms behind them, or that are
careless in keeping their arms both fix, and clean. In quartering
either in village, field or city, he must give orders for his posts to
keep guards upon, and he ought himself to recognize all avenues, and
inquire of the known countrymen, the passes, whereby his enemies may
come unto him, and of the distance he is from his enemy; he must also
direct parties on all quarters of horsemen to get intelligence, and
conceit of his enemy, lest unawares he should be surprised.

Likewise at his upbreaking from quarters, he should take notice of all
complaints, and do justice accordingly: And he should have a special
care of the sick, either to transport them, or to foresee for their
good usage, in case necessity, or weakness force him to leave them
behind. He ought also, to foresee before he march for his guides and
to give charge to keep them from running away; and he ought to learn
of the guide the inconveniences on the way that may be hindersome unto
his march, that timely he might provide a remedy. His guide should
also know how far to go, that when he comes his length, he may timely
provide for another. He ought also to learn the best way for his
baggage, and ammunition to march on, and in case of suspected danger,
he ought to ordain a guard of musketeers with a sufficient officer to
command for their convoy, and if it be such way, as that on occasion
his ammunition cannot be steadable unto him, in such a case he must
not part from his ammunition wagons; but rather to keep one way,
though it should be far about.

He ought never for pastime, or pleasure, on a suspected march near an
enemy, to go from the sight of his troops; for fear he should be
absent in greatest need, or that some misfortune might happen between
those he commands himself, or against others incurring in their ways.
If occasion of service offer, he must never be dejected, but to
encourage ever his own most in the greatest extremity, showing
testimonies of his inward valour and settledness of mind, by his by-
past experience, testifying he is no novice, not taking counsel of
others, when he is with resolution to rencounter a brave enemy.

He must be of judgment to consider on the sudden his enemies' design,
and timely he ought to oppose his enemy, either with few, or with
many, as he finds his best advantage, And if his enemy be too far
stronger than he, he must timely resolve how to make a safe retreat,
being forced thereto; preserving his soldiers, to a fitter
opportunity: for once far engaged, the retreat will be the more
difficult to make without great loss; He ought always to keep a good
reserve of fresh, brave, resolute fellows to keep faces on their
enemies, while as others should be forced to turn back on them: at
such times, and in such occasions the resolution, the courage, and the
judgment of a valourous commander is best known; for many can advance
rashly, that have never the wit, or judgment to retire bravely, as is
ordinarily seen in many such commanders, more stout, than wise. But
lest I should enter too far to this purpose in this observation, for
fear to be blamed myself for not retiring in time, it being a large
field I entered in, let this suffice for this march of the leader's
duty.

Now to retire, being quartered a mile from Lauenburg in a dorp, where
the boor for fear quit his lodging, so that for want of provision we
were forced to send our sutler called John Matheson, towards
Lauenburg: in his absence our boys made use of his rug to cover their
faces; in drowning of bee-hives, the rug being rough did lodge a
number of the bees, which, when the boys had drowned the bee-hives,
they threw away: The sutler coming late home we being abed, went to
rest; and putting off his clothes, drew his rug to cover him, but as
soon as the bees found the warmness of his skin, they began to punish
him for his long stay, that he was forced roaring like a madman, to
rise, and throw off his rug, not knowing (though well he felt) the
smart of his sudden enemies; we called to him, asking, if he was mad:
he made no answer, but still cried the devil had bewitched him, in
piercing him in a thousand parts, still rubbing and scratching, crying
with pain, not knowing the reason, till a candle was lighted, and
seeing the bees, threw his rug in a draw-well; The gentle reader may
judge whether, or not, he was punished, for his long stay. Thus Seria
mista jocis.



The fourth duty discharged of our march from Boizenburg to Ruppin in
the Mark, and of the storming of Boizenburg Skonce.

Having rested here three days on the fields, till our Colonel came
from Hamburg with a month's means to the regiment, our moneys paid, we
got orders for a new march towards Ruppin in the Mark, where the old
Markegrave von Turlaugh lay at Havelberg with a part of his Majesty's
army, and the enemy lay against him on the other side of the Havel,
our orders were to divide our regiment again, and to leave Major
Dumbarre with four companies to beset Boizenburg Skonce, the enemies'
army being then within five miles of it, ten thousand strong of foot
besides horse. The other seven companies were ordained to march with
the Colonel and Lieutenant colonel towards Ruppin, as said, is; we
severed not without tears, both of officers and soldiers. But he that
serves a master, must obey. The first night our comrades accompanied
us to our quarters. The next morning our march continuing, news
overtakes us, the enemy is set down before Boizenburg Skonce. In the
relation of the service I must be succinct, being loath, having not
seen the service, to set anything in record, but what I know to be
truth, neither can I be particular in the declaration of this service
done by our countrymen, though it be generally well spoken of, over
all Germany, yet I must say somewhat, and if my report diminish from
their credit, I protest it is not for lack of love, but for want of
information.

The enemy hearing we were marched, and having gotten true intelligence
how strong they lay in the skonce, he marched ten thousand strong, and
lay down within a cannon shot of the skonce, and having begun his
lines of approach, the first night, the Major made an out-fall, where
having bravely shown their courage, and resolution, returned again
without great loss.

The enemy longing to be repared of this their bravado, resolved to
storm the skonce at all quarters, but finding resolution joined with
valour against him, after long fighting in vain, he is beat off from
the walls, and forced to retire at that time, with the loss of five
hundred men at least. But having redoubled his forces the next time,
sets on with greater fury than before, but is beat off the second time
also, with loss; the third time he adventured, and, as was reported,
the Scots defenders, as is well known, behaved themselves so well,
that the enemy storming the walls, the defenders for want of powder
threw sand in their enemies' eyes, knocking them down with the butts
of muskets, having been divers times pell-mell through others; at last
the enemy is forced to retire without effectuating anything.

Yet, gentle reader, think that at such play, the loss was not only of
one side, but of both, for in defence of this skonce being so oft
stormed; that ever praise-worthy Captain Learmond, brother to my Lord
Balcomy, being twice shot with a musket, received death's wound, and
after died at Hamburg, in perfect memory, discharging his duty
Christianly to God, as he did during his life time both to God and
man.

For his sake, and in remembrance of his worth and valour, the whole
officers of the regiment did wear a black mourning ribbon: in this
conflict also was killed his Lieutenant, called David Martin, an old,
stout and expert officer: many other valourous fellows, that were
there, carried the true marks of their valour imprinted in their
bodies, for their country's credit. There was also, a Scottish
gentleman under the enemy, who coming to scale the walls, said aloud,
Have with you gentlemen, think not now you are on the streets of
Edinburgh bravadoing: One of his own countrymen thrusting him through
the body with pike, he ended there. This skonce so well maintained by
our countrymen, is to their praise recorded at length in the Dutch
story of the Dane's Wars, where the curious reader may learn more of
it. The enemy finding this opportunity to fail, at another pass above
this on the Elbe watched by Dutch surprising the watch, did come over
the Elbe: the news coming to his Majesty, he presently sends orders in
the night to Major Dumbarre, who commanded the skonce to retire, and
to bring off his cannon, and to cut off the bridge, and then to come
by water with his troups to Lauenburg, and to beset the Castle thereof
with two companies, and to retire with the rest to Glueckstadt, which
accordingly was done, to their great credit.

Major Wilson being set with two companies on the castle of Lauenburg,
the enemy falling down, General Tilly leading the army, coming before
the castle, doth summon it to render, the Major refusing, he is
besieged, the enemies' batteries having played a little on the castle,
the Major parleys for accord, before the parley, General Tilly is shot
through the thigh, pledges delivered, the accord agreed on, he should
march out with bag and baggage, drums beating, Bale an Bouche, with a
convoy granted to them to Glueckstadt, the accord subscribed, but
neither circumspectly nor wisely by the Major: at his out-coming his
colours are taken from him, having forgot to insert them in his
accord, he complaining of the breach is bidden read it, and finding it
was so, was forced to march without colours to Glueckstadt, where, for
his over-sight, he was set from charge, with disgrace, and the company
restored again to the right owner, Captain Duncan Forbesse, and
incontinent Major Dumbarre, with four companies, was commanded to
beset Stadt-holder Ransove his castle of Breddenburg in Holstein; the
enemy having already fallen into the land. Which discourse I must now
leave, and prosecute the continuance of our march towards Ruppin.

After this service the renown spread so abroad, wherever we came, that
the gentry of the country were ready meeting us, providing all
necessaries for us. The Duke of Weimar, the Dukes of Mecklenburg, with
a number of gallant ladies, did visit us in our march, to congratulate
with us the good fortune, and good service, done by our comrades. But
if we should look to the outside of soldiers, these four companies
were the meanest of our regiment to the outward appearance. Our march
continues to Ruppin, where we were to receive further orders of
General Major Slamersdorffe: our orders were to draw up in battle
before the town of Ruppin, where the General Major would come, and see
us, his intention being to bring the town under contribution,
otherwise to fright them with inquartering of the regiment: his
intention effectuated, we were led in quarters or dorps, for three
days to rest us, seeing our intentions were to march unto Silesia.

The fourth Observation.

IN this observation, though the duty be suddenly discharged, we have
much to amplify the observation; first, by reason of the dispute that
did arise betwixt his Majesty and the Colonel, for offering to cashier
some of his officers for alleged insufficiency, by the information of
some malignant spirits amongst ourselves, whose names I will suppress,
and the reasons also, letting some other tongue, not mine, divulge
their shame. At this time also before our rising to this expedition we
were discontented of the division made of our regiment, being
absolutely divided by his Majesty's authority, without the consent of
our Colonel, who would have been loath to have left Captain Learmond
behind, that had done him so many notable good offices, and this noble
gentleman of famous memory, at his leave-taking of his Colonel, my
brother and me, being then his entirest comrades, with tears revealed
unto us, whom he thought was the plotter of his stay, and withal did
with grief in a manner foretell his own fall, alleging we should never
meet again. Therefore, for the love I bare to my dear comrade, I will
point at the heart of those, who had a hand in the separation of the
regiment. I must therefore crave pardon a little, to express my duty
for the loss of this noble, and virtuous cavalier, whose heart and
eyes were ever fixed upon virtue, and upon his love to his dear
friends. He hates nor, but with cause, that is unwilling to hate at
all. And it is the end that shows the difference betwixt virtue and
vice. Fie then upon those judgements, that, for their own aims, hatch
the ruin of their comrades, in fore-thinking, and pursuing evil. And
as the discharge of my last duty was tragical, the reasons of it I
will set down obscurely, pointing at some, that every man may examine
his own conscience, that had any hand in plotting, or hatching, (by
villanous policy, bred of envy,) the ruin of their comrades, the
reward whereof doth still await them with shame in a killing ambush,
when the Lord of Hosts will bring to light the hidden plots of the
malicious man. Here I could make some to blush, that I know plotted
the fall of their comrades. But I will be dumb, doing by them, as 
Joseph thought to have done by Mary, in seeking to cover blemishes
with secrecy, lest I should wound some so with my pen, as to make them
by their comrades, to be pushed out of company. But I will rather show
my charity to the delinquent, by concealing of his fault, and tell him
of it in secret, than openly to divulge his mischief, seeing I wish
his amendment before the world should know his amiss: I will not
therefore be too harsh, or virulent, hoping for his penitency, wishing
God may enlighten his conscience, that while he hath time, he may
crave pardon for his hatched evil. Being sorry for the loss of these
two worthy cavaliers, of famous memory, Learmond and Dumbarre, for
whose sakes, with grief I have pointed thus obscurely at the forger of
these cavaliers' fall, whose name I will suppress, though my heart
knows him well; and hoping time may change him to another man, I will
let him be his own beadle, and for his punishment, I would not care,
though he were made to sing an invective against himself. But I pray
God, we may be freed of the like ourselves, and not to look upon
another, with a beamed eye, but rather to be our own antidotes,
against all the poison that another is able to spit upon us. Let us
then have our eyes fixed upon virtue, and we shall find a beauty, that
will every day take us with some grace or other: For the world hath
nothing so glorious in it as virtue, when she rides triumphing, as
both these cavaliers do after death, in despite of their enemies, like
Phoebean champions, praised by their enemies, for resisting their
strongest assaults, are now renowned in despite of envy, and the
abusive world. And the worthy soldiers, their associates in this
memorable conflict, and hot storm, are not to be forgotten, but to be
praised for their valour. For though, as I said, by appearance to look
but on their outsides, they were the meanest in show of our whole
regiment: yet God that gives hearts, and courage unto men, made them
the instruments of our regiment's first credit in the wars of Germany.
They were, I confess, led by brave officers, which were seconded and
obeyed by resolute and stout soldiers, that gained victory, and
credit, over their enemies in extremity, by casting sand in their
eyes. This victory puts me in mind of a pretty story, showing that
some times the meanest things, do help us much against our enemies,
especially, when the LORD will bless our fighting, with mean
Instruments, fighting for us for his own glory.

Jovianios Pontanus reports of Alphons being resolved by assault to
take in Vicaro, his soldiers having at the first passed the
counterscarp and fosse, scaling the walls, the inhabitants not able to
repulse them with stones, and the enemy unawares having surprised
them, that they got not leisure to arm themselves, they threw beehives
amongst the enemy, which being dispersed, sticking under their arms,
and in their faces, forced the enemy to retire, uneffectuating his
design. Read Jovian in his seventh book of Alphons his deed, Cap. 2.

Jerome Osorius reports the like story, of one Captain Baregue, a
Portugal, in his eighth book of Portugal, who by throwing bee-hives on
his enemies, made them to retire. The like was done of late in
Hungary, on a fort belonging to the Bishop of Agria, near the Turks,
which with the like help was relieved of a sudden assault, the
soldiers not having time to go to their arms, used this mean, and were
saved thereby. We see then, that an immortal good name is attained
unto by virtue, and not by villany.

Here also in this conflict we see, notwithstanding of the enemies'
eager pursuit with fury, that resolution at last prevails; for the
defenders having at first resisted their fury, the enemy with loss
being forced to retire, the assailers were discouraged, and the
defenders encouraged. Therefore it is the duty of a brave Captain,
that is to be assailed, to resist the beginnings well, and then the
end must needs be glorious.

In such occasions, happy is that Commander, that, in extremity of
danger, is accompanied with a few trusty friends and soldiers: He may
be assured not to be forsaken, as I have been some times by strangers.
The valiant soldier is ever best known in the greatest extremity of
danger, and a forebeaten enemy, once or twice repulsed, will be loath
to continue his pursuit: But he that would gain honour, must resolve
to contemn death, though ever before his eyes. Wherefore I would wish
the brave soldier to be ever well prepared to die, who should glory in
nothing earthly more than in the tokens of his valour, being known
they were got with credit, and not by infamy, as many unworthy
soldiers oft-times get wounds, but not with credit, while for their 
cowardice they are running away, yet they will vaunt amongst the
unknowing, as if their wounds were credibly gotten. Here also we may
see the resolution and courage of our countryman to be praise-worthy,
though killed serving the Emperor; for though I loved him not, being
mine enemy, yet I honour his memory, in serving them truly, whom he
did serve, for his own credit.

Of all professions men of our profession ought to look nearst to their
credits, being attained unto by much toil, and travail; and is lost
with little. Therefore it is said, that a valourous man his credit
hangs, as it were, at one hair, and one little error or oversight in
command, can obnubilate all his former glory. Circumspect then had we
need to be, to preserve this credit, so dearly bought, and easily
lost.

We must not then look to the outside of a man, but unto his virtues;
for he that judgeth men of our profession by physiognomy, shall oft-
times be deceived; for he that is not stout by nature in our
profession, having served out a seven years prenticeship under such a
leader, as the magnanimous King of Denmark, such a one, though not
stout by nature, by frequency of danger is made stout, as a sword,
fearing nothing, not death itself. And soldiers thus used with danger,
for the love of their leaders, to gain their favours and good opinion,
will undertake the hazard of the greatest dangers for their
commander's sake. Such then, that have travailed well, should by due
have rest, since the crown is laid up and ordained for him that fights
well. On the other part, to end this observation, as I did begin,
there is no punishment more grievous, than the public ill-will of all
men; especially for just causes. And in my opinion, it is better to be
buried in oblivion, than to be evil spoken of to posterity,



The fifth Duty discharged of our Retreat from Ruppin to Wismar on the
Baltic Coast.

Having rested eight days at Ruppin, of intention to have marched
toward Silesia, to join with the army there, God that disposes all
things by his providence for our best, provided that we went not; for
the army there being beaten, and put to rout (whereof few escaped) the
enemy after his victory following down to us-ward, and having crossed
the Elbe behind us, our retreat towards the King's army in Holstein
was hindered, the passages being all beset by the enemies' forces, so
that there was no other passage free for our army to pass through, but
only to retire towards the Baltic Sea, to patronize the Isle of Poel
for our safety, till such time as shipping should be provided by his
Majesty to transport us unto Holstein. Orders then were given to the
whole army, to march with all celerity from Ruppin unto the
rendezvous, being appointed at Perleberg, where having come together,
we were near ten thousand strong of horse and foot, being sufficiently
provided of artillery and ammunition answerable to the strength of our
army. Our march in great haste, night and day, continues towards
Wismar, being afraid of our enemies, we feared we should not gain so
much time, as to put our army in assurance, within trenches, before
the enemies' coming: but being more affrighted, than we had reason,
coming there betimes, we intrenched ourselves within a close leaguer,
before the Isle of Poel, a mile from Wismar: where we made a draw-
bridge over the passage to the Isle, and fortified it with skonces and
redoubts on both sides; where we lay five weeks, till his Majesty
provided shipping for our transportation unto Holstein, and fearing
contrary winds might keep us long on the Isle, it being in the harvest
time, we provided the island with corn and cattle taken off the
country about, sufficiently to have entertained us the whole Winter in
necessity. In this leaguer we had abundance of flesh, and of drink,
but we were slightly provided of bread and salt, where a soldier had
but one pound of bread allowed him in ten days, if that he took it not
off the field. Our Scottish Highland men called this leaguer the flesh
leaguer, and justly, for the soldiers were so cloyed with flesh, that
oxen flesh was let lie on the ground, the hides taken off by the
soldiers, and sold for a can of beer a hide, the whole body left on
the place untouched, and at last, the soldiers weary of mutton also,
eating only the heads and feet, being boiled with wheat brought off
the fields. In all this necessity, the town of Wismar did prove very
discourteous unto us, in not suffering to help us, with anything they
might spare for our money, but rather through their pride abused our
officers and servants, that entered their town to buy necessaries.

The fifth Observation.

Where we have represented unto us, the mutability of human estates,
and especially of wars, the wheel turning, we that looked to go
forwards, were forced to retire, human affairs being opposed as a mark
to all the shots of discontentment; so that we ought not to rejoice
too much in a calm, or prove faint hearted in a storm. We read of a
Roman captain, who did tremble being victorious, as being uncertain
how long his good fortune might continue. And the Romans (as Scipio
told the ambassadors of Antiochus) were not puffed up by victory, nor
cast down by loss. And Augustine said, this life of ours, was
doubtful, blind, miserable, made of a flood of humors, ebbing, and
flowing.

Notwithstanding whereof, it is the duty of a wise commander to make
use of the time, by diligent foresight, and wise deliberation, to save
himself, and others so long as he may, and not to be dejected, at
every buffet unconstant fortune doth give him.

As this old general his resolution at this time, having an enemy
before him, was good, the enemy coming also behind him, took his march
betwixt both, and did come fortunately to his wished forecast, putting
himself and his army in assurance. This old general was of good
experience, but not fortunate, neither were they fortunate whom he
served, though of invincible courage, and of great understanding in
wars: for, to give his Majesty of Denmark his due, no man breathing, I
think, carries a stouter heart then he doth: Yet I have seen his
Majesty far dejected in spirit, through great loss, and no wonder, as
you shall hear more particularly set down in the seventh observation.

In this retreat we were not void of fear, but suspecting the worst,
every man bethinking himself of his best safety, to eschew an apparent
overthrow, a thing at all times most dangerous in an army. Our
horsemen, being afraid of a retreat by water, and consequently the
loss of their horses, for want of shipping, and which was more, they
feared the loss of their goods, and their own imprisonment: but it was
in vain they should torment themselves beforehand, for things without
their powers to eschew. But they ought rather to have made use of the
present, and to have foreseen the future so far as lay in them,
resolving patiently against all crosses and to refer the event to God.

Here also I did observe the inconvenience that comes to soldiers,
through eating much flesh without salt, or bread, which did bring
diseases in the leaguer, so that many died of pestilence and flux: but
of our nation fewest, for to speak truth, I never did see more durable
men against all toil, travail and tediousness, than they were.

Likewise I did observe first here, that the towns of Germany are best
friends ever to the masters of the field, in flattering the
victorious, and in persecuting of the loser, which is ever well seen
in all estates.

When we are happy in the spring-tide of abundance, and in the rising
flood of plenty, then the world would be our servants: but when these
pleasant waters fall to ebbing, then men look upon us, at a distance.
Wherefore adversity is like Penelope's night, which undoes all, that
ever the day did weave. And our misery is so, that we can never try a
friend, but in the kick of malignant chance: so I confess he is happy,
that finds a true friend, but he is happier that findeth not extremity
to try him.



The sixth duty discharged of our expedition by Water from Wismar to
Heiligenhafen, and of our service at Oldenburg.

Having remained five weeks in this leaguer, during which time,
preparation was making, for the transportation of the army unto
Holstein; seeing the Emperor's forces come from Silesia, and Tilly's
army were joined very strong, which barred our passage from coming
into Holstein by land, which made us ship our army for going unto
Heiligenhafen; and from thence to the pass of Oldenburg in Holstein,
of intention to lie secured there, till then rest of his Majesty's
forces might join with us. The army then consisted of eight thousand
foot, and horse, besides those that were left behind on the island
under the command of General Major Slamersdorfe.

Having all safely landed, at Heiligenhafen: we matched towards the
pass of Oldenburg, where arrived before night, our leaguer was drawn
out into the most convenient part, for maintaining of the pass, where
the first night we begin to work in the trenches, and continue working
the whole night, and the next day, till noon, that the enemy was seen
marching towards the pass, in full battalions of horse, and foot,
which before three of the clock had planted batteries, to play with
cannon on our leaguer and to force a passage over the pass, which our
General perceiving, gave orders, to double the guards both of horse,
and foot; as also strongly to barricade the pass, and to cast up in
the night a redoubt before the pass: the night drawing on being dark,
silence was over all, on both sides of the pass.

But the day clearing, the guards on both sides begin the skirmish, the
cannons on both sides begin to discharge, the horse guards charge one
another, till ours were forced to give ground; the foot guards
beginning to fight, the reliefs were commanded on both sides to second
their own, the service growing hot; and the pass in danger of losing.

My colonel in all haste was commanded to march with the half of his
regiment to maintain the pass; The colonel commanded me, to have the
men in readiness, and to distribute ammunition amongst the soldiers;
which done the colonel leading on marches towards the pass under mercy
of cannon, and musket: the general meeting us bids ask the soldiers,
if they went on with courage; they shouting for joy, cast up their
hats, rejoicing in their march, seeming glad of the occasion. The
general commending their courage, and resolution, doth bless them in
passing. At our ongoing to the pass, the enemies' cannon played
continually on the colours, which were torn with the cannon: Also to
my grief, my comrade Lieutenant Hugh Rosse, was the first that felt
the smart of the cannon bullet, being shot in the leg, who falling not
fainting at his loss, did call courageously, go on bravely comrades,
and I wish I had a treen, or a wooden leg for your sakes; in this
instant of time, and, as I believe, with one bullet, the leg was also
shot from David Rosse son to Rosse of Gannis. The service thus hot,
both of cannon and musket, many were hurt at the ongoing, where I
received a favourable mark, being hurt in the inner side of my right
knee, with the end of mine own partizan, being shot off, by the cannon
bullet. And we drawing near to the pass, the Dutch, that were on
service being all fled but the captain, the pass near lost, my colonel
draws off a platoon of musketeers of the right wing, being most of
them brave young gentlemen of the colonel's own company, which in all
haste with an officer were directed to maintain the pass, which being
hardly pursued, sundry worthy young gentlemen did lie on the place in
the defence of it, and sundry were hurt, as Andrew Monro, Hector
Monro, Alexander Tollough, Arthur Forbesse, and divers more, of common
soldiers. By this time, the rest of the colonel's division were not
idle from service, the reliefs going often on, and the rest doing
service along the pass, having a hedge for their shelter, The body of
the pikes standing, for two hours in battle, under mercy of cannon and
musket, so that their sufferings and hurts were greater both amongst
officers and soldiers than the hurt done to the musketeers, that were
on service, for few of their officers escaped unhurt, as Ensign Ennis,
Ensign Stewart, Ensign Monro; divers also were killed, as Andrew
Monro, Ferwhar Monro, and Murdo Powlson was killed with a cannon. In
time of this hot service, powder being distributing amongst soldiers,
a whole barrel was blown up, whereby the colonel was burnt in the
face, and many soldiers spoiled: the enemy seeing our powder blown up,
press to force the passage, and some coming over, Captain John Monro
with a few musketeers was commanded in a flat champaign to encounter
the enemy, who forced the enemy to retire, so that the pass was
cleared again by Captain John his valour, much to his credit.

The first division of our regiment having thus maintained the pass for
two hours hot service, then comes from the leaguer, for relief of the
Colonel's division, the Lieutenant Colonel, with the other division
nothing inferior to the first, who falling on fresh with man-like
courage, the other division falls off, to refresh themselves during
their comrades being on service, at the very entry the Lieutenant
Colonel was hurt, Sir Patrick Mackey and John Forbesse of Tullough,
both captains were hurt, Lieutenant Andrew Stewart, Ensign Seaton and
Ensign Gordon were also hurt, and many gentlemen and common soldiers
were killed. This service continued in this manner from seven o' clock
in the morning, till it was past four in the afternoon, first began,
with the half of the regiment, who were relieved by the other half,
which continued till mid-day; after that the service not being so hot,
as before, they went on to service by companies, one company relieving
another, till night that it grew dark, and then darkness, the enemy of
valour, made the service to cease.

During all this time, our horsemen stood bravely in battle under mercy
of cannon and musket, besides the foot, attending to second us, in
case the enemy had set over, and forced the pass, which once he
adventured to do, but was suddenly beaten back: all this while, the
General the Duke of Wismar, and both the armies, were witnesses to the
manly and brave carriage of this praiseworthy regiment.

In the evening before night ammunition on both sides growing scarce, &
darkness coming on, the service begins to bear up: by this time, there 
is a barrel of beer sent us, from the leaguer, the officers for haste
caused to beat out the head of it, that every man might come unto it,
with hat, or head piece, they flocking about the wagon, whereon the
barrel lay, the enemies' cannonier gives a volley to their beer,
which, by God's providence, though shot amongst the mid'st of them,
did no more harm, but blew barrel and beer in the air, the nearst miss
that I did ever see; for many of them were down to the ground, whereof
my brother, Captain Obstell of worthy memory was one.

At night the service ceased, I was sent by the rest of the officers to
the leaguer to my colonel for orders, to learn of the general, who
should relieve us at night: My colonel did go to the general's tent,
and I with him, to have his Excellence's resolution, who having nobly
accepted of the colonel, did praise him and his regiment, requesting
him, that as the regiment had done bravely all day, in being the
instruments under God of his safety, and of the army's, he would once
more request him, that his regiment might hold out the inch, as they
had done the span, till it was dark, and then they should be relieved,
as he was a Christian; and drinking to me, I returned with a
resolution to my comrades, leaving my colonel in the leaguer: And as
it grew dark, we were relieved by the Duke of Weimar his earnest and
diligent entreaty, having proved our good friend, in urging to take us
first off. The General having resolved to retire from the enemy, with
the whole army, by reason ammunition grew scarce, and we having
deserved best, were first brought off, getting orders to march in the
night to ships.

The sixth Observation.

The wise ancients said, it was the principal thing in all things to
look unto the end: but it is the property of our nation to be over-
wise behind the hand; as we were after the service, having lost
thereat a great many of our friends, we ought to have been the more
circumspect again. But our condition is so, that no experience can
make us wise, till we be sore beaten by others, and then we will grow
kind one to another.

Amongst the Romans none was admitted to the dignity of a commander,
till first he had passed a prenticeship under a brave general, where
he was taught the use of arms, and novices durst not be so bold, as to
intrude themselves in this honourable profession, in any degree, to
take command on them, without long practise, and experience, as was
requisite to undergo a charge in so high a calling, and of such
importance, as to lead others: Nevertheless, the ground work or
foundation of military discipline once well laid, then they were
suffered to advance by degrees unto high charges, proposing
recompense, and reward unto those, that did merit, and to that effect,
they invented several sorts of crowns, for the reward of their
travails, and wisdom: Amongst others, the crown called obsidional was
ordained, for those that entered first the besieged places, being of
the most esteem of all crowns, which was made of the root of the
herbs, or grain, that had taken root within the place besieged; also
those that first scaled the walls, were wont to get a crown of the
herb woodbine, or parietaria, pellitory growing on the walls, and
those that first entred the enemies' ports by force, had also a crown
given unto them; And the crown castean was ordained, for him that
first entered the enemies' trenches, and broke the palisades, making
way to enter unto the enemies' leaguer: Also a crown was given unto
those of the naval army, that first entered the enemies' galleys, or
ships on sea; this crown was made of gold, representing the combat,
and the general afoot, being victorious, had given him a crown made of
hats, and mitres, and triumphing in a chariot, he carried a hat made
of laurel. At last, these crowns were made of gold, laid over with
precious stones. They had also given them, for recompense of their
travails, chains, and bracelets, all to the end they might accustom
themselves to virtue, and to the discipline and toil of wars. Who then
would not desire to be of this society, to get a crown for well doing?
On the contrary, cowards, poltroons, and effeminate persons, were
disdained, degraded and put off charge, while the valiant were
honoured, advanced, and recompensed, as the Turk doth practise to this
day; to the disgrace of Christians neglecting discipline, till they
are overthrown. It should then be the duty of brave generals to make
choice of brave and virtuous commanders, not asking of whom they come,
but where, and how long, have they practised to be virtuous. Then we
see here, what was the custom of the ancient Romans, in choosing the
virtuous, that had passed their prenticeship, and not novices to be
commanders: for we see, that the love of the public brings honour,
pleasure and profit to the virtuous, who think on it sincerely; But 
those, that would raise their fortunes by the ruin of others, shall
never prosper.

The reason of our coming to this pass of Oldenburg was, to have stayed
there in safety from our enemies, till we might join with our friends;
but the enemy prevented us, in coming betwixt us and our friends: then
there was no remedy, but to hold him up at the pass, till our army
might join with us, and of this intention we resolved for best, to
maintain the pass, as we did, till ammunition grew scant, and then we
were forced to retire to our ships.

This King is powerful by sea, and is mightily well furnished of all
things necessary for wars, of arms, artillery, ammunition, victuals,
money, and what else is requisite to set forwards a war; and, which is
more, a noble, and a liberal master, as ever I did serve.

Here also I observe the slowness of our general, that did not
patronize the pass some few days before the enemies' coming, that it
might have been fortified: for it was no time for us to fortify the
pass in the night, when the enemy came before us, and the next day, we
were not suffered to work, being otherwise employed. Another oversight
was, that our general did not know certainly, how we were provided of
ammunition, for though we had lead in abundance, we wanted bullets in
the time of need. Whereupon the general was accused, after our coming
into Denmark, and the blame was found in the commissary, that had the
charge of the artillery, Et jure, for they were all rogues, and 
deceived his Majesty, that trusted them too much. Nevertheless, I
cannot excuse the general of being ignorant of the provisions ordained
for the army; seeing he was certain of the enemies' coming: for it is
most sure, if we had been provided of ball, we were sufficiently
bastant to have kept the pass against our enemy, since it came not in
the enemies' power, till we had left it voluntarily in the night. The
enemy also retiring from us, hearing the Rhinegrave's forces were
coming behind him, of intention to join with us. I observed also, that
the general was too slow, in the encouragement of his officers and
soldiers, having delayed his exhortion to the very time of our going
on service. And it is easy, at such time, to prognosticate by the
countenance going on service how they are affected. But never men went
on service with more cheerful countenances, than this regiment did,
going as it were, to welcome death, knowing it to be the passage unto
life, especially fighting in a good cause, against the enemies of the
daughter of our King, the Queen of Bohemia, for whose sake, our
magnific and royal master did undertake the wars, and for her sake, we
resolved to have followed such a courageous leader, as the earth this
day affords none stouter, as mine eyes did witness divers times: And
for her sake, I persuade myself, our noble colonel did engage his
estate, and adventured his person, to have done her sacred Majesty
good service. I did also observe this day, that the best way to eschew
danger, is not to perceive it; for a man well resolved perceives no
danger neither doth anything seem difficult unto him, that may import
his credit. And the best commanders, in my opinion, as they are in
measure remiss, not seeming prodigal of their lives, though resolutely
adventurous; and for me, I love a man that is modestly valiant, that
stirs not till he must needs: for he that is conscious of his inward
courage, is confident to show it to the world, when he will; but a man
prodigal of life, oft-times endangers himself and others; for though
he have courage to lead them on, he lacks wit and discretion to bring
them off, in case of eminent danger. And at such times, as I condemn
him that runs away first, I cannot allow of him, that, out of
ostentation, will stay after all his comrades are gone, till he yield
himself prisoner, or die unnecessarily there, where he might have
preserved himself with honour for a better occasion. I have also
observed, that a base fellow hath been killed running away, when a
valiant soldier stood to it, and came off with credit.

I did also remark the invincible courage and resolution of that worthy
gentleman Lieutenant Rosse, who having lost his leg, wished for a
wooden or treen leg, lying on the ground, as the example of pity, that
he, who was endued with such courage, and Christian resolution, had
not time in the warfare, to have given the world greater proof of his
valour.

Here also I must condemn those arrogant spirits, who contemn God and
Fate, that while as being on service, and being hurt, may retire with
credit, and on the contrary will be so foolishly valiant, as to stay
on a second hurt, worse than the first; as became that day of a young
gentleman of my name, and kindred, who being shot in the arm with a
musket bullet, would not at my desire retire, but slighting his wound
stayed on service, till he was shot dead in the head. David Monro
Ensign, being shot through the body above the left pap, went a little
aside, till he was dressed, and returned again to his station, keeping
his colours in his hand, till night, before the enemy, never fainting
with his wound, an example of rare courage, and of great strength of
body, neither did he ever thereafter keep bed or lodging one hour,
more than ordinary, for all this hurt.

Here also I did observe, that the former distractions amongst the
officers of the regiment were taken away, having been companions of
equal danger against their enemies, made them love one another the
better ever after: for Captain John Monro helped Lieutenant colonel
Seaton, being shot, to his horse, having on the march two days before
fallen horribly out: which verifies the Scots proverb, Dogs will part
swine, and make them agree amongst themselves. We see oft-times, that
those that are feeblest themselves, are most ready to speak
derogatively of others. Here I might infer divers instances, yet I
will infer, and only point, for the present a little at those unlucky
dispositions, that cannot endure any but themselves to be well thought
of, for if one be justly praised, or advanced in recompense of his
virtue, they will presently dismount his virtues, and stab him to the
heart, obnubilating his brightest glory, with a butt of detraction
bred of envy, nasty indeficient minds devising spots, where they find
them not, a base office to make his tongue whip a worthy man. If I
knew vice in another, I would nobly show my charity in concealing it,
if he be absent; if present, I would not flatter: for the valiant man
his tongue is ever the greatest coward in absence, for it is not good
to deprave the fame of the absent, with a viperous tongue: Therefore
my advice were to thee, in such a case, to do like the wise man, to
learn somewhat by thine enemies' outrage, as King Philip of Macedon
learned well the lesson, who many times thanked his enemies for their
outrage, which made him afterwards the more wise, more circumspect,
and more settled: for nothing gives a man more good experience, than
wars, laws, love, and detraction: And for detraction thou oughtest to
be so wise, if thou be made the mark for calumniators to shoot at, let
them shoot, as they please, I would be hard, they should not pierce
me, being armed with a good conscience, we should not care for their
shooting, for though it sometime take root in the ears of some
hearers, yet thy comfort should be, that one day, he shall kill
himself, soon or late, as the poisonable birth kills the mother: and
such fellows should be punished, as thieves: seeing the one bereaves
men but of their substance, but the other bereaves them of life, and
death, and of their dearest friends also. And he should be holden as
such a one himself, till he brought his evidence; as the custom was of
old: and for myself, I never found better remedy against them, than to
disdain them, as coming about the ears of a deaf man, that did not
hear them, and this I found to be the best bridle, to curb their
tongues, for in the end he would hold his peace, and turn his tongue
another way: but I must confess, the tongue of a calumniator hath
sometimes offended me, and grieved me much, but they profited me, in
making me the more circumspect and diligent, in thinking on all
circumstances, that might conserve my credit and reputation, to be
avenged on them. And with the proverb, which I know to be true, I will
conclude this point, things that grieve us, should lead us to
repentance, seeing that which destroys, instructs; and God oft-times,
cleanses the inward man, by the outward, by the contrary course,
leading us to our wished for harbour: for there is no such great
discommodity, but brings commodity with it; for those that are stinged
by scorpions, though at first it be very dangerous, yet at last, the
hurt being cured by convenient remedies, it brings fruit with
advantage, as experience hath taught, neither fly, bee, nor wasp can
harm those thus cured.

To conclude then this point of detraction, men should be circumspect,
what to determine of other men's actions, being on service: for I am
of the opinion, that in time of hot service, no man doth remember the
half of his own actions, much less to remark the actions of others,
except some circumstances, which he may remember. Therefore we should
be loath unnecessarily to bring ourselves in question, in speaking
evil of others: for commonly, at such times, cowards, or feeble men,
that are not in action themselves, see more than others that are
better employed: yet the feeble man is ever readiest to detract, for
to prevent his own insufficiency, too well known to others. But after
this day's service, our detractions, and distractions also, were
almost taken away, being companions of the like danger, against our
enemies: And I inferred this discourse of detraction, by reason, that
at such service commonly men do speak, as they do favour, or rather,
as their envy carries them; which fault as being too much in use in
all estates, especially amongst soldiers, I would wish from my heart
that it might be eschewed.

Here also I observed, that want of circumspection in command,
especially over young soldiers, as we had to command, do many times
cause great inconveniences to follow, as was seen in the blowing up of
our powder, whereby our Colonel was burnt in the face, and many more.
Here I might speak somewhat of the hurt and inconveniency, that doth
happen many times by cannon, and powder, but I will refer it to a
fitter place, to be spoken of.

Likewise I cannot here omit to speak somewhat of the resolution of
some particular soldiers, that were hurt on this service. Hector Monro
of Cool, being shot through one of his feet, was desired to go off,
who answered, it was not time, till first he had emptied his
bandoleers against his enemies, before which time he was shot through
the other foot also, and then was not able to come off alone, without
help of others, and some of his comrades, which helped him off, going
farther with him than he thought needful for his safety, or their
credit, he wished them to retire, and discharge their duties against
the enemy, as they had sufficiently done towards him. Hugh Murrey
being desired in time of hot service, to go and take off his brother
being killed; he lacking powder said, going towards his dead brother,
I will first empty my brother's bandoleers, as I have done mine own,
to be revenged on his enemies, before I take him off: in the mean
time, he was shot in the eye himself, and that wondrous favourably,
the bullet some few days after having come forth at his nose, which is
most true, though seeming incredible. This day also I observed an ill
custom too common to all generals, that they make most use, in time of
desperate service, of those that do best serve them, and when once
they have experience of their valour, they never omit to employ them
on the most dangerous exploits; and for reward, they only do commend
their valour, when others are scarce remembered at all.

Here also I did see, that on hot service, nothing can be more
comfortable, than the getting of a timely relief, as we did get of the
rest of our regiment, for having long smarted under the mercy of
cannon and musket, in hot service, so that a soldier was not able to
handle his musket for fear of burning, having shot so oft, till his
shoulder did ache; who can think, but to such a one a relief was
welcome: truly I think no man that hath his foot in the fire, but
would gladly take it out: yet I persuade myself, there were some here,
who would suffer to burn before they retired with disgrace, or
discredit, their honour being so dear unto them. The best proofs a
soldier can infer of his valiant courage, are his wounds got  with
credit, not running away, and the best exhortation a leader can give
common soldiers is, to show himself courageous, and then, without
words, with a sign, some will follow him, in imitating his example.

Here also I did observe, that the Dutch are not the best soldiers in
extremity of danger, though I confess for the discharge of all duty,
otherwise very obedient, till it come to extremity, and then commonly
they make a cloak of discontentment, and call for money, as they did
this day. Likewise I cannot say, but horse-men are useful many times,
as they were here; yet in my opinion, in their service, they are not
to be paralleled to foot: For at the in-taking of towns, and in hilly
and mountainous countries, that are straight by nature, they are not
useful, neither can they do but little service, yet for their great
charges, they are much harder to be entertained: Therefore my choice
shall be ever, as most credible to command on foot, and if I were
worthy to advise a king, or a general following wars, I would wish him
to esteem more of his foot officers, than of his horse: then fewer
should serve on horseback, and more on foot, and as his charges should
be less, his profit should be the more, his army the stronger, his
country less spoiled, his contribution to maintain his army, the
better paid, his treasure richer, his victories more frequent, and
more durable, his conquest the better maintained.

This I dare presume to affirm to be all true, out of my little
experience, and which is more, all the time I have served, where I
have heard one fault imputed to a body of foot, I could instance ten
defects in our horsemen's service: for the worst sort of them being
too much given to plundering, makes them neglect their duties, which
fault also is too common amongst many of their leaders; though I have
known some honest men amongst them free from this imputation: and for
a king, or prince, that must defend his country, by sea, (as our noble
master the King of Denmark was) I would advise him, as unprofitable
for his service and country, not to entertain strangers in this kind,
so being their charges would far surmount the benefit that could
redound by their service, yet I cannot say, but the Rhinegrave his
regiment was the only regiment under the King at this time, that did
best service, which was ever praiseworthy.

Likewise, I have found by experience that those who fight best in
occasions, have ever the best of it, though they chance to suffer
loss, if it come to a retreat, commonly they are most respected and
come first off, as we did at this time, and it is ever better to fight
well, and to retire timely, than for a man to suffer himself to be
taken prisoner, as many were that morning after our retreat: and in
occasions, I rather choose to die honourably, then to live and to be
prisoner to a churlish fellow, that perhaps would keep me in perpetual
bondage, as many brave men are kept; or otherwise, at my taking, to be
scurvily used, being stripped naked by a villain, and then, if I
lacked moneys about me, to be cut and carved, and at last, poorly put
to death, being naked without arms to defend myself. My advise then is
to him that cannot resolve to fight well, that he resolve according to
his station, and charge, to be well furnished of money, not only about
him, but also, to have money to the best in a sure place, and in sure
hands to maintain him, being prisoner, and to pay his ransom; or
otherwise, let him resolve to remain in perpetual bondage, except some
noble friend or other have compassion on him.

Likewise I would advise all worthy soldiers, and officers going on
service, if they can, never to want some moneys about them, that, if
they chance to come as prisoners in undiscreet hands, they may cast a
bone in the dog's teeth, to curry favour of the cruel cur.

I did also observe here, that continency is a virtue very necessary
for a soldier, for abstaining from many inordinate appetites, that
follow his profession, that he may the better suffer hunger, cold,
thirst, nakedness, travail, toil, heat, and what else patiently, never
mutinying for any defect: for it is the greatest victory we can attain
unto, to overcome ourselves, and our appetites. Likewise I did
observe, that kings, and generals are very courteous to cavaliers,
while as they stand in need of their service, in making their use of
them, but the occasion once past, oft times they do look on cavaliers
at a distance, as if they had not employment for them; which should
teach cavaliers, to take their time with reason of their masters also;
and then they might care the less for them (being strangers or foreign
kings) while as, they would disdain them, having still a sure retreat
to their own king, and master. Here also I found that a friend in need
was better than gold, for had not the Duke of Weimar been our friend
we had been left behind at the pass, and been prisoners the next day
with the rest of the army. It is therefore ever best to do well, come
after what may; for virtue in despite of envy, will not want a reward:
And a stout mariner that hath ridden out the storm with loss, as we
did this day, rejoices in the calm, when it comes; and he is said to
merit the Crown, that hath fought valiantly.

It is also very necessary, that at such service, as this was, if we
have time, that we be careful, to bring off our comrades' bodies
killed on service, that died honourably before their enemies, to be
laid in the bed of honour, in burying their bodies, as becomes
Christians. We are also tied in duty to our comrades, that were with
us in danger, if either they be wounded, or mutilated, to care for
their safeties, so far as lieth in our power: And we must not prefer
the safety of our own bodies, to the public weal of our comrades, and
countrymen dead or living, but we ought, with the hazard of our own
lives, to bring off the dead and hurt.

An example of this duty, we have in the person of the President of
Chassangue treating of the Jews' law, that did command, that the
bodies of their dead enemies should not lie unburied. Caesar caused to
be buried the head of his enemy Pompey, and wept at his death, as
Valerius Maximus reports in his fifth book, and sixth chapter.
Hercules is thought to have been the first that ordained to bury the
bodies of those killed on service, and David calls them blessed, that
were so thankful, as to have buried Saul. Judas Macchabi did cause to
bury the bodies of the enemy killed in battle, and Alexander restored
unto the mother of Darius the dead body of her son, Hannibal did bury
the body of his enemy Marcellus, as Valerius affirms. It is also
expedient, for the common-weal, that the bodies of the dead be buried:
and Leonard Darez reports that Cyrus, Alexander, and Caesar did
recommend their funerals to their friends, as Lieutenant Rosse did his
to his Captain and me, which we performed in the best manner we could,
for the time. If pagans had such regard to their burials, Christians
should be more careful, whose bodies sometimes were the receptacles of
the holy Spirit, and of the immortal soul created to God's own image.

Here also I would report the commandment that we read in the second
chapter verse 23. of the fourth book of Esdras. Where thou findest the
dead, put them in the grave (with a certain mark) and I will give thee
the first seat in my resurrection: and the wise Ancients said, men
should look unto the end. My exhortation then is to all my worthy
countrymen, and women, that were interested in our loss in this day's
service, to consider, that when these gentlemen, and cavaliers were
born, that they were marked and ordained to die honourably, fighting
in the good cause; and for the liberty of our King's daughter, the
Queen of Bohemia and her distressed royal issue, under the magnanimous
King of Denmark our master, who for her Majesty's liberty, did hazard
not only his life, but his crown; let them then that are interested,
as said is, in this our loss consider again, that they died with great
honour, and reputation, seeing they live eternally in their fame,
having laid down their lives, as servants of the public, if not for
their country, yet at least, as cannot be denied, for the liberty of
their king's royal issue: It then became them well, to have died
standing. Therefore those mothers, friends, or sisters, are to be
condemned, that mourn for them that live (after their death) in their
fame, and though their grief be great, let them shed no tears, for
fear it become of them, as became of that ancient woman called Vicia,
mother to Futius Geminus, who was killed at Rome, for having wept at
the death of her son, that had lost his life in the public service, as
reporteth Tacitus in his 6 book of his Annals, and our Saviour in the
Evangelist Saint Luke doth forbid the widow to weep for her son that
was dead, and St. Paul writing to the Thessalonians saith, Brethren I
would not have you ignorant of the estate of those that are asleep, to
the end you do not over-mourn, as those do, that are without hope.
Therefore, let us forbear all tears for those departed, and if we
should mourn, let us mourn with tears, even those most precious tears
for sin, these are the Christian tears, that should be shed from our
hearts, to reconcile us unto God, those tears are as the blood of the
soul, hurt and wounded with the sense, and feeling of our sins, before
God these are the tears, that draw God's mercy upon us, as David cried
unto God in the 36 Psalm. Thou hast counted my wanderings, and put my
tears in thy bottle, are they not in thy register? Therefore though we
be grieved at the loss of our friends, and at the loss of the day; Yet
O God, make us thankful unto thee, for our deliverance, that we may
rejoice at our own safety.



The seventh Duty discharged of our Retreat from Oldenburg unto Assens
in Denmark by Sea.

Having thus passed the day at Oldenburg, the night (the friend of
cowards) coming on, what we durst not have done by day, being favoured
by the moonshine, when all were wearied with hot service and toil in
the day, begun to take rest, and refreshment by their fires, in the
leaguer all guards relieved, and sentries set out, being all of us,
after a great storm in a quiet calm, we begin to take our retreat to
the water:  our general being full of fear and suspicion goes before,
and our colonel also; we follow, having the avant-garde according to
our orders for going a ship-board, which orders were willingly obeyed,
perceiving the danger was to follow, and in consideration that long
before the Lieutenant Colonel Sir Patrick Mac-Gey and Captain Forbesse 
being hurt had retired for their safeties towards the Isle of Fehmarn,
and from thence to Denmark to be cured. I supplying the place of the
major, our regiment orderly retiring from the enemy, Captain Mac-
Kenyee and my brother Obstell, who before were companions in the day
of danger, in the night did march together leading off the regiment to
be secured, and I bringing up the rear, accompanied with some other
officers; we had no doubt of our safe retreat: the whole army being
behind us made us halt the oftener, taking pains to bring up our hurt
and sick men; we marched but softly, Py a Pyano: at last by ten
o'clock of the night we arrived on the shore, and drew up in battle
attending the Colonel's command for shipping, who had gone himself
unto the road amongst the ships, to provide shipping, but could get no
obedience, the fear was so great amongst the mariners; having heard
the roaring and thundering of cannon and muskets in the day, fear so
possessed them all, that they lacked hands to work and hearts to obey:
and the Colonel coming ashore without bringing of ships to receive us,
we made use of the time, our comrades the horsemen having come before
us, who ever begin confusion, were without orders, forcing ships to
take in their horses, and had already possessed the whole bulwark and
shipping with their horse, I asking my Colonel's leave, drew our whole
colours in front, and our pikes charged after them; our musketeers
drawn up in our rear by divisions, fortifying our rear in case the
enemy should assault us in our rear, and then I advanced with our
colours alongst the pier, our pikes charged we cleared the pier of the
horsemen, suffering them to save themselves from drowning, where they
found the channel most shallow, and advancing thus to the end of the
pier, we seized upon one ship with some horses in it, where we set our
colours, and making that ship launch off a little from the shore for
fear of being aground, having manned the shipboat with an officer, and
some musketeers, we sent to force other ships out of the road to
launch in and serve us, until such time as the most part of our
regiment were shipped except some villains, who were gone a plundering
in the town; but not knowing the danger they were in, they stayed all
night from us and were taken by the enemy the next morning. Thus
having shipped our men we were forced to quit our horses and baggage:
the officers that were most diligent, as Captain Monro and my brother
Obstell, were busied the whole night ferrying soldiers from the shore,
especially the sick and wounded, who were not able to help themselves:
In the morning I shipped three boatfuls of wounded and sick men, till
at the last I was beaten from the shore by the enemies' horsemen. And
my Colonel's ship being under sail laid up to the wind, attending my
coming with the last fraught, and then we followed the route of the
fleet, seeing the enemies' army drawn up in battle, horse, foot and
cannon, and our army of foot and horse opposite unto them; where I did
see six and thirty cornets of horse, being full troops, without
loosing of one pistol give themselves prisoners in the enemies' mercy,
whereof the most part took service: As also I did see above five
regiments of foot, being forty colours, follow  their examples,
rendering themselves and their colours without loosing of one musket.
Judge then, judicious reader, though we were sorry for the loss of our
army, if we were glad of our own safeties: I think we were, and
praised be God with no discredit to us, or our nation; for none can be
blamed that doth what he is commanded: thus following our course the
third morning we arrived before Flensburg, where our rendezvous was
appointed, and having sent ashore for some victuals, whereof we stood
in great need, no man was blamed to provide for himself at such time,
when the whole country was to be left to our enemies' mercy.

His Majesty being there, after hearing the certainty of his great
loss, resolved to secure Denmark; having lost Holstein & Jutland we
got orders with expedition all of us to ship, and to hold forth our
course unto Assens in Denmark, where his Majesty promised to meet us
to dispose further of us, for his Majesty's service, and we making
sail follow our course and orders. At our parting the Rhinegrave with
his regiment did come thither the enemy at his heels, and he at spurs
following the King, till he had gotten the pass made good betwixt
Holstein, and Jutland, and his Majesty once safely arrived in Denmark,
the Rhinegrave quitting Jutland unto the enemy follows the King unto
Denmark: We landed at Assens of our regiment eight hundred soldiers
besides one hundred and fifty wounded and sick men, and being put in
good quarters, we rest us, leaving the enemy to rest in the fat land
of Holstein and Jutland, having a good broad and deep fosse betwixt
us, we were by God's mercy secured.

The seventh Observation.

Here we see that the loss of a day, is the loss of a great part of his
Majesty's Kingdom: for the loss of his army was the loss of Holstein
and Jutland, so that here below we have no assured estate, from the
king to the clown, whereof we have frequent examples in histories,
which should make none of all estates to glory too much, either in
their peace, or prosperity, as the Holsteiners did: for though now
thou be in peace and security, as they were before this day, thou
oughtst to look unto thyself, and to prevent the worst better than
they did.

Therefore to discharge a part of my duty to my countrymen and friends,
I mind here somewhat to touch the misery of man through the
inconstancy of human affairs. Isidore writes, that it was the custom
at Constantinople in the days of the Emperor's coronation, while as he
sat in his throne, a mason came to him, presenting stones, that he
might choose which he would to make his tomb of, thereby putting him
in mind of the inconstancy of human fragility. We read also of a
simple citizen in Italy, that became one of the most powerful men in
Italy, and coming to the dignity of a prince, being thirty years,
without interruption, in great prosperity, tranquillity and peace, yea
ever in the most dangerous time of war, and his children raised to
high honours and dignities; this man thinking himself to be above the
wind, a whirl-wind of wars, unlooked for, came on him and his from
Florence, that he with his wife and children were taken prisoners, and
sent to Milan, his goods confiscated, he was shut up in close prison,
and died miserably: the Venetians appropriating unto themselves all
his money he had in bank.

We read also of one Francis Sforza, that through his heaping up of
wealth came to be made Duke of Milan, and after that intitled himself
to be the son of Fortune, and the oracle of the princes of Italy,
being many years in prosperity, was afterwards chased from his goods,
as the Holsteiners were then, but having recovered his lands and goods
again, he grew so insolent and proud of his prosperity, that at last
he was taken prisoner, and was kept till death in prison; mocked of
the whole world, for his pride and greediness. The same author
Guicchardine in his seventh book in the 157, doth record of the
Bentivoglios chased out of Bologna, where they long were in peace, the
subjects of Milan being forbidden to receive them, the chiefest of
them died of grief, having never before tasted the cup of adversity:
And so became of sundry in Denmark, that for fear did send away their
goods by shipping unto the crags of Norway, to be kept there, whereof
some were lost by sea, and the owners afterward died of grief, not
having the courage to undergo patiently their cross. The Lord of his
mercy preserve my country and friends from the like visitation. Let no
man therefore flatter himself with prosperity, riches, or honour, as
Agapetus adviseth us in his Politic Aphorisms. All are born alike,
come of dust, our glory then should be of virtue, and not in riches,
prosperity, or honours; for we should esteem of nothing so much, as of
God's judgements, praying his Majesty continually to divert them from
us, esteeming more of our souls, than of deceivable riches, whereof
the possession is uncertain, as was seen at this time, both in
Holstein and Jutland, their riches went faster away than they came,
and though they could have enjoyed them, yet at last they were forced
to leave them to others. Since therefore we can carry nothing with us, 
but our good name, let us be ever careful of that, discharging, so far
as we may, with a good conscience our duty to God and man, and this
heritage we cannot be robbed of, though the world should turn to
nothing.

Here we see this magnanimous king his estate falling for his love to
his niece, the distressed Queen of Bohemia, and her children, seeing
her banished from her kingdom by the sword of her enemies, he hazards
the loss of his crown and person, to get her restored, bringing the
sword of his enemies within his own country, fortune having crossed
him abroad: yet for all this, this magnanimous king was not dejected,
but with a courageous resolution makes use of the time, retiring to
one corner of his Kingdom, to prevent the loss of the whole, being
naturally fortified with a broad graff, as the Isle of Britain, being
strong of shipping, having his Majesty of Britain to friend, and the
estates of the United Provinces, he was careless of the Emperor's
forces by Sea or Land, not being able to harm his Majesty more than
they did.

By this example we may see, what advantage our sovereign, the King's
Majesty of Great Britain, hath over all foreign kings in Europe,
through the situation of his dominions, being mighty in power of men,
shipping, and money, is able to make war abroad, where he pleaseth,
and to make a safe retreat, when he pleaseth, being master at sea, as
he can easily be, terrifying his enemies with one army abroad, and a
strong army at sea, he can offend whom he will, and retire when he
list, forcing all europe to be in fear of him, and his Majesty in fear
of none, but of the King of Kings. The Lord therefore preserve his
Majesty, his children and subjects, from the power of foreign enemies;
and I wish a great part of my friends and countrymen were so far
addicted, to seek the restitution of her Majesty of Bohemia, and her
royal issue, as I am; the wars then should never end, till they were
restored, and I avenged of my friends' blood, and mine own, shed in
the quarrel.

Here also I did observe his Majesty's circumspection, in preventing
the imperialists, in coming by water unto his kingdom, having beset
all Finland with strong garrisons of horse and foot, which kept strong
guards, and good watch by night and by day, at such places on the
coast, as was most in danger of the enemies' over-setting, till in the
end, the enemy was forced to retire his army, leaving but a few men in
garrison in the towns, which lay on the coast, which garrisons his
Majesty with shipping did often visit, to their great hurt, with
strong parties, retiring again, having done his exploit, at his
pleasure in safety. This magnanimous king, to my knowledge, deserved
to have been worthily thought of, and well spoken of, for his noble
enterprizing of the war, being leader and general in so good a cause.
And though the success was not answerable, I dare be bold to affirm,
it was none of his Majesty's fault, for his Majesty not only bestowed
much in advancing of it, but also did hazard himself and his crown in
maintaining of it. Nevertheless, there are always some cynics, that do
bark at his Majesty's proceedings, without reason; where we may see,
that no man, no nor kings themselves can escape the lash of censure,
and none can eschew to be traduced by the ignominious aspersions of
the malevolent tongue. Therefore it is good to do well, and then we
need not care what is said; except the sayer put his name to his
assertion, and then he may be made to foot his boule, in maintaining
of it, or unworthily to refuse it. Here also I did observe, that no
armour nor pass could remove the general's fear; for having once
imagined the enemies' over-coming, he was never fully settled, till he
was safe a ship-board. And therefore I did see at this time that
verified, that when man distrusteth God, it is then just with God to
leave man to himself: for after our retreat, being on the road, the
general, being thronged in his own ship, could not command a ship to
transport his servants, till I forced a ship for his Excellency's
service; which should teach all men in authority, while they have
command, to command with discretion, lest the wheel should turn, and
then they should be beholden to those, whom before they commanded.

Here also I did see mutinous soldiers well rewarded, and it may be
sooner than they thought, for the day before those that called for
money when they were commanded to go on service, the next day I being
a shipboard did see them turn slaves unto their enemies being taken
prisoners, robbed both of clothes and money, and kept long in bondage,
being forced to serve against their conscience, such was their folly
in calling for money when it was no time to tell it. Having at this
time left our horses and baggage to our enemies, I observed somewhat
on the love of men to those beasts, and the love of beasts to their
masters, as worth the noting, to confirm the kindness that should be
entertained amongst Christians, and men of one profession; my brother
Obstell, of worthy memory, had a horse of our own country-breed, that
was so familiarly acquainted with his soldiers, and with the noise and
touch of drum, that the whole day on our march, when his master went
afoot, he unled followed the drum a little aside from the company,
halting when they halted, and moving when  they moved fast or slow.
Another horse I left, that being in Wismar leaguer, having rode out
one day to a wood, half a mile from the leaguer, to cause to cut
timber, leaving my horse standing alone, and my cloak on my saddle, a
rutter coming by, unknown to me and my fellows, steals my horse away,
who finding himself in stranger's hands, skips loose, and runs to our
leaguer, being chased and hunted at by more than a hundred horsemen,
out-runs them all unto the trenches, and running through the leaguer,
stands before my tent, my comrades wondering what became of me,
thinking I had been killed by the horsemen, come and make search for
me, and finding me, tell me of my horse.

These beasts I have remembered for their love, for which I will set
down some particulars concerning the address, fidelity, and bounty of
some horses whereof I have formerly read. Pliny protests their praises
cannot be expressed. We read of the Numidians, that were so much
redoubted of the Romans, that in their wars, they would at spurs, run
their horses in midst of their enemies, without a bridle to govern
them. In the battle of Cannae, Hannibal returning the next day on the
place of battle, to look more narrowly to the place, a Roman knight
half dead, hearing the noise of people, lifted up his head, of purpose
to have spoken, but his voice failing, died: with the last gasp, by
Hannibal there rode a Numidian on that dead knight's horse, who
knowing his master, begun to move his ears, to bray, and to leap, and
rebound with such fury, till he casts the Numidian to ground, runs
through the dead bodies, and stands before his dead master, and
leaning down his neck and shoulders, showeth the desire he had that
his master should leap on him, to the great astonishment of Hannibal,
and his followers. We read also in the wars of Germany, in the year
1176 the Dukes of Saxony forced by arms to submit themselves to the
Emperor Henry the fourth, giving the Emperor for pledges of their
fidelity, two young princes, sons to a marquess, which were carefully
kept in a castle, that was very strong, the captain whereof moved by
compassion, and won by some presents, suffered them sometimes to go
abroad to take the air, and to ride their horses thereabout: The
captain going a hunting, takes these young youths with him, the prey
found and hunted, she is followed by all, not thinking of any other
thing: The youths spurring hard out of sight, follow their course till
they come to the river of the Main, where they request a fisherman to
transport them in his little canoe or boat to Mainz, offering him
their little scarlet cloaks for pay: The fisherman helps them from
their horses, and takes them in his boat, and rows down the river,
their horses swimming after them to Mainz, where they and their horses
were graciously welcomed.

Pliny writes, that horses wept at their masters' deaths, and it is
recorded, that the horse of Caesar wept: foretelling his master's
death, and I persuade myself, the gentle reader could add somewhat to
this purpose, if he listed, but thus far to animate Christians to
love, respect, and cherish their comrades, and not to kill and
backbite them, as too many are too ready to detract from others, to
add to themselves: a wrong way; for honour is compared well to a
chaste maid, that will never love them who would ravish her, but being
courted she may be moved.

Here I must not forget that duty I owe to the remembrance of that
worthy young gentleman, Arthur Forbesse, son to a worthy, cavalier, of
famous  memory, Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Forbesse, being a worthy
valourous son, descended of a valiant father. This young gentleman
being deadly wounded on service, and with hazard brought unto our
ship, within two days died. Likewise a gentleman born in the Isles of
Scotland, called Alexander Mac-Worche, being wounded in the head, and
shot in the arm, the enemies' horsemen shooting at him with pistols,
he leaps from the shore, with his clothes on, notwithstanding those
wounds, and swims to my cousin Captain Monro his boat, and being
brought in died the next day, and was much lamented for of his
comrades, as a gentleman of great hope.

I did also observe here, the inconvenience that happens to many brave
officers and soldiers given to plundering, gathering together a little
booty for spending, which brings them commonly into their enemies'
hands, their punishment being far more grievous, than their purchase
was delightful, and yet I think, the guilt is worse than the
punishment. To which purpose I will only here infer one story. A
Pythagorian bought a pair of shoes upon trust, the shoe-maker dies,
the philosopher is glad, and thinks them gain, but a while after his
conscience touches him, and becomes a perpetual chider, he repairs to
the house of the dead, casts in his money with these words; There take
thy due, thou livest to me, though dead to all besides. Certainly, in
my opinion, ill gotten gains are far worse than loss with preserved
honesty. These grieve but once, the others are continually grating
upon our quiet, and he diminishes his own contentment, that would add
unto it by unlawfulness; for looking only to the beginning, he thinks
not of the end. But in my opinion, if plundering, or making of booty,
at any time be excusable for a soldier, it is only in respect of the
circumstances. Our friends being forced to quit their country and
their goods to their enemies, before it should enrich the enemy, it
were not amiss to take it, or destroy it either with fire or water,
before it were profitable to our enemies; and in this point only I do
allow of this booty making, providing it do not hinder men from the
discharge of their duties, in time and place: otherwise, our best
goods, being impediments to the discharge of our honest duty in our
calling, are to be thrown away. And for mine own part, a few books
left by my friends, which mine enemy might have burnt, was all the
booty that ever I made: neither do I repent me of my neglect in this
point; having seen many make booty, who had never the happiness to
enjoy it long. His Majesty's care, in fore-seeing the safety of
Denmark, merits praise: for by the preservation of Denmark, his
Majesty, like a skilful gamester, recovered again all that he lost.
Therefore we ought never to grieve for anything past, but for sin, and
for that always. And he spake well, that said, He that hath himself
hath lost nothing.



The eighth Duty discharged of our Quartering and Mustering in Funen,
and of the Colonels' going for a Recruit unto Scotland.

Having happily arrived in Denmark, at Assens in Funen, our Colonel
goes ashore to understand of his Majesty's will and command, and being
graciously welcomed, is made to dine at his Majesty's table: after
dinner his Majesty discharging then the duty of a General Quarter-
master, who wrote with his own hand the names of the dorps ordained
for our quarters: as also did appoint a fair hoff, to receive all our
wounded and sick men, where they were to be entertained together, till
they were cured, and to that effect, his Majesty graciously ordained
skilful chirurgians, diligently to attend them, being an hundred and
fifty, besides officers; then we got orders to land the regiment, and
to draw up in a convenient part, till our sick and wounded were first
directed to quarters, and then to appoint our watch (viz.) two
companies to watch at Assens, then having gotten wagons, for
transporting of our Colonel's baggage and spare arms, the several
companies' quarters dealt out, the furriers sent before, to divide the
quarters, every company led by their own guides, we marched off
severally, by companies, as our several ways did lie unto our
quarters, where we had rest for our former toil, and good
entertainment for our spare diet, so that in a short time, we were all
sufficiently refreshed, without fear of an enemy. Nevertheless, our
watches were duly and orderly kept, and relieved by course, every
second night: then orders were given by the commissaries to give in
our rolls, for mustering of us, that his Majesty might know, what loss
we had sustained on service, and that those that served well might be
rewarded: we mustered sick and whole near nine hundred men under arms,
besides officers, having lost on service, four hundred men, that were
killed in the place, and taken in our retreat. Before our coming to
muster, news was come to his Majesty of the loss of the castle of
Breddenburg in Holstein, Stadt-holder Ransowe his chief residence,
where Major Dumbarre did command, and was killed. The particulars of
this service I refer to the next duty discharged.

The major being killed, I having discharged the duty in his absence,
by my Colonel's respect to me and his Majesty's favour, I had patent
given me, under his Majesty's hand and seal, as major to the regiment:
as likewise Captain Lermond his company then at Glueckstadt, being
vacant, through the death of the captain at Hamburg, was also disposed
unto me; and orders were given unto the commissary, that mustered us,
according to my patent to place me, as sergeant-major over the
regiment, which all duly obeyed by the commissary, the drummer major,
accompanied with the rest of the drummers of the regiment, being
commanded, beat a bank in head of the regiment. The commissary having
his Majesty's patent in his hand, makes a speech, signifying his
Majesty's will unto all the officers of the regiment, and without any
contradiction placed me sergeant major, and delivering me my patent
takes me by the hand, as the colonel did, lieutenant-colonel with the
whole officers of the regiment, wishing me joy, with the general
applause of the whole Soldateska, which ceremony ended,  the regiment
marched off, by companies unto their several quarters as before; The
Colonel conveyed by his officers unto his quarters, the officers were
appointed the next day, to meet at the Colonel's quarter to receive
money, and to understand further of the Colonel's resolution,
concerning the standing of the regiment. At their return the next day,
they received two months pay for the officers, and one month's pay for
the Soldateska, with promise of winter clothes. But the soldiers
coming into a good fat soil, clad themselves honestly, which made them
want commisse clothes; Yet none of us could say, but we served a
liberal, and a bountiful master: the money first paid by the
commissaries, they give orders in his Majesty's name for keeping of
good discipline over the regiment, whereby the boors should not
complain on the soldiers insolency, which they needed not to use,
getting willingly from the boors both meat, and money, with some
clothes: Nevertheless, there were always amongst the one and the
other, some churlish rascals, that caused complaints to be heard which
made our proforce or gavileger get company and money, for discharging
his duty: for neither officer, nor soldier escaped due punishment,
that was once complained on, until such time, as his Majesty was
satisfied with justice, and the party offended. Thus continuing in our
duty, the colonel anew doth capitulate with his Majesty, for bringing
over from Scotland a thousand men to recruit the regiment. Officers
were appointed of every company to go for Scotland, and for the most
part the captains went themselves, leaving their lieutenants in their
absence to command their companies. The Lieutenant Colonel taking a
furlough, did go unto Holland: I being left to command the regiment,
the Colonel and his Captains Sir Patrick Mac-Gey, Captain Annane,
Captain Monro of Obstell, Captain Forbesse, Captain Sinclair, Captain
John Monro, and Lieutenant Robert Stewart, the Baron of Fowles
followed them in the spring, for levying a company also. They being
gone, I was commanded by his Majesty to take orders from General Major
Slamersdorph then resident at Odense in Funenland, who immediately
after their going away, commanded me to take my quarters in Assens,
where we kept our watch, seeing that part of the country was most in
danger of the enemies' pursuit; where I had question with the Major of
the Rhinegrave's regiment of horse, who should give out the orders in
the garrison, which did bring an emulation betwixt our soldiers and
the horsemen, so that in several rencounters had in the garrison,
three or four on each side were killed. To prevent this disorder, the
General Major with some other associates came to Assens and held a
council of war, the business considered, the Major of horse is removed
to another garrison, and Rut-master Cratsten is put with his troops in
Assens, and the command of the garrison was given unto me.
Notwithstanding whereof our enmity with the horsemen did continue a
long time, till the Rhinegrave himself had given orders to his whole
officers, examplarily to punish those insolent rutters, who should be
found to live otherwise then brethren with the whole Scots regiment,
so that by that time the coldness removed, we lived at more quiet
during my being there, which was not long.

The eighth Observation.

First here we may see the wisdom and magnanimity of this king not cast
down with the loss of his army, nor with the loss of the half of his
country, but preventing his further loss for the safety of his
country, and good of his subjects, he with expedition, draws himself
and the remnant escaped of his army within Denmark, to preserve them
for a second fitter opportunity; As also to encourage his subjects,
that through fear, were on the flight by water unto other nations,
carrying their substance with them, fear coming unawares, having heard
of their king's loss and overthrow abroad, fame dispersing the rumours
of the loss, much worse then it was, the people were so afraid, and so
fearful, that they enjoyed nothing without a frighted mind, no not
their sleep: they trembled at the present miseries that might but
come, they were anticipated in a more horrid habit, than any enemy
could put them unto, meeting with evil before it came, making things
but probable as certain, as when one may sit even in a boat, he is in
no danger, yet through fear stirring, he may drown himself, and
others, as we see often in battle that the valiant man constantly
keeping his rank, doth live, when as the feeble coward by stooping
thinking to save his life, he loses it; when the brave soul knows no
trembling. Caesar spake like Caesar, when he bade the mariners fear
nothing. And this invincible and magnanimous king, though ruffled by
Caesar, yet he encourages his subjects, by exhorting them to fear
nothing, going at all times himself betwixt them and all dangers, he
being the first many times engaged, and the last coming off, casting
as it were, through his valour, a kind of honour upon God; believing
in his goodness, casting himself in danger, trusting and confiding in
his care only. Not like an unworthy coward that eclipses his
sufficiency, unworthily doubting that God will bring him off, unjustly
accusing God, his power or his will, making himself his own Saviour,
he becomes his own confounder.

But this magnanimous king setting his care upon God, and using the
lawful means, for his country, and kingdom's preservation, winning the
love of God, and of his subjects, establisheth himself, and his throne
in despite of his enemies. Here also I have observed that good service
done to a noble and liberal master, as this king was, cannot be
without reward: Therefore let the servant deserve, and the master will
recompense, if he be such a just master as we served, where both loved
each others, for their generous worthiness. Who ever then is a
servant, if he suppose his lot hard, let him think on the other part,
that service is nothing else but a free man's calling, and comfort
himself with the example of kings, that are but servants (though more
splendid) for the common-weal; and as this king our royal master
served for his country, let us that are servants serving strangers
serve truly where we serve, for our country's credit, our own weal,
and our eternal fame which must live after us. This magnanimous king
through the experience he had of our former true service, is desirous
to have more of our countrymen to serve him, as we may see by the new
employment laid on our colonel and his officers; Also on divers other
noblemen of our country, to bring unto him three other regiments as
Nithsdale, Spynie and Murckle's regiments, we being the first that
showed them the way to be employed by his Majesty.

Here I will exhort all brave cavaliers, of mind to follow the laudable
profession of arms, not to grudge, though their advancement or
preferment come not at first, but with patience to await on God's
blessing, since preferment comes neither from the east, nor from the
west. But it is the blessing of the Lord, given by man as the reward
of virtue.

Who ever then would be famous by preferment, let him first study to be
diligent and virtuous in his calling, and then doubtless God will
dispose of him as he thinkth best for his own Glory.

Here we see that the Baron of Fowles, of worthy memory, thought it no
disparagement at first to follow my Lord of Rhey and his regiment, as
a volunteer, till he had seen some service, and attained unto some
experience, and then beginning with a company, coming at last with
credit to be colonel over horse and foot, and that to animate others
of his name, and kindred to follow his example, rather to live
honourably abroad, and with credit, then to encroach (as many do) on
their friends at home, as we say in Scotland, leaping at the half
loaf, while as others through virtue live nobly abroad, served with
silver plate, and attendance.

Officers of one regiment ought to live as brethren together, not
envying one another's advancement, entertaining no other emulation,
than the emulation of virtue, every one serving truly in their
stations, till such time occasion may be offered, for their
advancement by degrees: for though their patience may be the longer,
their credits will be the more, and their contentments at last will
make them forgo and forget their former toil, and disturbances having
come to their proposed mark, though not altogether to their wished
end. Here also we see that good discipline is requisite for keeping
good order, that as virtue is rewarded; so vice may be punished: as we
may see by the institution of the imperial laws, whereof one we read
constitute by the Emperor Frederick the Second in the code of
Justinian, bearing that the labourers of the ground might live
peaceably with assurance over all, staying in their villages,
labouring the ground, so that no man should be so bold, as to presume
to take any such men prisoners, or to offer them any violence in
destroying their bestial, or in taking their goods from them,
condemning them to death that did contemn, or violate his ordnance.

And Cyrus going to war, commanded no man should trouble the labourers.
Xerxes commanded the like, saying, the wars were against those that
caried arms, not against shepherds.

Belisarius that brave commander under the Emperor Justinian, was so
strict against soldiers that troubled the boors, that the soldiers
going by the fruityards durst not throw down one apple, and for his
good order kept, victuals were cheaper in the camp than in towns.

Procopius in his third book of the Goths' wars in Italy reports, that
Totila King of the Goths observed the same strict discipline in Italy,
suffering the boors untroubled, for paying the contribution.

Nicephor Gregorius affirmed, that while as in the front of an army
marched insolency and violence, orderly came in the rear defeat and
ruin. And nowadays the Turks do observe stricter discipline in their
armies than Christians do; in so much that their captains must not
suffer their soldiers to go into orchards or vineyards, as they march
by. And as order is necessary in an army, so it is in a regiment
requisite to be kept, and punishment also to be used, for banishing
all villany from a regiment, as gluttony, drunkeness, whoredom,
oppression, playing, dicing, roaring, swaggering: for it is not
seemely that those, who should overcome others, should suffer
themselves to be overcome with any such notorious vices; neither ought
a brave fellow to vaunt of his valour, since it is not tolerable to
kill men with words, without coming unto blows; But he that comports
himself modestly is to be commended.

Here also we see that the emulation and strife begun amongst superiors
and officers of quality, brings at last the same amongst their
inferiors and followers; as was seen in the disorders and quarrelling
betwixt our soldiers and the Rhinegrave's horsemen, which was wisely
prevented and taken away by the wisdom of their commanders, that
carried mutual love and respect to each others: for the mutual good
deserving of both officers, which was the chief instrument of their
reconcilement, and taking away of their jars, and idle quarrelling,
arising of ostentation, an unworthy fruit growing out of dunghills,
withering faster than it groweth, their jars thus once removed,
thereafter our love waxed so great, that where we chanced both to be
on one service, as at Wolgast, where we stood in need of help, the
Rhinegrave's regiment, especially rut-master Hoomes under God made our
retreat safe, as you shall hear in its own place.

Here also I cannot pass over with silence the love that ordinarily is
seen betwixt officers, and their followers: being once put under good 
discipline they will undergo anything for love of their commanders and
leaders, who have taken pains and diligence in excercising them in the
perfect use of their arms, and in leading them bravely on occasions
before their enemies, in making with exercise their bodies strong, and
their hearts valiant, then I say, what will they not undertake for the
love of their leaders? Truly, I must confess, they will stand a
thousand times more in awe to incur their officers' wrath, whom once
they loved through love, than in any wise, thorough fear of any
punishment, that may be enjoined unto them by laws: and if they love
and respect their officers, for fear to offend, even in their marches,
for their officers' credits they will march so orderly with arms in
their ranks and files, that you would think a whole regiment well
disciplined, as this was, were all but one body, and of one motion,
their ears obeying the command all as one, their eyes turning all
alike, at the first sign given, their hands going to execution as one
hand, giving one stroke, yea many strokes all alike, ever ready to
strike, or hold up, as their commander pleaseth; and thus exercised
they were, that their enemies in all rencounters could not but duly
praise them, calling them the invincible old regiment: which always
rencountered with them on all occasions, so that Mac-Keye's name, was
very frequent, through the glorious fame of this never-dying regiment,
never wronged by fortune in their fame, though divers times, by their
enemies' valour, they sustained both loss and hurt: but would to God,
we had always met man to man, or that our army had consisted all of
such men, and such officers, whereof, I was the unworthiest! If so had
been, our conquest had extended so far, as the Romans of old did
extend the limits and borders of their Empire, which for my wish I
would bestow on the Prince Elector Palatine, borne by the Jewel of
Europe, the Queen of Bohemia his royal mother; and if it were at my
distribution, he should have all from the River Euphrates at the East,
to the ocean sea at the West, the fertilest part of Africa at the
South, and the Rhine and the Danube at the North; and yet I durst
affirm, that his Grand-father King JAMES of blessed and never-dying
memory, might merit a far greater possession for his grand-child, the
illustrious Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine; and to have an army
of such men, under his command, to be avenged on his enemies. I would
wish their clothes nor mine own, came never off, till his enemies were
made his footstool to tread on, or to show mercy, at his Highness'
pleasure: And for my wish, his army should be all of Britons, Dutch,
and Irish, such as Vegetius describeth the Roman soldiers of old: and
I, as one though unworthiest of a thousand Britain officers, would
undertake to make such brave lads to dwell summer and winter in tents,
ever in readiness to fight with our enemies, and to endure all
incommodities, for the credit of such a master, banishing far from him
with valiant hands well armed, all the craft, power, and subtlety that
his enemies were able to devise against him: And we should, for his
sake, be contented with such allowance as the Imperial laws allow a
soldier, being only so much as might maintain life, or so much as
beasts get that are put to diet, and we should be content to march
with such expedition, without intermission, without quarter or
garrison, as need requireth, never staying behind, but always
advancing, consenting willingly to undergo correction, if we did to
the contrary: but to march ever orderly in ranks, as the way lay rough
or even, foul or fair, as our colours and leaders went before us;
Never quitting our ranks, but with licence, till the cause were won,
or that our master's throne were established. And if otherwise we went
astray, we should be content to quit our allowance: and if this
discipline were not strict enough, we should be content to have his
Highness and royal mother restored, to do as our Fathers did coming
out of Egypt, marching alongst the spacious and wide desert, that our
rendezvous might be appointed and set, till we arrived in Gaza, that
is to say, in the Holy Land, where being victorious, we should bid our
master farewell, and rest with our Fathers.



The ninth Duty discharged of Major Dumbarre his Service at
Breddenburg.

This noble cavalier, of famous and worthy memory, having done notable
good service at Boizenburg Skonce on the river of the Elbe, as was
formerly set down, at his retiring to Glueckstadt, he was commanded
with four companies of Scots, and certain Dutch, the enemy having
fallen into Holstein, his order was to beset the castle of
Breddenburg, being a pass, but not strong, nor fortified in forma. As
I was informed by a valorous little captain, Captain William Lumsdell,
who then was ensign to the major, who only at that time escaped with
his life, from the fury of the enemy, being within the house, while as
the rest, in the fury, were put to the sword: This gentleman who
informed me, was with the major walking abroad near to the house at
the enemies' first approaching, so that the enemy unawares did come so
near, that they retiring to the castle, had scarce time to draw up the
draw-bridge, when the enemy with his forces, being, as was thought,
ten thousand strong, led by Tilly, had the house environed on all
quarters. The enemy sends a trumpeter, summoning to render the place,
which was refused. Whereupon they entered to approach, and the
defender resists. The service thus begun, comedian-like, ends very
tragically, the whole court and lodgings running with blood, with
which the walls and pavement are sprinkled with our Scottish blood, to
be viewed and seen to this day. To be particular in the discharge of
this duty at large, not having seen the service, I will not, lest I
should err in giving notice unto the world, of things I did not know;
but by report, which ordinarily holds not so true, as things we have
both known and seen. In this house of Breddenburg there was a great
number of men, women and children, besides the soldiers, that had
taken their flight thither, as to a place of refuge, at the enemies'
first coming into the land. There was also in this house great store
of riches, belonging to the lord of the house, and to the fugitives,
that was brought from the country. The Major valourously defended the
place for six days, until the time they had approached unto the moat,
and shot two several breaches in the wall, and being so near, the
enemy directed a drummer unto the Major, to see if he would parley;
But the drummer returned with an answer, that so long as there was
blood in Dumbarre's head, that house should never be given over: which
answer so incensed the enemy against them, that they sware, if they
got the upper hand over them, they should all die without quarters.
Shortly after the answer was returned, the Major was shot dead in the
head with a fire-lock; The rest of the officers were ashamed to
capitulate for an accord, the Major having refused: immediately after,
Captain Duncan Forbesse was killed, and after him, Lieutenant Barbour,
and then Captain Carmichell, who had no charge there, but came by
accident to visit his comrades before the enemies' coming, whose
fortune was not to eschew the payment of that debt by longer
continuation. The enemy then passing the moat or fosse, with a general
storm, scorned all quarters, and being entered, cruelly put all to the
sword, making no difference of quality, age, nor sex, but all alike
cruelly put to death: so that five or six at most escaped, whereof
Ensign Lumsdell miraculously was one.

The enemy before this house was taken, as I was informed, lost above a
thousand men, which made the enemies' cruelty the greater; and of our
regiment were killed above three hundred. And it is reported, that
after the fury was passed, they made inquisition for the Major's body,
and having found it, they ripped up his breast, took out his heart,
sundered his gums, and stuck his heart into his mouth; they also
killed the preacher, who being on his knees, begging life, was denied
mercy.

The ninth Observation.

Happy is he who opens the earth, and crops her plenty from her fertile
bosom, tasting the harmony of peace, singing away his labours all day,
having no note drowned with noise of drum nor cannon, but sleeps with
peace at night, not over-awed by the tyrants of the earth, leading the
ranks of blood and death, as these cruel murderers did at this time,
by their monstrous and prodigious massacre, breaking the peace of God,
swimming in Christian blood, without mercy to officer, soldier, or
preacher, heaping up wrath on their own souls, against the day of
their appearance before that great Judge, that shall judge both the
quick and the dead.

Out of our enemies' cruelty used here, we ought to learn to forbear
the like, lest one day we might be used as they used our friends and
countrymen: for we may be revenged on our enemies' cruelty, repaying
them in a Christian manner, without making beasts of ourselves; in not
showing mercy being sought of us, which is to be more cruel than
lions, who will not stir those who stoop unto them. And there is no
greater token of injustice, than to do that unto another, that we
would not have done unto ourselves. And would'st thou have mercy that
refusest to show mercy, being sought of thee? No truly; it is just
with God, that he miss mercy, that refuseth mercy unto others; and to
have courage without mercy, is to brag of virtue, and lack the right
use of it.

Was there greater perfidy in the world than was used here at the in-
taking of this house, willingly to harm the dead, and the innocent?
For to wrong an innocent preacher, was savage, beseeming a beast, not
a man; and to give a stab, as was done here, for the innocent smile of
an infant, was devillish black at the heart. We read in the Turkish
story of a child, that struck an intending murderer into a swound with
offering to embrace him. Would to God, all those that refuse mercy,
were so stricken dead, to terrify such tyrants as they were! And I
persuade myself, none but villanous persons, being commanders, ever
suffered the like to have been done without moderation: but, I hope,
haughty and violent minds will never bless the owners; but that by
domineering they shall fall like dust.

This worthy cavalier, of famous memory, after his death thus
unchristianly used, let no man judge by his end, that he in his
lifetime used any man but generously: for I dare affirm, though
sometimes he was subject unto passion, it continued not long, he being
of a good, sweet, and mild nature, and very kind and constant, where
he professed friendship, and as devout in the profession of his
religion, professed in Scotland, as became a good Christian being
sincere. And commonly his custom was, leading troops on service, till
he came in action, he went before them bare-headed, praying for a
blessing to his actions, as he hath told me himself; having asked a
reason for this his manner of carriage, he scorned in all his onsets
to have been anything but a leader, always teaching by the strongest
authority, his own forwardness by his own example: And as his humour
scorned to be so base as to flatter, so he did hate to be so currish
as to bite. But he was ever endued with inviolable amity, joined with
invaluable love; and as he was courageous, so he was constant; in the
one, withstanding his enemies, in the other, entertaining his friend.
In a word, he was a resolute Christian, and a man truly honest; and
therefore I persuade myself, his death was but the beginning of his
joy, and the end of his misery: having therefore written nothing amiss
of him, I need desire no pardon. But I know some men will object, as a
blame in him, that he refused a parley, while as there was no
appearance, either of relief, or holding out: to which, I cannot
otherwise answer, than he answered himself to some of the officers
that were most inward with him, which was, that he was sorry the
charge of the blood of so many souls did lie on his shoulders. But if
he should give over that house, he was persuaded, the King his master
would cause to hang him, seeing he had enemies about his Majesty, who
would make him die, though innocent. Therefore he resolved to die
honourably, rather than his name should be brought in question, and
then to suffer at last. Here also we see a poor minister in his last
act giving good example, not terrified with the horror of death, nor
cruelty of his enemies, but on his knees being denied of mercy from
man, begs mercy of God, dying as a martyr, persecuted unto death.

A happy death to him, being resolved with God and his conscience, to
die innocently, like a valiant soldier of Christ, encouraging others,
even in the last act of his calling! A happy man, dying in sincerity,
time shall not out-live his worth; he lives truly after death, whose
pious actions are his pillars of remembrance; for though his flesh
moulder to dross in the grave, yet his happiness is in a perpetual
growth, no day but adds some grains to his heap of glory.



The tenth Duty discharged of our March unto Lolland, leaving three
companies in Fune.

My Colonel and his officers being parted for Scotland to bring over a
recruit, I being left to command the regiment: In November I received
orders from his Majesty to leave three companies in Fyn and to march
myself, with the other four companies, and the regiment staff unto
Lolland: the reason of our march was: the Imperialists having by
shipping crossed Angelandsbaelt, and taken the Isle of Fehmarn under
their contribution, Lolland the Queen Mother's dowry being next unto
it, and without soldiers, his Majesty was afraid the enemy out of
Fehmarn might set over with shipping, destroy the land, and retire
again, seeing there was no fortified city within Lolland, though it
was the fertilest soil within Denmark: to prevent this inconvenience,
I was ordained to march thither, and to quarter the companies in the
most convenient parts of the land, and to remain there during his
Majesty's will, having only charge to watch where our garrisons lay,
and the boors were ordained to watch night and day alongst the coast,
at such places where the enemy might land: This march though short was
tedious, being in the midst of winter the ways deep and foul, being
fat clay ground, the best and fertilest part in Denmark; and the march
was the more troublesome, that we were forced in the winter time to
cross the seas over Angelandsbaelt twice.

Marching through Langland, having quartered there a night, there
happened an odious complaint to be made on a soldier called Mac-Myer
of Monro his company, for forcing the boor's daughter, where he
quartered. The boor complains to the Commissary, and the Commissary to
me; to satisfy justice, we called a council of wars (having our
auditor with us) of the regiment officers; the business exactly
examined, according to his Majesty's articles, the soldier was
condemned to die, and to be shot at a post, to terrify others by his
example from the like heinous sin: The soldier getting time for that
night to prepare himself for death, the minister instructing him of
his duty, the next morning the companies drawn to arms, a guard was
directed to see the execution, the soldier courageously and
Christianly resolved, being tied to a post was shot dead by his
comrades, who without any delay executed the command laid on them by
the malefactor, whose corpse was presently buried. The next day having
shipped, we crossed over unto Lolland, where, according to his
Majesty's orders, we were well quartered and courteously received. The
Colonel's company and Sir Patrick Mac-Geys with the staff, were
quartered with me in Maribo, Captain Mac-Kenyee his company were
quartered in Rodby, and Captain Monro his company in Nykobing, where
the Queen mother did remain.

The tenth Observation.

Here I did observe that wisdom and virtue were the best guards of
safety, the one securing the soul, the other the estate and body: For
this magnanimous and wise King, by his foresight and wisdom, did
prevent the evil (by a timely foresight) which his enemies might have
brought upon this Isle of Lolland, being the richest part within the
Kingdom, for corn a magazine, and a garner for foreign countries: It
abounds also in all sorts of fishes, the ponds belong to the gentry,
making great commodity of their fish, being sold in the cities and
country, that are not licentiate to have the like of their own. The
gentry of this land are much given to policy and economy, following
the example of their King, having great stalls and stables, containing
above four hundred oxen, and their stables some threescore horses,
being well fed and made lusty, they are sold to the Germans, which
yearly brings unto the gentility great store of money: this island
abounds in deer and wild fowl.

This country is also plentiful of wood for building of ships, where
his Majesty every year hath some builded by his own master builder, a
worthy gentleman begotten of Scots ancestors, called Mr. Sinclaire,
who speaks the Scottish tongue, and is very courteous to all his
countrymen which come thither. The citizens also of this island, being
very rich, build ships for their own use, and some they sell unto
strangers.

My host the Burgomaster of Maribo, sometime furnished his Majesty for
building of his ships, to a reckoning of one hundred thousand
rixdollars, so that in a word, in this little Isle of Lolland I did
observe virtue to be habitual in it, and so was the people's goodness
distributive unto us and our soldiers, so that during our residence
there, we were so welcome, that all things smiled upon us, where it
was my fortune one night to have gotten his Majesty to be my guest,
having then my quarter in the Burgomaster's house, and though he was a
king, I persuade myself he was contented with his entertainment, being
both good and rare, whereof truly I had a good deal, but my guest
departed by three of the clock in the morning without bidding me
farewell; yet being his Majesty's will, I was well pleased, having sat
up all night I was not for attendance in the morning, which his
Majesty at his departure gratiously did excuse.

To return then to my observation, I did see and learn here the truth
of that proverb in his Majesty's person, that the wise man only is the
cunningest fencer; no man can give a blow so soon, or ward and keep
himself so safely as the wise man, and nothing is to be placed above
him, but God, the King of Kings and giver of wisdom. To live is
common, to be wise and good particular, and granted to a few: many I
see wish for honour, for wealth, for friends, for fame, for pleasure;
I desire but those two; virtue, and wisdom, which both I saw in this
magnanimous king, and in his country people following his Majesty's
example. We find not a man that the world ever had so plentiful in all
things, as was Solomon: yet his request was but one of these two,
though indeed it includeth the other; for without virtue, wisdom is
not; or if it be, it undoes us at last: and to return to my
observation, in my judgement it may be said of this magnanimous king,
as was said of Caesar, Semi-Deus est: for as he is valiant, so he is
learned, Ex utroque Rex, being valiant and wise, a prince of an
excellent spirit, capable of all good things, as I have seen, and
observed in him: he is learned in the liberal sciences, and
understands well the mathematics and the practise of fortifications,
as a soldier studied in the laws, joining arms with justice, two great
helps for the government of a princely dignity: he handles well his
arms, and is expert in riding of horses, a strong man for wrestling,
as all Europe affords, able for to give strokes, and the levellest
shooter with a piece, that ever I did see; for with a pistol he never
misses a dog in the head he shoots at; for experience in warfare,
nothing inferior to the greatest captains we read of, easy to come to,
and very affable, patient to bear with heat, cold, hunger, and most
durable in travail; and if I were to wish for the personage of a man,
mine eyes did never see his like, for a stately majestic person, whom
ever I will greatly respect and love for the good received, and shall
be ever ready to serve him against all his enemies, my gracious
sovereign only excepted, and his dearest sister's royal issue, to whom
I have vowed my best service.

Here also in this kingdom I did observe, that there is nothing moves
subjects more to obedience, than the opinion they conceive of their
prince's care and diligence, in the conservation of his kingdom and
subjects; and experience teacheth us, that the obedience due to kings
by their subjects is weak, if it be not grounded on fear and
respective reverence. As authority is gotten by honourable and
convenient carriage: so oft-times we see it is lost by evil carriage.
So that all greatness destitute of virtue doth vanish in an instant;
and therefore the poets did say, that honour and reverence were the
children begotten of majesty and authority: the example wherof, we
have in the person of Charles called the Wise, who having seen France
ruined by the former wars, under his predecessors Philip and John,
Normandy and Picardy possessed by the English, and having Edward the
third to deal with, the best and happiest king ever England had, who
defeated the French in two battles. This prince resolved to keep the
rest, finding it to be as good to govern by counsel as by force of
arms, he did nothing rashly nor unforeseen, but his designs were all
well premeditated and digested, making choice of men wise, valiant,
and knowing how to command in wars. Edward seeing his sword thus
blunted, and the course of his victories by the wisdom of Charles
interrupted, said, who did ever see one out of his chamber to give a
man so much ado without arms? Thus Charles was so wise, that his
enemies did make no difficulty to praise him, for he not only freed
his people from misery, but also gathered afterward a great treasure
for his son, being called rich, as he was wise, and being respected of
his subjects, and of his enemies, as this magnanimous King of Denmark
is, for his prudence after his wars, is as much to be commended, as
his valour was in preserving his subjects & throne from his enemies,
being redacted to a corner; and his counsel served also well, for the
good of his subjects, the estate of his throne, and for the recovery
of his loss. And therefore Cicero said, that counsel availed for the
good of the state as well as captains, for it is oft seen in effect,
that by the good advice of the one, the others have happily drawn, and
governed their swords; And in another place he saith that Agamemnon
general of Greece, did never wish for ten such great captains as Ajax
was, but rather ten wise counsellors, as Nestor was, which made Cicero
so often to proclaim the honour due to eloquence above valour, saying,
Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea linguae but joined together, as in
this magnanimous King of Denmark, they work one to another's hands,
for the establishment of his throne, which I wish so long to continue
as the world. Here also we may learn to eschew vice by the punishment
inflicted upon this soldier for his exorbitancy, in having ravished a
virgin of her honour, he was bereft himself of life, by God's justice,
punishing man for sin examplary to others.

Against this sin of ravishing emperors ordained punishment, to wit, to
lose their heads, and their goods also to be confiscate, but the law
of the canonists treats more meekely with ravishers, suffering them to
marry those whom they ravished: But the Lord judging more severely,
steeping his rods in vineger, ordains stricter punishment for such
malefactors. To eschew therefore the committing of such villanies, I
will here set down some remedies to hinder man from such vices, that
we may eschew the like punishment. The first remedy then is to abstain
from the excess of wine and meats, not to be drunk with wine, wherein
there is dissolution. The second remedy is to eschew idleness and too
much sleeping, which is enemy to travail and diligence. The third, to
eschew the company of uncleaan persons, whose delight is in filthy
communications, for he that will touch pitch, must be defiled with it.
Evil speeches corrupt good manners; and with wolves we learn to howl
and cry. Dinah the daughter of Jacob desiring to see what was not
convenient, neither for her shamefacedness, nor for the respect she
ought to have carried to her father's house, was ravished, violated,
and was the cause of greater evil. The fourth remedy is to keep both
women and maids in a convenient modesty of a chaste behaviour, without
which there is a door opened to all villany and filthiness, which is
able of virtue to make vice. The other remedies are, to live soberly
and virtuously in our callings, eschewing evil company and filthy
communications, loving rather to take pains in our callings,
remembering our duty we owe to God, in not delighting in any
uncleanness, that we may eschew the malediction hanging over the heads
of those, which continue in their filthiness without repentance,
abusing the long suffering and patience of the Lord our God and
Father.

To conclude this observation, there are laws and justice observed as
well among soldiers, as in other governments, and the strictest
justice that is, with least partiality: our laws are the King's
Articles, we are sworn to obey our president or judge, he amongst us
present having the command, to whom his Majesty joins, as assessor to
the judge, an auditor for doing of justice, our assizers or jury we
have not to seek (viz.) a competent number of thirteen of our own
regiment, officers, captains, lieutenants, ensigns, sergeants and
corporals, till our number be full: our proforce or gavileger brings
in the complaints, and desires justice, in his Majesty's name, to the
party offended, and to his master the King's Majesty or general, that
fuehrs or leads the war; and every regiment is bound to have an
executioner of their own, which if the regiment wants, the colonel is
obliged to hire another to do the execution for payment, and sometimes
as the crime and the person is respected, that is to suffer, he is
honoured to be shot by his comrades, or beheaded, not suffering an
executioner to come near him. Other slight punishments we enjoin for
slight faults, put in execution by their comrades; as the loupegarthe,
when a soldier is stripped naked above the waist, and is made to run a
furlong betwixt two hundred soldiers, ranged alike opposite to others,
leaving a space in the midst for the soldier to run through, where his
comrades whip him with small rods, ordained and cut for the purpose by
the gavileger, and all to keep good order and discipline; for other
lesser faults, there is ordained slighter punishments, as irons,
standing at a post, his hands bound up above his head; likewise
sitting on a treen or wooden mare, in some public place, to make him
ashamed of his fault: As also sometimes to stand six or seven hours
longer than ordinary at the sentry posture; as I was once made to
stand in my younger years at the Louvre gate in Paris, being then in
the King's regiment of the guards, passing my prenticeship, for
sleeping in the morning, when I ought to have been at my excercise,
for punishment I was made stand from eleven before noon, to eight of
the clock in the night sentry, armed with corslet, head-piece,
bracelets, being iron to the teeth, in a hot summer's day, till I was
weary of my life, which ever after made me the more strict in
punishing those under my command.



The eleventh Duty discharged of our expedition by water unto the Isle
of Fehmarn, and of the in-taking of it.

The twenty-second day of March 1627, his Majesty having come in person
to Lolland with two thousand five hundred foot, having appointed
rendezvous at Rodby, I had orders to repair with all diligence to the
rendezvous, with the four companies commanded by me of our regiment:
his Majesty's intention being to ship at Rodby, to fall on the enemy
upon the Isle of Fehmarn, as being too near in neighbourhood unto
Denmark: for preventing of their evil, his Majesty resolved to visit
them before they should visit his country, and in the extremity of a
bitter frost we were all shipped in open scouts or boats, where we lay
three days with contrary winds in the road very much perplexed and
troubled with the extremity of cold weather, being hard frost and
snow: the storm continuing we were appointed to come ashore, and to
retire to our former quarters, till orders were sent us to rise again,
so that the sixth of April we shipped again. And on the eighth we
anchored before the island, where the enemy with diligence planted
ordnance for hindering of our landing. But was repaid again by our
ordnance ten for one: During which service, we were landing our
soldiers with small boats by twenties and thirties. The enemy with
cannon and musket giving continual fire on us, till at last seeing a
strong body of soldiers landed, and he having no horsemen to second
his foot, he was compelled to retire his cannon, making his retreat to
a strong fort they had built of purpose on the island, leaving the
rest of the island and the cities at our mercy; the towns being of no
strength.

Before it was dark we were all landed, with our cannon and ammunition,
encamping for that night in the fields, keeping strong guards and
diligent watch. The enemy being discouraged, we had not so much as one
alarm. The next morning his Majesty marched towards the fort with his
forces and artillery, and having himself recognosced or spied the
fort, retired, giving orders for our several quarters: Our soldiers
were entered to work the approaches, which were ordained and assigned
to us to approach on. The enemy being scarce of victuals, and knowing
of no relief, resolved as his best course to parley, and having sent
forth a drummer, which being received, and the parley granted, pledges
being delivered Hinc inde, the accord goes on, and is presently agreed
upon. The conditions granted to the enemy were somewhat hard, (viz.)
that they should leave their arms, baggage, and ammunition within the
fort, and that they should come forth in his Majesty's reverence, of
mercy, or of none; which accordingly they did undergo. But before
their out-coming, there was a prohibition given to all our soldiers,
that no man should wrong or injure them: Nevertheless, at their coming
out, the country boors (ever cruel to soldiers) remembering the hard
usage of the soldiers to them in the winter time, seeing them come
forth unarmed, ran violently upon the soldiers, knocking them
pitifully down, they caused great disorder, so that in the fury the
Count of Montgomery, Colonel to a French regiment, was knocked to the
ground, and left for dead, being taken for a Walloon, or one of the
enemies' officers. This insolency of the boors continued (in killing
the poor soldiers) till by his Majesty's charge, I was commanded to
put my soldiers to arms to suppress the boors, which was presently
obeyed by my soldiers, who again robbed the boors of that they had
taken from the enemy, and withal were well knocked. The tumult
appeased, the enemies were sent away by boats to Holstein, where they
were put ashore, and left; his Majesty then refreshed his troops for
three days, during which time, the island was brought under
contribution to his Majesty, and a governor with a garrison being left
on the island to keep them in obedience, and to hinder the enemies'
return, we were commanded to be in readiness for a second expedition.

The eleventh Observation.

Scipio said, we were most in danger when we wanted business, for while
we want business, and have no foe to awe us, we are ready to drown in
the mud of vice and slothfulness. So our regiment having lain six
months in idleness and sloth, eating and drinking, and sometimes doing
worse, for lack of employment in our callings, falling out amongst
ourselves unnecessarily, and without reason abusing both burghers and
boors, so that when we lacked employment, then was the gavileger and
his irons best employed, insolency domineering, so that when we came
to endure hunger, thirst, and cold on our ships, we were grown so
effeminate, that we could not sleep without a good bed, our stomachs
could not digest a gammon of bacon, or cold beef without mustard, so
far we were out of use, till this magnanimous King came to lead us,
who in a short time, without the help of physic, cured our cloyed
stomachs, hardened our effeminate sides, instead of a warm chamber,
made us contented with a hole digged in the ground, to let the wind
and bullets fly over us, making hunger our best sauce, giving us
employment, and to our gavileger rest and ease at home.

O how bright then doth the soul of man grow with use and negotiation!
Now could our soldiers having made a little booty on this island,
speak like Cleanthes, when he had laboured and gotten some coin, he
shows it his companions, that he then could nourish another Cleanthes:
even so our soldiers showing and telling their comrades of their
booty, they rejoiced the hearts of their leaders, whom before they had
offended by their exorbitancy in their idleness, bringing joy with
profit, when they were exercised in their callings, banishing mischief
from themselves by their diligence: for it is one of our greatest
happiness in our calling, to have a mind and love to virtuous
exercises, raising us daily to blessedness and contentation; for every
one shall smell of that he is busied in, and every noble action adds
sinews to the virtuous mind: where on the contrary, surely he must be
miserable, that loves not to be diligent in his calling, when he ought
to employ himself; for if he grows no better, yet sure it keeps him
from doing worse, not having time by his idleness to entertain the
Devil. When our enemies least looked for us, then came we with
Bellona, summoning him to the combat, but he obeys not, and for his
cowardice we degrade him of his arms, and banish him to some other
corner to lurk in, seeing he lacked the courage to have made us sport
at our landing, or to have given us an alarm in our quarters; to have
once tried what for soldiers we were, or what resolution or conduct we
had: for he ought to have busied us at our landing, as well with the
spade and the shovel, as with the pike and the musket, and so we could
have said, we had an enemy, as we had not, but a flying dastard or
coward.

This fort was scurvily given over, which any resolute commander could
well have kept for three days, during which time, he had added to his
own reputation, and subtracted doubtless from ours, by diminishing of
our number, which at last would have made him get better conditions of
quarters, and a more honourable accord: for in such a case, I would
choose before I came in my enemies' reverence without arms, rather to
fight to the last man, and if I chanced to be the last, I had rather
die, being resolved, with resolution having arms in my hands, than
unawares, being unprepared, to be knocked down miserably, when I
looked not for death.

Here I did see the engineer that built this fort (who in time of
working did oftentimes beat the boors to make them work) for his
cruelty he was most cruelly beaten again, and he running to his
Majesty's feet for refuge (thinking thereby to escape) was on his
knees crying for mercy, so hard pursued by the multitude, that before
his Majesty he was cruelly beaten dead, as the reward of his former
tyranny, and so would God.

Here also we see, that oftentimes the innocent doth suffer with the
guilty, as happened to that worthy cavalier the Count of Montgomery,
being cruelly beaten by the rascal multitude: which should teach all
cavaliers bearing charge at such times, to look unto themselves in
attending their master or general on horseback, when an overcome enemy
is marching out of strength or town, or otherwise they ought to be on
the head of their charge attending their duty; or if for pleasure they
would look on, they ought to be on their guard, lest being taken for
private men, they might be disgraced receiving a disaster, as this
cavalier did.

Happy therefore are those who can eschew evil by the example of
others. Here also we see, that the best means to suppress the
insolency of the tumultuous multitude, is a band of well commanded
soldiers with arms, who are ever good servants, but more often cruel
masters. It is then the duty of a general in such cases, peremptorily
to see that his accord be kept, which otherwise being broken causeth
much evil and mischief to follow. His Majesty as he was diligent in
the in-taking of this island, so we see him careful of the keeping of
it, as his conquest, by leaving a governor with a garrison in it, to
be his retreat, in case of need, out of Holstein. We read that
Guicciardini in his history of the wars of Italy in his first book,
accuses under hand the French, that did enlarge their territories by
arms, and did not maintain and keep their conquests, but on the
contrary did ruin themselves in the end.

The Emperor Augustus, having read the great conquest of Alexander in
the East, he did wonder that Alexander did not take care to keep them,
as he travailed to win them. It is said of Pyrrhus King of Albany,
that where he once set his foot, he was conqueror there. But was ever
unfortunate in keeping his conquest, and therefore the King Antigonus
compared him to a gamester at dice, that lost his own in hope of gain.
Examples we have of this at home without wars.

Leonard Darrez in his 3rd book of the wars of Italy against the Goths,
Totilas King of the Goths being made conqueror of Rome, in his
harangue made to his army concluded, that it was harder to keep a
country conquered, then to win it: for in conquering oft-times (as
here) the cowardice of the enemies helps more than our own valour, &
to maintain our conquest we had need of valour and justice. That
custom of the Turks is commendable, that when he enters into his
chapel, the beadman of the temple going before him, cries out aloud,
that he remember, that the empire attained unto by arms and justice,
is to be maintained with the like: so mutiny is and should be holden
detestable amongst soldiers, and in all well governed estates. For the
use therefore of my fellow comrades, and for the benefit of my
country, I will speak somewhat at large of the fury, cruelty and
barbarity of the multitude, mutinous and superstitious, that we may
avoid the evil incident thereto, I will set down here my collections
on this point, which occurred in my observation. The philosopher Plato
called the wisest and most honourable amongst the Grecians, says, the
people are ungrateful, cruel, barbarous, envious, impudent, being
composed of a mass of fools, naughty, debauched, and desperate: for
all that is spoken by the wise, displeases the people that are
incensed. And Baleus writing the lives of the Popes, writes of Pope
John the twenty third being asked what thing was farthest from truth,
he answered, it was the vulgar opinion, for all things they praise
merit blame, what they think is but vanity; what they say is but lies;
they condemn the good, and approve the evil, and magnify but infamy:
And Nicholas Hanap Patriarch of Jerusalem, in his book of the
unconstancy of the people, hath a whole chapter apart to this purpose,
and Arrianus in his first book praiseth much the wisdom of Alexander
the Great, in taking away from the people of Ephesus the means to
mutiny against the chief men of the town: for some of the mutineers
being executed Alexander forbids to search, or punish the rest,
knowing that if once the popular could loose the rein, there was
nothing to follow but mischief, where the innocent might suffer as
well as the guilty, as witness here the Count of Montgomery, that ran
the hazard of death, being long bedrid after his beating, without
sense or feeling. And Thucydides did in his third book, speaking of
those of the Isle of Corfu, did feel the evil of a sturdy popular
having licence to do evil, how much it was to be doubted, in so much
that the massacre being so cruel, that there was no villany left
unpractised, and such strange things he writes of, that the fathers
did suffocate their own children, and those that were run to the
churches for refuge, were cruelly put to death; who pleases may read
the story, where it is set down more at large. As also to read the
late massacres in France, from the year 1560 to this present time,
especially the massacre of the twenty-fourth of August 1572 in the
chiefest cities of the kingdom, continuing without respect of age or
of sex, as well against the dead as the quick, as saith Lactance in
his sixth book and second chapter: humanity was so far gone from men,
that to take away the life of their neighbours was but sport, being
become beasts drunk with custom of blood, not sparing the innocent,
but doing to all, what the hangman doth to malefactors. Therefore
Quintus Curtius saith properly, that the deep sea in a tempest hath
not more waves, then the tumultuous multitude hath changes; especially
getting liberty by a new government: And Titus Livius in his fourth
book of the third decade saith, so is the nature of the people to
serve as slaves, or strike like tyrants. Read also Thomas Fasell in
his tenth book of the second decade of the history of Sicily, a
memorable example of sedition, moved in Palermo of Sicily, where John
Squarelazop was chief leader, amply described in brave terms, he
having seen the tragedy himself, where he complains of the ruin of the
city, justice and laws being abolished, avarice rife, and pride did
reigne and dominier (a pleasant story to read and make use of) in the
day robbing unpunished, spoiling the Church in all confusion.
Aristotle says well, that such changes come by them that have eaten up
their own, and have no more.

There was also sedition moved at Lisbon, in the year 1506 by the
fantasies of the multitude, that was a flood that took away almost all
the Jews, that were turned Christians, whereof there were killed above
a thousand, and the massacre continuing three days was never appeased,
till at night the third day Arius Silvius and Alvare of Caster
gentlemen, and chief of the justices, came with men of war in arms to
Lisbon, and appeased the tumult. The King's Majesty hearing the news
of this horrible sedition, being much grieved did presently send unto
Lisbon two of the chiefest of the court, to wit; Jackes Allmod and
Jackes Lopes, with full power to punish the malefactors of such
cruelty, where publicly there was executed a great number of the
seditious popular, and the priests, that moved them to the sedition,
were first put off their charge, then hanged, then burnt, the judges
and magistrates that were loathfull to suppress that popular rage and
fury, were some deprived of their estates, and condemned to great
penance, and the town itself was deprived of their privileges and
honours: I pray God to keep my country from the like. Who pleaseth to
read the story, it is much worth, and of great observance for any good
Christian.

Another notable story of the like we have in the beginning of the
reign of Charles the fifth successor to Ferdinand King of Spain and
Sicily, in whom did fail the race of the kings of Aragon; the people
being moved by a monk continued long in seditions one after another,
till God did remove it at last, and since they lived peaceable.

To conclude then this point, it is a vain thing to be a follower of
the popular sort: for none is the better for their praise, nor the
worse for their blame. And therefore Plutarch said well, that one man
could not be master and servant of the people, otherwise, perforce it
behoveth him to fall into inconveniency; as we read in the fable
written of the serpent, the tail whereof came one day to quarrel the
head, saying, he would go his day about foremost, and not go always
behind, which being granted unto him by the head, he found it worst
himself, not knowing how or where to go, and became the cause that the
head was all spoiled and rent, being compelled against nature to
follow a part without sight or hearing to lead it. The same we have
seen happen unto those who in the government of the public would do
all things to please the multitude, and being once tied to that yoke
of slavery, in all things to will and agree with the common and lower
sort, that oft-times are rashly moved and without reason, howsoever
they cannot thereafter come off and retire, hinder or stay the fury
and rashness of the people. And therefore the great servant of God
Moses did properly comprehend in the blessings promised unto the
Israelites their obedience to God's laws, that the Lord might
establish them in the first rank a head; in brief that they should be
as masters, and should not be subject. Read Deut. 28.



The twelfth Duty discharged of our expedition by water to Ekernfoerde
in Holstein, and of the in-taking of it.

The eleventh of April 1628 we got orders to ship again, and being
shipped we sailed along the coast of Holstein, till we arrived before
Ekernfoerde, where lay a garrison of the Imperialists, being five
hundred strong, half dragoniers and half foot soldiers, having
anchored while we were providing for our landing, the town being no
strength the dragoniers marched away, leaving the captain of foot to
defend the place, who had a skonce without the town, with a running
line from the skonce to the port of the town, and thinking us to be
but a weak flying party, that durst not remain long on the land,
seeing the enemy lay strong of horse, and foot near by, he resolved as
his best, to defend the skonce without, whereunto he drew his
strength: his Majesty commanded us to land our forces, and to storm
the skonce, he staying a-shipboard looking on us, we land in all
haste, being almost two thousand foot of several nations, English,
Scots, Dutch, and French: all about equal strength; we threw dice for
the vanguard, who should fall on first, concluding those [who] threw
most should have the leading, and so successively to second one
another, having thrown sixes, the honour of the vanguard or leading
fell on me and mine; the English falling next unto us, having put
ourselves in order, and dealt out ammunition, recommending the success
to the Lord, by our preacher Mr. William Forbesse, companion of our
dangers, and having directed Ensign Allane to recognosce or spy the
best advantage, being retired, I commanded Captain Lieutenant Carre
with fifty musketeers to a broken house, that flanked on the skonce,
giving him orders to give fire from thence on their backs, as we
marched to them in front, and in case of their retreat to the town, to
cut off their passage, or at least to march in with them. Thus done, I
gave charge to my musketeers that no man should give fire till I
commanded, but to follow their leaders still in good order. The ground
we were to advance on to the skonce, was plain as pavement; the skonce
not being high, our resolution was to storm without giving fire, and
as we advanced those of the skonce did give three several salvoes of
musket thundering amongst us, whereof some felt the smart, and Captain
Mac-Kenyee was favourably shot in the leg, and I more favourably in
the hilt of my sword, which afterwards I gave to Mac-Kenyee. The most
hurt was done to the English marching after us, led then by Captain
Chamberlaine, a worthy and a valorous gentleman. In this time we were
advancing, our musketeers commanded by Carre, giving fire on their
flanks many were hurt, and the captain shot in the arm seeing us give
no fire, but marching hard to storm, he quit the skonce and retired to
the town, and enters the port before us, shutting us out, and leaving
a few hurt men behind him; we broke down the stacket, and the town not
walled, we entered the broad side, and follow the enemy to the market-
place, thinking he would fight us there. But he retired into the
church, and shutting the doors defends the church, shooting out he did
us great hurt: our soldiers not having forgotten their cruelty used at
Breddenburg, resolved to give no quarters, and with a huge great
ladder and the force of men we ran-forced the door and entered. I
thinking to get the officers prisoners, entered withal, but could not
find them: incontinent perceiving a great quantity of powder spread
athwart the Church, fearing the blowing up of the powder, I commanded
every man upon pain of death to retire, the word not well spoken, the
powder blew up, blowing the top of the Church, above a hundred were
killed, and a number burnt pitifully, and I with Lieutenant David
Monro standing behind me, was also pitifully burnt: the blast passed,
Captain Chamberlaine entering, finds the officers, and gives them
quarters as his prisoners: of the soldiers few or none of two hundred
and fifty escaped. The town was plundered, and his Majesty fearing the
coming of the enemies' horsemen before our retiring, we got orders
every man to ship again as we might best.

The twelfth Observation.

This service being but short, having had ado (as formerly) with a
slight enemy, my observation must be the shorter: but to my great
grief, as we found afterwards the next day, this day's service was but
like a pleasant weathergall, the fore-runner of a greater storm; for
they made booty this day, that had not the happiness to enjoy it eight
and forty hours, as you shall hear in the next observation.

Our hap here and good success in making of booty was soon restrained:
no man, no beast, no creature, but hath some thing to ballast their
lightness. One scale is not always in depression, nor the other lifted
ever high, but by the beam is ever kept in motion; nothing but hath
some thing to awe it: man with man is awed and defended, the world is
but a perpetual war, and a wedding. When the Assyrian fell, the
Persian rose, when the Persian fell, the Grecian rose; the loss of one
man is the gain of another. It is vicissitude that maintains the
world. Here (I say) our soldiers made booty by oppression, which
brought a sudden consumption with it, Hodie mihi, cras tibi. The dying
fly lectures out the world's mortality, and though frequent, miserable
man never thinks of his end, till it be too late, ever epicuring
ourselves with this world's joy, till at last we are seized on
unawares.

Here I must not forget the memory of our preacher Master William
Forbesse, a preacher for soldiers, yea and a captain in need, to lead
soldiers on a good occasion, being full of courage, with discretion
and good conduct, beyond some captains I have known, that were not so
capable as he: at this time he not only prayed for us, but went on
with us, to remark, as I think, men's carriage, and having found a
sergeant neglecting his duty, and his honour at such a time (whose
name I will not express) having chidden him, did promise to reveal him
unto me, as he did after their service, the sergeant being called
before me, and accused, did deny his accusation, alleging if he were
no pastor that had alleged it, he would not lie under the injury; the
preacher offered to fight with him, that it was truth he had spoken of
him; whereupon I cashiered the sergeant, and gave his place to a
worthier, called Mongo Gray, a gentleman of good worth, and of much
courage. The sergeant being cashiered, never called Master William to
account, for which he was evil thought of, so that he retired home and
quit the wars.

Some men perhaps will blame our conduct here, for pursuing men retired
to a church, being a place of refuge. First, I answer, our orders we
had of our master, were to beat our enemies, in taking them prisoners,
or by killing them, which we could not effect, neither the one nor the
other, without entering the church.

Secondly; They having banished the gospel, and the preachers of it out
of the Church, we had good reason to banish them, who had made of the
house of God a den of thieves and murderers, as they were at
Breddenburg, having killed our comrades, and massacred our preacher,
being on his knees begging mercy, and could find none.

Thirdly; They treacherously retired themselves to a loft apart in the
church, for their own safeties, and left trains of powder to blow us
up at our entry, which made our compassion towards them the colder;
for when the subject of our hatred is sin, it cannot be too deep; and
for my own part, I refused not to show compassion on those, who did
beg it of me, and what others did in their fury, I did tolerate, not
being powerful to hinder them: yet truly my compassion was so much,
that when I saw the house ordained for God's service defiled with
their blood and ours, and the pavement of the church covered over with
the dead bodies of men, truly my heart was moved unto the mild streams
of pity, and wept, as is reported of Caesar, when he heard how Pompey
died. For in my opinion, pity, though she be a downy virtue, yet she
never shines more brightly, than when she is clad in steel, and it is
thought that a martial man's compassion shall conquer, both in peace
and war, and by a two-fold way get victory with honour. And generally
we have found and observed, that the most famous men of the world,
have had in them both courage and compassion, and oft-times wet eyes
as well as wounding hands. Fabius did conquer, as well by delaying, as
Caesar by expedition. To end this observation, reason teacheth us to
cast the blood of the slain upon the unjust authors of it. That which
gives the mind security, is a just cause, and a just deputation; let
me have these, and of all others, I shall think this one of the
noblest and most manly ways of dying.



The thirteenth Duty discharged upon our expedition by water to Kiel,
and of our service there.

Having retired all unto our ships, his Majesty made sail again alongst
the coast of Holstein, till we entered before night, betwixt two lands
that go up unto Kiel, where by six o'clock at night we set sail,
within musket-shot of the town: the commander over the garrison doth
keep himself and his people very wisely silent and close, making his
Majesty suspect there was no soldiers in the town, providing for the
worst, he expected his advantage at our landing: the whole night he
was busied, and very provident, in working a running trench alongst
the coast, near the height of a man under ground, over against our
ships, within the palisades, unseen or known of us, where in the dead
of the night he lodged, and placed a thousand musketeers, giving them
charge, never to shoot, nor appear, till first our soldiers were
almost landed: his Majesty not expecting the like, by seven of the
clock in the morning, turns the broad sides of five great ships and
two galleys on the town, and shoots at once, for the space of an hour,
so fast as they could charge, seventy half cartows at every salvo,
through and through the town houses, where many were lamed of legs and
arms, and freed of lives. Nevertheless, the soldiers within the town
never gave one shot of musket during that time, but the sling-pieces
from the town were spreading their bullets thick amongst our fleet,
which for the most part, shot over, doing us no great hurt: in the
end, our cannon leaving shooting, his Majesty sent orders to set a
party of two hundred musketeers a-shore, we that were officers met
together in the admiral's ship, and agreed to command out the party,
and having cast lots, it fell on the Dutch: they suspecting the
danger, delayed, desiring the rest to command out alike, which we
refused; seeing the lot had fallen upon them, except his Majesty would
give a second command for it: thus contesting, we go together towards
his Majesty, to know his Majesty's further resolution, and we show his
Majesty of the Dutch's delay, on whom the lot had fallen; his Majesty
considering better resolved, the party should be commanded
proportionally of all nations alike, and to cast lots who should send
a Captain to command them, the lot falling upon the English, they
command a lieutenant that supplied the place of his captain in his
absence, the party made ready, were sent from his Majesty's ship
ashore, being twelve musketeers in every boat, with their muskets in
readiness; the enemy perceiving them coming, gives a salvo of a
thousand shot amongst them, twice before their landing, so that the
half of them were killed: yet the Lieutenant valourously led on the
rest, and begins the fight ashore, and continues the skirmish hot on
both sides for one half hour, till the most part of our party were
killed, their powder spent, and perceiving no relief was to come, his
Majesty having considered the danger, the relief, though in readiness,
was stayed. The lieutenant being the last man, retired with credit,
being thrice shot, did come off, and died the next night. A sergeant
of Captain Mac-Kenyee his company, called Mac-Clawde, an old expert
soldier, and a diligent, son to Neale Mac-Clawde, was killed, and
twenty-two soldiers of the thirty that I commanded out of our
regiment, the rest being wounded, for fault of boats, came swimming in
their clothes to his Majesty's ship, and were taken in.

The party thus lost, the enemy begun to thunder amongst our fleet,
with two half cartows and six sling-pieces, where leaving our anchors,
he was thought the best master that had his ship first under sail: his
Majesty's ship being the last, was twice shot through, and two
constables were shot in two in the waist. Thus forced to retire with
great loss, we hold on our course towards the Isle of Fehmarn again.

The thirteenth Observation.

In time of this hot service, no man could perceive any alteration in
the majesty of this King his royal face, but rather seemed
notwithstanding of his loss, as it were, triumphing over his enemies,
and comforting others, most graciously said. We ought not to be
astonished, when things happen unto us beyond our expectation: and
that which was more esteemed as a God amongst the pagans, was
extraordinarily changeable, sometimes taking part with one, and
sometimes with another. In a word, this magnanimous King did abate
nothing of his former courage, or of his gravity: So that his very
enemies, if they had seen him at so near a distance as I did, they
could not but have humbly reverenced his Majesty for his magnific
stature, higher than any ordinary man by the head: yet ashamed he was,
to stoop for a cannon bullet, when they flew thickest.

And for the accomplishment of his virtues, nature hath given him an
extraordinary rich presence, to wit, a face as manly as possible may
be seen, worthy of a great King, well mixed in complexion, his eyes
flaming and shining, full of courage, his beard brown, his nose
aquiline, or imperial, his voice manly, winning the hearts of those
that see or hear him; in effect, a royal King, full of assurance,
without any fear at all, in respect of man: yet full of majesty,
amiable to his friends, and terrible to his enemies.

Here then we may see, that it is the LORD that guards and keeps kings
and princes from imminent dangers that environ them, whereof histories
both ancient and modern, are full of examples of the miraculous
deliverance of great personages from dangers.

One notable story I will bring to confirm this divine protection, in
saving Titus son to Vespasian, appointed for the ruining of Jerusalem,
to subdue and punish the Jews. Flavius Joseph in his sixth book and
second chapter of the Wars of the Jews, records of him, that before
the siege was laid to the town, of mind to recognize, he fell unawares
amongst an ambuscade of his enemies, where then it was known, as much
as ever, that it is the LORD who disposeth of the moments of war, and
of the life of kings: for though Titus had no head-piece nor corslet
on his back (having not gone to fight, but to recognosce) of an
infinite number of shot, shot at him, none touched him, though many
were shot behind him, those darts shot aside at him, he rebated them
with his sword, and those shot low, he made his horse skip to eschew
them. The Jews perceiving his resolution, made great noise, exhorting
one another to run at him, and to follow him wherever he went. A rare
example of a rare deliverance, where we see that he is well guarded,
whom the Lord keeps. Here also we may see, what difference there is
betwixt commanders, he in Fehmarn showed himself no soldier; neither
yet the captain in Ekernfoerde: but this brave fellow that commanded
in Kiel, preserved himself and others, and that with credit; where we
see, that where wisdom and valour do meet, oft-times the success is
answerable; and a man's discretion is seen when he abides a fit
occasion, as this brave fellow did: where I find always, that those
are the best commanders, that are resolute and remiss, not hunting
before he sees his prey, and then with advantage, if he would catch.

Here also, experience dear bought did teach us, that it is better in
commanding men on exploits, to command them proportionally out of
divers regiments, than to command them all out of one, which were to
undo a regiment: and we see often, that the examples of the noble
carriage of officers, do much animate and encourage their followers to
well-doing; and it is a comely thing for the servant of the public, to
teach by example, which makes his fame live after death, as this
worthy English cavalier did, especially being in the public view of
the King his master, his comrades, and his enemies, carrying their
characters from service, as the marks of his valour, without fainting,
though wounded to death.

Here also our Scottish Highlandmen are praise-worthy, who for lack of
boats, made use of their virtue and courage in swimming the seas,
notwithstanding of their wounds, with their clothes, showing their
masters, they were not the first came off, but with the last;
following the example of their leader, they would not stay to be
prisoners, as many do at such times, and never return.

I did also observe after this day's service, an alteration in the
common soldiers' behaviour, while as before we were to send out a
party of commanded men, we were troubled with the soldiers, striving
who should go out on the party, every one desiring it should be he,
but after this days smart once felt by their comrades, they learned to
be more wise, and to stay till they were commanded, and then they
obeyed, though not so freely as before.

Here also I will entreat thee, judicious reader, to give me leave to
digress somewhat, to discourse a little of sea-fights, which occurred
in the discharge of the last duty, though not properly belonging to my
scope. Yet in this retreat-making, as we were in danger of killing, so
were we in danger of drowning, by the enemies' cannon piercing our
ships, repaying us for the hurt done by our ships and cannon to their
town and soldiers, having in one hour discharged amongst them an
infinite number of shot.

To give then notice to the reader of his Majesty's power by sea, I
will relate a story of a sea-fight, that happened betwixt the Swedens
and the Danes, which was in the year 1564, the thirtieth of May: the
story is written by Gasperence in his Commentaries of the Swedens
wars, as followeth.

Amongst other ships, saith he, there was one which in greatness and
excellent equipage, went beyond all human apprehension, so that many
affirmed, that since the memory of man, the like of her was not seen
on the North Ocean, which by the Swedens, in their language, was
called Makeless, that is to say, Matchless, carrying two hundred
pieces of ordnance. The Swedes' admiral, trusting much in this ship,
did employ his whole force against the principal Dane ship, called the
Fortune, furiously cannonading her, till he had shot her fourteen
times under water, and above one hundred times above water, on her
masts and shrouds: the conflict of the first day being doubtful, both
the armies being much endangered, the next day the Danes being sure of
one side, next the land, and on the other side, having the Swedens
fleet, that pressed to make them ground, but the wind turned so, that
the Danes having the wind at best, they chased the Swedens fleet,
scattering them so, that the Matchless being almost overthrown by the
strength of the Danes' fleet, was driven on a bank of sand, where she
was burnt by the Danes with wild fire, which the Danes launched within
her, the admiral of the Swedens, called Jacques Bagg, and Arrold
Troll, counsellor of the kingdom, and a lord called Christopher Ander,
were taken prisoners. The Swedens finding their best strength lost
fly, being followed of the Danes, whose ships being shrewdly battered
by the cannon of the Swedens, that it was impossible to sail, or keep
the sea longer, but were forced to harbour till they were helped.
Where we see, by the ruin of this great hulk, that God is not pleased
when men make such cities of timber; but on the contrary, ruins them,
not suffering any to grow proud of their might.

Paul Jove in his seventy book records a story of a sea-fight, that
happened betwixt the French and the English: Two English ships having
pursued one French ship, of an extraordinary greatness, called the
Cordeliere, having fought long with cannon, with fire staves, and with
artificial fire pots, in one instant were miserably consumed by fire,
having lost above two thousand men, burnt, killed and drowned, and
lost in ground thought incredible, near two hundred piece of cannon,
as reports Hubbert Waleus, who amply hath written this story; and of
the loss of those ships, he writes in his addition to the History of 
Gagwine.

Athene makes mention of some worthy observation, in his fifth book,
and fifth Chapter. Ptolemy Philadelph King of Egypt had a great number
of ships, amongst which were two, each one having thirty ranks of
seats, called trignitriremes, so that they were marvelous great, and
Ptolomy Philopater caused to build a ship, of two hundred and eighty
cubits in length, and of forty eight cubits in height from the keel to
the poop, with four hundred mariners, and four thousand rowers: and
that ship of Hieron Prince of Syracuse, built by the skill of
Archimedes, was yet greater then this other, according to the report
of Athene, who reports things seeming incredible being a worthy
author, which according to his account did carry two thousand tons,
being a prodigious monster, so that there could not be found a sure
harbour for that city built of timber, so that Hieron did send a
present of all the wheat and provision within her to the King of
Egypt, for the relief of his country. Plinius writes of another ship
in Claudius Caesar his time, that carried six score thousand bushels
of corn, whereof the mast was so great that four men could not fathom
it, where we may see, how these Princes of old delighted in making of
things out of measure.

More of this we may read in our own story, of the ships built by King
James the fourth King of Scotland, whereof one was such a huge great
ship as ever was seen on our seas: she was so great, that Henry the
eighth and Francis the first, kings of England and France through
jealousy caused to build every one of them a greater ship then the
Scottish ship, which being made ready, and put to sea, were
improfitable for navigation, and this Scottish ship also was
improfitable, being lost by Admiral Hamilton on an exploit at Bristol.
Where she being robbed of her equipage, she rotted on that coast by
succession of time.

At Venice this day we hear of a fair ship, but not in comparison of
these for quantity, of which Instinian writes as follows, above water
she is garnished with columns, many in number, gilded with fine gold.
When any prince or great man comes to Venice, the Duke & senators to
do him honour, lead him unto this ship, where before the mast on the
highest stage or degree, is set the Duke's chair, where the prince is
set amongst the ambassadors, and the lords of the privy council, and
all men about, on banks set lower, all the senators with great silence
and gravity, sitting on those banks under them, are those that lead
the ship, even by force against the stream, though the wind be
contrary.

The territories of the Duchy are seen, with the Duke's buckler, clad
and covered with black, the ship is covered with tapestry of velvet or
scarlet, well bound that the wind may not discover those under it; at
the rudder there is to be seen, the portrait of justice in clean gold,
having in the right hand a naked sword, and in the left a balance: she
is called Bucentaure, bu signifying great, and centaure, as the most
ancient mark of ships built in the time of Sebastian Siano Duke of
Venice; at the coming of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, for
treating of the peace betwixt the Pope and the Venetians.

Osorius writes of the mighty ship of Dian, which alone fought against
the whole fleet of King Manuel, and at last was taken: and in another
place of the same story, he speaks of a great ship, called Reffe, that
fought valiantly against the Portugals, and they being entered into
her, there was made on the sudden an artificial fire, that so
affrighted the pursuers, that they quit the Reffe, retiring the
farthest they could from her, which fire did not burn, being
artificially made, and the makers of it could extinguish it when they
pleased.

To conclude then this observation and discourse of ships; I did
observe here before Kiel, fire being entered into one of our ships,
and the soldiers throwing salt water on it, it still burnt the more,
till I made them throw fresh water, and then it was quenched, having
before read the like in Plutarch treating of the natural causes. And
Venice seated on the sea hath been often in danger of burning, as
Sabellicus writes in his sixth book in the story of Venice, where he
reports that the Temple [of] St Mark was almost all burnt, and the
Duke's palace was preserved with great difficulty; which verifies,
that fire and water are good servants but evil masters. God make us
thankful for this deliverance, and from many more since, having been
in danger of fire, water, sword, famine, pestilence, and from the
cruelty of our enemies.



The fourteenth Duty discharged at Grossenbrode in Holstein.

This magnanimous King, yet still preferring the good of his country
before his own rest and quiet, with the hazard of his person, landed
again in Holstein, his forces not exceeding three thousand foot
without horsemen: of intention, there to bring his army together, he
drew out himself a royal leaguer with a strong fort in the midst of
it, having the Isle of Fehmarn sufficiently provided of victuals and
of ammunition, to furnish his army during that summer, and leaving the
most part of his strength a-shipboard, he advanced himself with a
thousand men, to a dorp called Grossenbrode, a mile from the shore,
naturally well situated, which might be put in defence with little
pains, to hold up an army. His Majesty having drawn the draught of the
retrenchment, the boors set to work, I with the English and two Dutch
companies, were made choice of, to guard his Majesty and the workmen;
the enemy lying strong with horse and foot, within two miles of us.
The first night's watch was laid on me and my soldiers: by break of
day, a corporal and twelve horsemen of the enemies' were sent to try
our watch, or rather, to betray us, which were holden up by our outer
sentry, who calling to the guard, the guard taking arms: I directed a
sergeant, and a corporal with twelve musketeers to advance, and to
speak with those horsemen: The enemies' corporal finding himself
wrong, pretended an excuse, alleging he was come to offer his service
to his Majesty, and then retired: whereof incontinent I did inform his
Majesty, who presently considered he was a spy sent from the enemy: 
before midday he returned with fifteen hundred horse, and some
dragoniers; our intrenchment not ready, we draw to arms, his Majesty
directing the two Dutch companies to beset the passes, and finding his
person in danger retired, with a few musketeers, and leaving me and
the English, being of equal strength to defend the dorp, promising to
provide me of ammunition, and to send us relief: his Majesty thus
retired, I caused a barricade of wagons to be made a hundred paces
without the dorp, where I placed a lieutenant and thirty musketeers,
giving him charge, if the enemy should advance to discover, or
recognosce, then to give fire on them, and not otherwise; This done,
the rest of our soldiers were placed for maintaining the entry of the
dorp, and the English were appointed, as our reserve, to lie at arms,
to be in readiness to second us; the enemy finding us provided, and
their foot not being come up, they stand in battle, and direct two
troops of horse to try the passes, meaning to come betwixt us and our
ships, to cut off our retreat, but finding we had the pass beset with
musketeers, they were forced to retire back, with the loss of three
horsemen.

By this time, his Majesty did send Colonel Holck unto me (being come
loose from the enemy on parole to solicit his ransom) to desire me, if
the enemy forced entrance unto the dorp, that I should retire to the
church-yard, which was but cold comfort, so being his Majesty had no
intention to relieve us, and consequently, at last we should be the
enemies' prisoners, after losing of our colours, which grieved us
most. But I desired the Colonel to show his Majesty, that seeing I
knew of no relief, if the enemy pursued us hard, I would choose rather
to set the dorp on fire behind us, and then commit myself, and the
rest to the hazard of fortune in making our retreat, rather than to
become prisoners to the enemy. The Colonel gone, we pressing to make a
fair show of a slight game, doubling our guards before night, and
making great guard-fires in view of the enemy, his foot not come up,
and seeing our resolution, he retired before night, where incontinent
we imbraced the opportunity, and leaving some dragoniers behind us, we
retired to our ships, giving orders to the dragoniers to follow after
us, so soon as they thought we were safely retired. Before midnight,
the enemy having gotten his foot joined with him, returned to the
dorp, and the next morning advances towards us, till he was holden off
by the fury of our ordnance of the ships. In the mean time, his
Majesty had above four thousand boors at work, finishing the leaguer,
and royal fort in the midst of it, whereon were placed eight pieces of
cannon, the fort being higher then the leaguer, did command the fields
about, which being complete, the two Dutch companies were left to
maintain the fort, and the rest had orders to ship their men and to
retire to Lolland, his Majesty having understood, that the enemy had
beleaguered Stralsund. The second night, after our going away, the
enemy coming to pursue the fort, the Dutch retire quitting the same,
and their cannon also, with the loss of fourscore men, so that his
Majesty's pains taken in Holstein was in vain, the Dutch retiring from
it unfoughten.

The fourteenth Observation.

It is much to be lamented, when Kings, or great men prefer their own
ease and rest to the public weal, suffering it to be overthrown: on
the contrary part, it is worth much commendation, when a king, or a
prince undertakes toil and travail of his body, for the safety of his
people, to keep them in quiet from imminent ruin, with the hazard of
his own life preserving his subjects. Therefore men ought to call to
mind often, the wise counsel of Pericles, who said that when the
public state was ruined, he that lived well at his ease, for his own
particular, should not escape unruined, where on the contrary, the
public state being well, the poor feel the less discommodity and is
comforted in some manner. Caesar was of this opinion, when he said
unto his captains and lieutenants, no man could so well establish his
condition, as that it could not perish, if the public state were hurt:
But if the public state did flourish, he might help and mitigate all
the misery of all particular persons. And the Emperor Antony called
the Debonnaire, was of that mind, when he took away the pensions of
some pensioners of the public, that did no service, saying, there was
no people more cruel, or more villanous, then those that did eat up
the public. Would to God this magnanimous King had done so with a
number of his commissaries, that had misguided his rich treasure, and
were the undoing of his army, where they should rather have died than
wronged their King and country, and should rather have left by will
and testament to their children, an example of their fidelity and
honesty, than a rich patrimony.

The rogues, the commissaries did much differ in their love to their
King and country, from that worthy gentleman of famous memory, we read
of in our own stories, called William Seaton, who is worthily recorded
of, for his love to the public, preferring it to his own children, who
being governor of Berwick, he and his wife did choose rather to quit
their own lives, and the lives of their children, then to give over
the place unto the English, choosing rather to keep it, for the weal
of the public, and for the honour of their King and country:
preferring the public-weal, to their own particular: the story I need
not amplify, being well known. This magnanimous King, scorning the
attempts of his enemies, ceaseth not still to hazard his own person
and crown for the safety of his people: for he trusted and confided so
much in God, that he knew well the sceptre was ordained for those that
slighted it, and not for those did covet it greedily, as his enemies
did.

Here also we see that the enemies' forces being drawn towards
Stralsund, minding that way to come unto Denmark, his Majesty was
diverted from his resolution, and was forced to join with Stralsund to
make a defensive war, for the safety of his country and people, for if
the enemy had gotten Stralsund, he had an easy way to come into
Denmark, wherein there were no great strengths, and getting shipping,
artillery and ammunition, (whereof his Majesty was well provided) he
had then the pass open unto Britain, when he pleased. But he was
wisely prevented by his Majesty and his Council, God bringing things
to pass according to his secret decree, and not according to the will
of man.

Here also we see, that it is the duty of a general lying near an
enemy, to know all avenues well, and betimes to beset them well with
diligence, and good watches; for if this pass at Gottenbrode had not
been timely well beset, his Majesty might have fallen into the
enemies' hands, the passage being cut off betwixt his Majesty and the
ships.

Also in all extremities, it is the duty of commanders to encourage
their inferiors, otherwise the passengers may be affraid, if the
skipper or steersman gives over: as commanders do look to their own
credits, so they ought to be careful of their followers' safeties.

The English and our nation are good seconds, one of another, being
abroad, for commonly they take part one with another against any other 
nation; as happened here at Grotenbrode, where I did see fifty English
and Scots chase above a hundred Danes, with swords into the sea,
deeper than their waist, running into the Sea for their safeties,
whereupon there was a complaint made unto his Majesty by the
commissary on my comrade Captain Chamberlaine and me, for not
suppressing our soldiers' insolency, from abusing of the Danes
soldiers. The occasion of their quarrelling was, the Danes boors being
commanded out for the King's service, and for the defence of their
country, they had forty days provision with them, and being well
furnished with dry beef and bacon, while as our soldiers did get
nothing but hard biscuit and beer, they devised that one coming behind
the Danes soldiers for taking up his knapsack, while as another should
cut the strings before, and then to run away with it; this stratagem
being oft practised by the English and Scots against the Danes; at
last, the Danes resolved being stronger in the fields than they both
were, to fight for their knapsacks: the occasion being offered, they
yoke or join with swords, and fight in the leaguer, and the Danes were
forced to give ground, and to retire within the sea for their
safeties, sundry on both sides being hurt, their officers appeased the
tumult, and after Captain Chamberlaine and I, though innocent of the
fault, were mightily chidden by his Majesty: his Majesty assuring us,
if the like happened again, he would punish us, and not our soldiers,
which made us afterwards look more narrowly to their behaviour and
carriage, making them live more peaceable with their comrades, in not
oppressing them; for it is a hard time when one wolf eats up another.



The fifteenth Duty discharged of our March from Lolland to Elsinore,
and from thence to Stralsund by water.

The eighth of May 1628, I being at Copenhagen, soliciting for our
regiment, orders were given unto me, to be sent to Lolland and to
Fune, to make our regiment march in all haste to Elsinore, and there
to attend for their orders: the orders I did direct to Captain Mac-
Kenyee, commanding him to keep good discipline in his march, and
strict, being in his Majesty's own land; he receiving the orders
breaks up the twelfth of May from Lolland, and continues his march to
the rendezvous. The garrisons also in Fyn break up the said day, and
continued their march towards their rendezvous. On the march through
Zealand, Captain Mac-Kenyee his soldiers being quartered in a dorp,
the boors go to arms to hinder their inquartering, the soldiers seeing
the boors take arms, stayed not to be led by their officers, but
entered the skirmish with the boors, where at the first salvo, four of
the boors were killed dead, and sundry hurt, the rest fly away,
leaving the dorp to the soldiers to be quartered in; the blame of this
accident was laid on the commissary appointed for the convoy, who
being absent was to answer for the wrong; but the commissary caused
for revenge, a boor's daughter to complain on three soldiers of
Captain Mac-Kenyee his company, alleging they had all three forced
her, so that the soldiers were apprehended, conveyed in irons to
Copenhagen, to be examined there before the General Commissary, the
Stadt-holder and me: who being examined, no proof was found against
them but accusations, whereupon they were remitted to prison till
further trial, where there was an act made, they should suffer no
trial, except I were present. Nevertheless, in my absence, they were
all three executed, (viz.) Donald Rosse, James Dumbarre, and Alexander
Caddell, who went to death without acknowledging the fact, still
pleading their innocency. The Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Seaton,
being then come from Holland, was ordained by his Majesty in all haste
to ship three companies, and to go with them for the relief of
Stralsund, I being appointed to stay for the other companies' coming;
they being come to Elsinore, were shipped also, and arriving at
Copenhagen, it behoved me in all haste to ship, and follow the
Lieutenant Colonel, for relief of Stralsund being hard beleagered,
where I entered the twenty-eight of May, and was no sooner drawn up in
the market place, but presently we were sent to watch at Frankendore,
to relieve the other division, that had watched three days and three
nights together uncome off, that being the weakest part of the whole
town, and the only post pursued by the enemy, which our Lieutenant
Colonel made choice of, being the most dangerous, for his country's
credit; where we watched forty eight hours together, till we were
relieved again by the other division, and so singulis noctibus per
vices, during six weeks time, that my clothes came never off, except
it had been to change a suit or linens.

The fifteenth Observation.

This town of Stralsund being hard beleagered by the Imperialists, they
desired humbly the protection and assistance of his Majesty of
Denmark, which was willingly granted unto them: having accorded on
their conditions, his Majesty made choice of our regiment to be sent
thither, having had sufficient proof of our former service, in his
Majesty's presence, and under command of others his Majesty's
generals; So that before others we were trusted on this occasion,
where we did come with a timely relief to those burghers, that were
wearied and toiled with watching, and also hurt by their enemies, whom
they had beaten from their walls twice before our coming.

In this accident, which happened in Zealand betwixt the boors and our
soldiers, we may see the antipathy that is betwixt soldiers and boors,
where the one cannot with patience endure the sight of the other,
without some present jar, so that it were impossible to make them
agree together, if military discipline were not strictly observed, and
the transgressors exemplarily punished.

Here also I cannot omit the over-sight committed by those belly-gods
the commissaries, that serve the public state worst, yet are oft-times
best recompensed; whose neglect on this march, was the cause of
shedding the innocent blood of the poor labourers, and of the soldiers
also: and it was pity, such a King should entertain so many of this
sort of belly-gods, that studied nothing so much, as to fill their own
coffers, and to raise their houses, without any care had of the public
weal.

Here also I cannot allow of that vain custom amongst the officers,
that will make a bad choice for a little ostentive credit, having the
good in their election, to make choice of the worst; for in occasions
against our enemies, we should rather take all advantages, as of
strength, of ground, of sun and wind: and shall he not be thought yet
unwiser, who may be the instrument to save his people on service, that
willingly will make choice of a place to lose them.

No menagry in my opinion comparable to that which spares the lives of
men from losing, and I persuade myself, I need not insist in this
reprehension, seeing the actor, though out of time, was sorrowful
enough for his evil choice.

Here also I did observe, that frequent danger doth encourage the
feeblest soldier, who by daily dangers, and the familiarity made with
death, in stepping every day over the bodies of dead men, who perhaps
never before had seen one die naturally, much less to see daily and
hourly examples of violent death, learning wit, by by-passed losses,
and experience had in the exercise of our calling, being hardened with
toil and travail. Therefore, in my judgement, no man is more worthy of
the name of a soldier, than he that endures best wearisome toil and
travail in this honourable calling, not withdrawing the shoulder, but
by pushing it forwards courageously, having once begun: for though in
all affairs of this kind, the beginnings seem hard and difficult, yet
soon after we find it lighter, according to the measure of our
advancement, and reward in the end, we enjoy still the greater
contentment, as became of me the first time my friends led me up a
steep hill, when my breath begun to fail me, looking behind, and
seeing what way I had put by, the rest to the top of the hill seemed
nothing unto me, being so near the end of my travail, but was pleasant
rather than tedious. And therefore we use to say, He that beginneth
well hath half ended.

At our entry in this town, our travail and toil once begun, continued
night and day for six weeks, till we grew hard with travail, yet not
hard, as many of the Dutch, that are hard against the musket bullet,
this proof we lacked. He that shows himself honest in his calling and
travails, the travail passeth, the honesty remaineth: But on the
contrary, when we have taken delight in evil, the delight passeth, and
the evil remaineth. Happy therefore are those who travail in well-
doing; for when the pains are gone, then do they enjoy the pleasure.

We read of Cincinnatus brought from the plough to the Senate, to be
made Consul for his travail: the like we read of Quintus taken from
his plough to be consul also; a great change. No wonder then to take a
man from the plough to be a soldier; as the porter of Fowls, called
Mac-Weattiche, who, in this town of Stralsund did prove as valiant as
a sword, fearing nothing but discredit, and the down-look or frown of
his officers, lest he should offend them.
xxxx


The sixteenth Duty discharged of our Watches and Accidents, that
occurred in this town, before the Enemy did storm our Works.

The twenty-eighth of May 1628, not without danger both by water and
from land, we entered the town of Stralsund, the Imperial army lying
before it, having their batteries near the water; at our in-coming
they shot our mast, having grounded before our in-coming, we ran the
hazard both of drowning and killing; but being again without hurt come
off, our comrades wearied of watching, immediately after our entry we
relieved the watch at Frankendore, being the only post in the town
most pursued by the enemy.

The order of our watch was after this manner: of the seven companies
one company watched still on the island before the town, called the
Daenholm; the other three companies were ordained by four o'clock
afternoon, to parade in the market-place, and afterwards to march to
their post at Frankendore, without the walls on scurvy outworks, which
were but slightly fortified with a dry moat, the enemy lying strong
before us, and approaching near, we fearing a sudden on-fall, those
that were relieved of the watch by five of the clock, were ordained
again to meet by nine of the clock at night, and to watch again on the
by-watch, till four of the clock in the morning, whereof the one half
were appointed to lie in readiness at their arms without the port near
the works, while as the other half were appointed also to lie in
readiness at their arms on the market-place, to attend all occasions
of alarms, either within or without the town: and thus we watched
nightly, relieving one another, for the space of six weeks.

The rest of the posts, above the walls, were also beset by the Dutch,
but none had the half of our duties to discharge, by reason the whole
approaches were made by the enemy to us, as being the weakest part.
Notwithstanding of this our great nightly watch and duty kept, the
burghers of the city did prove very ungrateful and unthankful to us,
in not quartering our soldiers, as they ought to do: for Captain Monro
his company did lie on the streets four nights unquartered, till the
fortnight that they came off the watch, unknown to their officers,
they went to the Burgomaster his own house, and said, they would
quarter with him, if there were not orders taken for their quartering,
but receiving a soft answer, they retired for that night: in the mean
time, the Burgomaster did complain to Colonel Holke, then governor,
who did cause to assemble a council of war, where the Lieutenant and
company were both accused, as mutineers; the Lieutenant proving he
knew nothing of it, and that the soldiers had done it without his
knowledge, he was assoiled and made free by the sentence of the
council of war: But the company were ordained, being divided in three
corporalships, that out of every corporalship one should be hanged,
who were to draw billets out of a hat, which were all blanks, till one
had the gallows on it.

The order and sentence of the Council of war being duly obeyed, three
were led aside, and committed to prison, to be resolved against the
execution,  and the rest were remitted to their quarters, of the three
ordained to be executed, it was concluded again, by the intercession
of the officers made to the governor, that one might suffer, who again
being two Scots and a Dane, having drawn lots, it fell to the Dane to
be hanged, the governor himself being a Dane also, he could not of his
credit frustrate justice, seeing before he was so earnest to see our
nation punished for a fault, whereof he was rather guilty himself, not
having appointed them quarters as he ought, so that the Dane suffered
justly for a Dane's fault.

The Captains of some companies being absent in Scotland, having gone
for recruits, the duty being great, Lieutenant Saunders Hay was made
captain to Annan his company, being informed the captain was to remain
in Scotland: Ensign Gordon being made lieutenant to Sir Patrick Mac-
Gey, being long sick in Lolland, and having a little recovered, on his
journey to Stralsund, at Copenhagen in Denmark, died suddenly being a
resolute brave young cavalier, and of good parts, was much lamented.

He being dead Ensign Gawin Allen was made lieutenant, and Patrick
Dumbarre, a young gentleman, of worth and merit, was advanced to be
ensign.

During our residence here, our orders were so strict, that neither
officer, nor soldier was suffered to come off his watch, neither to
dine or sup, but their meat was carried unto them, to their post. The
enemy approaching hard, and we working fast, for our own safeties,
where sometimes, we sallied out, and did visit the enemy, in his
trenches, but little to their contentment; till at last, the enemy did
approach right under our work, where sometimes, being so near, we
begun to jeer one another, so that the Dutch one morning taunting us,
said, they did hear, there was a ship come from Denmark to us, laden
with tobacco and pipes, one of our soldiers showing them over the
work, a morgenstern, made of a large stock banded with iron like the
shaft of a halbert, with a round globe at the end with cross iron
spikes, saith, here is one of the tobacco pipes, wherewith we will
beat out your brains, when ye intend to storm us.

We did also nightly take some prisoners of them, sometimes stealing
off their sentries, which made many alarms in the night, and in the
day time. Here a man might soon learn to exercise his arms, and put
his courage in practise: and to give our Lieutenant Colonel his due,
he had good orders, and he did keep both officers and soldiers under
good discipline, and he knew well how to make others understand
themselves, from the highest to the lowest.

The sixteenth Observation.

When cannons are roaring, and bullets flying, he that would have
honour must not fear dying: many rose here in the morning, went not to
bed at night, and many supped here at night, sought no breakfast in
the morning: many a burgher in this city, coming forth in his holy-
days-clothes, to take the air, went never home again, till he was
carried quick or dead, where some had their heads separated from their
bodies, by the cannon; as happened to one lieutenant and thirteen
soldiers, that had their fourteen heads shot from them by one cannon
bullet at once: who doubts of this, he may go and see the relics of
their brains to this day, sticking on the walls, under the Port of
Frankendore in Stralsund.

It is said, that valour is then best tempered, when it can turn out of
stern fortitude, unto the mild streams of pity: who could behold these
accidents, and not be moved with pity and compassion? and who will not
weep at the casual miseries our calling is subject unto, in following
oft-times the leading of an ambitious general, yea and of an ambitious
captain, yea the following of an ambitious soldier, delighting
sometimes to tread over his enemies, as happened many times unto us
during this siege?

Who then is more compassionate, in peace or war, then the martial man? 
Observe generally, and you shall find, that the most famous men have
both courage and compassion; of which in this city we had need; of
courage against our enemies, and of compassion to our friends,
comrades, and sometimes to our enemies.

You see here we were made to keep double watch, as wise men ought to
do: for when we kept steady watches, the enemy could not harm us much,
being wary of ourselves, and he that can do this, he surely merits the
name of a good soldier, but oft-times, we are our own worst enemies,
and killing ourselves we need no other enemy against us. Therefore at
such a siege as this was, sobriety and temperance were requisite to a
soldier, as well as valour to defend him from his enemies.

Here our enemies were our pedagogues teaching us virtue, every moment
minding us of our duty to God and man: yea minding us both of death,
and of judgement: here we needed no dead mans paw before us, to mind
us of death, when death itself never went night or day with his horror
from our eyes, sparing none, making no difference of persons, or
quality, but aequo pede, treading alike on all came in his way, whose
hour was come.

Here I wish not the gentle reader to mistake this insurrection of
Monro his company for a mutiny. It was not; neither against their
officers, nor yet in prejudice of their masters' service. Therefore I
would rather term it, a rude ignorance in seeking their due, though
unformally, whereof their officers had no part, and therefore were
made free by a council of wars, but the unthankfulness of the citizens
(in sparing their means from feeding of those that kept them, their
wives and children, from the furious rage of their enemies, at such
time as they themselves did look for no safety, till they came for to
relieve them) cannot be well excused, but their unthankfulness was so
much the greater, that they erred against the very laws of
hospitality, being in their unthankfulness far inferior to beasts. For
we read, that the Athenians did bring those guilty of unthankfulness
before the justice, to be punished, and that justly; because he that
forgets a benefit received, without making any satisfaction, doth take
away human society, without which the world could not subsist: and
therefore such citizens, as would not acknowledge the good received,
ought to be banished the city, as unthankful, for a man evil in
particular, cannot be a good member of the public, as many villanous
traitors were in this town of Stralsund during the siege, that for
their particulars would have sold the town, and the common good to
their enemies; such fellows some of them were made slaves, being not
worthy the name of free citizens: and the canon law makes the
ungrateful the most detestable of all men; And therefore they were
cruelly punished.

To make then the ingratitude of the citizens of Stralsund towards
soldiers the more odious, I will infer the stories of beasts here to
accuse them; Elian writes of a dragon mindful of the good done to him
(as these rogues were not) in these terms, in his thirteenth book. In
Achaia there was a town called Petra, where a young boy did buy a
dragon very little, feeding it diligently, making of it, playing with
it, and making it lie in his bed, till it became great, and a dragon
in effect: those of the place fearing some evil by it, did cause it to
be carried unto a desert: the boy becoming a man also, and certain
years after, returning from a feast, with some of his comrades, they
met with robbers, and crying out for help, there comes the dragon
running on the robbers, killing some, putting the rest to flight,
saves the life of him that had done him good. A memorable
acknowledgment to convince those of Stralsund.

We may join to this story, the memory of the lion healed by Androcles
the Roman slave, whose life afterwards the lion saved. The story is
written by Gellius and Elian, and also now set out in verse by
Dubartas, in the sixth day of the first week.

Here also we may see the profit and benefit good order doth bring unto
the observers of it: though we thought hard, not to be suffered to
come off our posts for our ordinary recreation, nor yet to sleep from
our posts, we found at last the benefit redounded unto ourselves: for
while as the enemy pursued us hard, we were at hand to defend
ourselves, and to maintain our credits; otherwise, it had become of
us, as it became in the Swedens wars in Germany of Magdeburg on the
Elbe, and of Frankfurt on the Oder, being both lost through negligence
and careless watch, which made much innocent blood to have been shed
in both. And therefore I cannot but praise the worth of my Lieutenant
Colonel, for his good order and strict discipline kept in Holke his 
absence, being in Denmark at his wedding, we being then in greatest
danger of our enemies.



The seventeenth Duty discharged of the storming of our Post, and of
our loss and the enemies'.

The twenty sixth of June 1628, the Duke of Friedland Wallenstein
General to the Imperial army, having come to visit the beleaguering,
and finding Field Marshal Arnehem had lain six weeks, and not gotten
it in, the general being offended, at his coming he did recognosce the
whole town, and finding our post to be the weakest part thereof, by
reason of the situation and of the insufficiency of the works, the
wall not exceeding the height of a man, he resolved to pursue it by
storm, swearing out of a passion he would take it in, in three nights,
though it were hanging with iron chains, betwixt the earth and the
heavens. But forgetting to take God on his side, he was disappointed
by him, who disposeth of all things at his pleasure, being the supreme
watch-man himself, that neither slumbers nor sleeps.

We having then gotten intelligence of Wallenstein his coming, we
looked the better unto ourselves, and having in the evening or
twilight set out our perdues, we strengthened all our posts, and we
placed our by-watch in the ravelin, to be in readiness, as also I
commanded four score musketeers, under the command of Captain Hay, to
sit by their arms and to be in readiness, to supply all defects might
happen by a timely succours, as they should be commanded; likewise I
caused to double all sentries, and so sitting down to rest us, we were
passing the time by discourse, betwixt ten and eleven o'clock at
night, when as our sentry gives fire and calls us to our arms: at our
rising we find the enemy approaching above a thousand strong, with a
shout, Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa, thus it went on cheerfully, and every
man to his station. The worst was, we had without a half moon
unfinished, where Ensign Johnston was with fifty musketeers, that were
forced to retire underground one after another at a sorting port,
where some were lost before their entry: they being entered, then
begun our soldiers to make service, and I give charge to quarter Mr.
Bruntfield, a valorous gentleman, with a guard to keep the enemy from
entering at the sorting port: thus the service being hot on all
quarters, especially Mac-Kenyee's quarter, being next the enemy, was
hardest pressed, where I having visited him, did send him fifty
musketeers of supply, and then I did visit Lieutenant Beaton his post,
whom I found both careful and vigilant in resisting the enemies' entry
valiantly, with his associates, who were two capable Segeants called
Embrey and Simpson, who were both killed this night.

Then I did visit the Dutch quarters, being betwixt me and the ravelin,
which I thought to be in least danger. The cavalier their Captain
being a Beamish gentleman, both stout and diligent, the most part of
his soldiers, the Dutch having left him, he was much over-pressed with
the enemies, them also I was forced to supply with fifty musketeers of
our nation, under the command of Captain Hay, otherwise the enemy had
fallen in betwixt us and the ravelin. But this valorous gentleman the
Beamish Captain being killed; Captain Hay by his valour maintained the
post, till the fury of the enemy begun a little to settle. In this
time, for one hour and a half, the service being hot, sundry were
killed of us, but three for one of the enemy, which finding himself
resisted with valour, being relieved by a fresh supply of another
thousand men, set on more furiously than before, where sundry of our
officers were shot, as Lieutenant Beaton, Ensign Dumbarre, Lieutenant
Arburthnot, quarter Mr. Bruntfield, & myself; divers others were
killed, as Sergeant Mac-Kenyee, Sergeant Young, Monsieur Gordon,
Monsieur Stewart, Monsieur Tullough, all gentlemen of my Colonel's
company, with divers more, and Captain Mac-Kenyee was also shot
favourably athwart the belly, and I being wearied and grown stiff with
my wounds, being helped off, did meet a fresh relief coming to us, led
by Lieutenant Andrew Stewart, a valorous gentleman, and of good
conduct, brother to the noble Earl of Traquaire: I did exhort them en
passant, to carry themselves well, they answered me cheerfully, as
became resolute soldiers, who were desirous to vindicate their
comrades' blood against their enemies: the relief being come, the
service went on afresh on both sides, the enemy storming again with
the third relief, which continued so long, till a number of our
officers more were killed and hurt, as Lieutenant Stewart, Ensign
Seaton, Ensign Ennis, Captain Armes, Andrew Monro, and divers more
were hurt. During this time, our Lieutenant Colonel was busied within
the town, in commanding the reliefs, and in sending orders to the
other posts to look unto themselves, who would not miss one man to
succour or help us in our greatest need. Notwithstanding, that the
whole force of the enemies' was employed against us alone.

The second relief that came to our post, was led by Colonel Frettz,
newly come to town, with some Swedens, who, though not admitted to
command, out of his generosity, being accompanied with his Lieutenant
Colonel Mac-Dougall, and his Major, called Semple, with fourscore
musketeers, voluntarily did come to succour and help our nation; who
at his first coming, received death's wounds, whereof he died shortly
after. His Lieutenant Colonel also was taken prisoner, and was missing
for six months, we not knowing whether he was dead or alive. The Major
also was killed instantly at his first coming to service; so that the
last time, and on the last storm, by the break of day the enemy was
once entered our works, and was beat back again with great loss, with
swords and pikes and butts of muskets, so that the day clearing the
enemy was forced to retire, having lost above a thousand men, and we
near two hundred, besides those who were hurt. He that was on this
night's service from the beginning to the ending, being in action,
might avouch he did escape danger. The enemy forsaking our works
unconquered, the graff filled with their dead bodies, equal to the
banks, the works ruined in the daytime could not be repaired, which
caused the next night's watch to be the more dangerous.

The seventeenth Observation.

The Emperor Alexander Severus had reason to say, that military
discipline did conserve and maintain the estate: And so might the
magnanimous King of Denmark say of this service, and the town of
Stralsund, the citizens of it, before this time being sluggish,
dissolute, cowards, spend-thrifts and voluptuous, are now by this
discipline made active, menagers, valiant, sparing and honest: the
thanks whereof they owe unto our nation, whose bones lie in their
ground, and to our countryman, who since hath been their governor, for
the reward of his virtue, was appointed by his Majesty of Sweden, of
worthy memory, and set to command over them and their city. And it is
most sure, that the observance of good discipline is the maintaining
of kingdoms, cities, and commonwealths, making them to flourish; where
discipline is well kept, as it was here during our beleaguering, for
then we had no thought of gathering of money, but of gaining of
credit; here were no novices, but expert soldiers to resist both the
craft and valour of their enemies, who did feel the smart of their
valourous resistance, in heaping their dead bodies one upon another in
the graff.

During the time of this hot conflict, none that was whole went off at
the coming of the relief, but continued in the fight assisting their
comrades, so long as their strength served, ever esteeming more of
their credit than of their safety, through the desire they had to be
revenged of the loss sustained by their comrades. On the other part,
it was reported of Wallenstein, that he was so eager to get in the
town, that his officers retiring off service being hurt, he caused to
shoot them dead, calling them cowards for retiring with so small hurt.
Here also I purpose to speak somewhat of the Imperialists' custom,
entering on service, shouting like Turks, as if crying would terrify
resolute soldiers: No truly; we were more encouraged, having long
expected for their coming, being all of us well resolved for the
combat, we were greedy of honour, and therefore we longed to try our
enemies' valour: Seeing we were more overjoyed of their coming, than
any wise terrified; and we received them with volleys of cannon and
musket in their teeth, which fair and well come was hard of digestion
unto some of them: and it might be well said of them, as the proverb
is amongst the Bactrians, that the dogs did bark more than they did
bite, especially the fleet curs; for true courage consists not in
words, neither ought we to look for much courage, where we hear many
boisterous words. But on the contrary, true valour doth consist in the
greatness of courage, and in the strength of the valiant arm, and not
in the tongue: and the first people, that did practise this loud
crying of martial resolution, and of rejoicing in battle, were the
Israelites, who in the most part of their fighting used those cries,
as testimonies of their faith, and of their earnest calling for the
help of the Almighty. And a Lord of Africa being to fight against the
Portugals, his troops ready to fight, he said unto them, they should
not cry but strike hard, for saith he, those men whom you see, are not
accustomed to be afraid with words nor voice; for it is not in cries,
but in valour, that men should establish the hope of victory.
Nevertheless, we read in histories, that the Romans, and other warlike
nations, were wont in battles, as to this day in approaches, even as
in fields, to cry aloud: and therefore we say among ourselves at home,
that he is to be pitied, that is surprised with the cry of his
enemies. We read also of the savages, whom the French do call
Tokniambous, that before they come within half a mile, they cry like
devils at the first sight of their enemies, redoubling their cries
coming near hand, sounding their horns, lifting their arms here and
there in a boasting manner, fighting so long as they are able to move
hand or foot, never giving ground or turning back till they die.

Tacitus reports, that the Germans of old, did sing going to fight: and
we read of Cato the Censor, that he taught young men to fight standing
in one place, and he used to say often, that words were more powerful
to terrify, and to chase an enemy, than the strokes of the hand. And
the same Cato said, he loved not the soldier that did shake his hands
marching, that staggered with his feet in fighting, & snorted louder
in sleeping, than he did cry coming to fight. And Caesar said, that in
every man was seen a certain moving and natural readiness and
promptitude, that kindled them with a desire to fight: which generals
and commanders of army's ought diligently to entertain, and not
extinguish. Wherefore it was, that the ancients before they fought,
caused to sound their trumpets, beat their drums, and made their
soldiers cry hard, esteeming that did encourage their troops, and
affright their enemies. The Macedons also began their fighting with
crying and shouting; and Curtius reports, that as soon as the armies
saw one another within shot of musket, the Persians began to cry
furiously, and the Macedons, though fewer in number, did so answer
them, that the tops of the mountains and woods resounded again to the
echo of their cries. The like we read in  our own story, where the
author in his ninth book makes mention of Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, and Regent of England at the East, being come unawares
into Scotland with seven thousand men, was driven away by the boors
and herds, by the help of stone-bags, as they are called to this day
in our Highlands of Scotland, being used by the inhabitants to fright
wolves, and to chase deer and other beasts from their grazings: the
instrument is made of dry skins made round like a globe, with small
stones in it that make a noise, as they did near the English camp,
that their horses broke loose through the fields, where after long
flying they were taken by the boors of the country. If then we should
cry at all, let it be such a noise as may terrify our enemies, being
strong, courageous, and brave.

Plutarch reports, that the cry of soldiers made a raven flying in the
air to fall down being astonished: and Titus Livius saith, that when
the multitude of people did embark, that few or none were left in
Italy and Sicily, coming together, and crying, the birds astonished
fell out of the air: and Paulus Aemilius reports the like, that when
the Christians besieged Tyre, a pigeon was seen in the air, which made
the Christians raise such a noise, that the pigeon fell down, as if it
had been stricken with thunder, and that they found a letter about the
neck of the pigeon, that the Saracens had sent to the besieged,
showing they should be soon relieved, if they would take good courage,
and maintain the town for certain days: and the Christians having men
with them, who understood the same language, did write another letter,
which they tied to the neck of the said pigeon, and let him go; which
letter carried, that the besieged had need to look to themselves, that
they had given good proof of their valour and fidelity, and that their
fortune was, not to give them hope of relief; the passages being
closed up by their enemies, and the Tyrians thus deceived, give over
the town unto the Christians.

The like we read practiced at the siege of Haarlem, which made the
town hold out long: and it is certain, such posts are made fall down
with the noise of crying, and of cannon and musket, so that their
packets are taken from them. Here also was wonderful, the loss and
damage done by cannon, especially the mortars of the enemy, carrying
bullets of stone within the town of three hundred pound weight, and
some that carried bullets of one hundred and sixty pound, and in one
day there were shot on the port of Frankendore, where we went out to
our watch, above seven hundred and sixty shot of cannon, the noise
whereof was heard above thirty English miles. Also we read, that at
the battle of Lepanto, in the year 1572, where the Turks were defeated
with great loss, that the noise of the cannon was heard from the
place, above sixty Scottish miles. But on the sea they are heard a
great deal farther, as having neither hill nor wood to hinder the
sound in the air.

Here also I did observe, how happy it is when officers and soldiers
love one another, refusing to undertake no danger to supply their
comrades, their lives being dearer unto them than their own: which was
evident by the timely relief, which discouraged the enemy, and made
them at last perceiving their own loss to be great, having effectuated
little, in the end to settle. To speak in particular of any man's
valour, at this time, seeing to my knowledge, I perceived no defect
neither in officer nor soldier; but so far as to my grief, I did speak
of the Dutch that left their captain, which since I confess to be a
warlike nation, being now long hardened by the custom of wars, but on
desperate service, as this was, I would wish, if I had liberty to
choose, other seconds: neither can I commend those Dutch that would
not send us relief in our great danger; for though we ought to look to
our own houses, when our neighbours are on fire, yet Christian
compassion ought to move us to supply the defects of our brethren; but
when soldiers and officers prefer their case, with whole skins, to the
safety of their comrades in danger, then such may be justly called
simple, without moderation, abandoning their comrades, they lose their
good name, and bring their reputation and valour in question. Who will
not then blame such, and who will not praise those, that in extremity,
contemned life and their ease, to relieve their comrades: as Colonel
Fretts his Lieutenant Colonel and Major did, fighting against our
enemies? Him then I esteem as a valiant soldier, that fights against
the enemy, embracing wounds for his mistress, and that is contented to
lie on the ground, being weary, and that makes no difference of food
to serve his appetite, without sauce; being contented with a nod for a
sleep; to such a soldier nothing is impossible or hard to attempt; and
such soldiers to command were my choice, that cared not for gold nor
money, but for credit: and soldiers have most fear when they are best
fed, best clad, best armed, and when their purses are best furnished;
but when the soldier glorieth in his poverty, then doth the army
flourish, then do they overthrow their enemies. And therefore it was
the saying of Demetrius to Xerxes King of Persia, going to make war in
Greece, that Greece did ever entertain poverty, and lodged virtue
brought in by wisdom and severe discipline: by which means their
dominion remaineth unconquered, so long as they were enemies to vice,
and were glad in their poverty, as may be well spoken of our own
nation at home, that hath suffered and done so much and more for our
freedoms, than any kingdom in Europe, which this day makes our
sovereign to say, Nobis haec invicta miserunt centum & septem proavi,
being left unconquered in his succession of one hundred and seven
kings: for what have we to do with gold or great riches, so long as we
can command our own appetites and desires? And if we thirst after
gold, let us valiantly bring it from a far with credit, to enrich our
country with, and to supply the necessities of our poor at home; and
then having served long credibly abroad, his Majesty our sovereign may
grant unto us after our dismission from other service, the liberties
and privileges which were granted by Charlemagne unto his soldiers,
after he had subdued the Saxons and Lombards, which I will wish his
Majesty to grant unto us, saying, Go your ways my soldiers, you shall
be called valiant, companions of kings, and judges of the wicked, live
henceforth free of travail, give good advice to princes for the common
weal, be protectors of widows, helps to the fatherless, wait on great
men, with your wisdom, and desire of them life, clothes, and
entertainment, and he that refuseth you, let him be detested and
infamous, and those that wrong you, let them be accused, as of
treason. But take heed ye spoil not through drunkenness, pleasure, or
other vices, the great honour and privilege you have attained unto,
through your just travail in wars, for fear, that, that which we grant
unto you for honour, may not redound to your dishonour and punishment;
which we reserve to ourselves, and to our successors Roman kings, if
by chance you commit any excess. It is a good thing and worth
commendations, to have defeated kings, assaulted towns and provinces,
strengths and castles. But it is a thing much more worth
commendations, to overcome your own passions, a marvel surpassing all
marvels, that he who did overcome so many, at last overcomes himself.
The first and best of all victories, which cannot be attained unto
without contemning of riches.

To conclude then this observation, happy are those cavaliers that
ended their lives in the defence of their country's credit, a brave
interchange, where worthy cavaliers, in undergoing a temporal death
for eternal fame and glory, gain life after death. Miserable is the
brevity, and more miserable the uncertainty of life. Since then, we
are sure we cannot live long, and uncertain if we live at all, being
like leaves on trees, we are the sport of every puff that bloweth, and
with the least gust, may be shaken from our life and nutriment: we
travail, we study, we fight, that labour may pay us the loss of our
ill expended time, while death whiske about us with a Pegasean speed,
flies unawares upon us, and with the kick of his heel, or the dash of
his foot, we are driven down to dust, and lie there. Many a stout
fellow this night at Stralsund, and five weeks before, did expire in
their oppugnations, leaving their breath in the places where they laid
their siege. Certainly, if we could think of life's casualties, we
would neither be careless nor covetous. What avails then a man, to
exhaust his very vitals, for the hoarding up of fatal gold, not
thinking how a hair or a fly may snatch him in a moment from it? Why
should we then strain ourselves for more than is convenient? We should
never care too much for that we are not sure to keep; yet we should
respect somewhat more than for our own time, that we may be
beneficiall to posterity; but for mine own part, I will cast this, as
my life on God's providence, and live here as a pilgrim of one night,
not being sure to see the morrow.



The eighteenth Duty discharged of the second night's storm at
Stralsund and of the success thereof.

The Lieutenant Colonel having visited me the next day at my lodging,
being not able to stir out of my bed, he declared unto me the loss
sustained by the regiment, both of officers and soldiers, and he
suspecting the enemy would storm again at night, being battering the
walls furiously the whole day, having shot at Frankendore near eight
hundred shot, he desired to hear my opinion, how I would have the post
beset at night with the regiment; my advice was, to cause beat a bank
by the Drummer Major, and the whole drummers of the regiment athwart
the city, commanding upon pain of death, that all officers, and
soldiers able to carry arms under the regiment should repair at parade
time, to the market-place, there to receive further orders, and that
at their coming, to appoint all the officers, that were not hurt, to
command the whole soldiers, to be all put under the Colonel's company,
till such time, as the recruits should come from Scotland, and then
every man should be suffered to serve again under their own companies,
as before, and this order being followed, they would be well commanded
having sufficient officers to lead them, giving them orders how to
behave themselves, in case the enemy should storm their works, seeing
they were not able to defend them long, being weak of forces, and the
works almost ruined the night before.

This determined, the watch being drawn up, they march to the former
post, getting orders from the Lieutenant Colonel, if the enemy should
press them hard, they should retire themselves orderly to the ravelin,
and quit the outer works, seeing that from the town wall, and ravelin,
they were able with cannon and musket to cleanse out the enemy again.

So entering on their watch, and the night being come on, the enemy
furiously did invade them, and they defended the works a long time,
till in the end being pressed hard, they retired according to their
orders, to the ravelin, whereupon the enemy followed them with a shout
and a cry, as if the town had been won, which did put the burghers,
and the rest of the soldiers that were on other posts, in great fear,
thinking all was past recovery.

Notwithstanding of this sudden fear, our soldiers valiantly and
bravely defended the ravelin with pikes and fireworks, the enemy
having advanced bravely to the cutting of the palisades, pressing also
to undermine the ravelin by working under it, which our folks did
hinder, by countermining.

The enemy also, had another fortell, or advantage by reason of a new
work, which was uncomplete, betwixt the ravelin and the outward works,
where he did lodge himself, having the new works as a breastwork, to
defend him from our shot.

The night thus passed furiously on both sides, not without great loss,
being well fought, both of the pursuer and defender, in the morning
our soldiers some of them being armed with corslets, head-pieces, with
half pikes, morgensterns and swords, being led with resolute officers
they fall out, pell-mell amongst the enemies, and chase them quite out
of the works again, and retiring with credit, maintained still the
triangle or ravelin; The enemy considering his loss, and how little he
had gained, the town also being not void of fear, thinking the third
night, the enemy might enter the walls, being thus doubtful on both
sides, the enemy sends a trumpeter, to know if they will treat for
conditions, our Lieutenant Colonel having the command, for the time
(in Colonel Holke his absence) I think was glad of the offer, to
prolong time, till his Majesty of Denmark might send a fresh supply.
Pledges delivered hinc inde, a stillstand or cessation of arms was
concluded on by both parties, for a fortnight's time, then articles
were drawn up, to be advised on, which continued in advising certain
days, in the end the treaty being almost agreed on, to the
subscription, orders come to our Lieutenant Colonel to dissolve the
treaty, seeing his Majesty of Denmark had folk in readiness to come in
all haste with Colonel Holke, for their relief. Whereupon my Lord
Spynie, a Scots nobleman, with his regiment, with sufficient provision
of money and ammunition, were sent unto the town, and being entered,
the treaty was rejected, and made void.

At this time also Sir Alexander Lesly, (an expert and a valorous Scots
commander) with some Swedens forces, was sent to govern the town, his
Majesty of Sweden having condescended with his Majesty of Denmark,
that his Majesty of Denmark should dismiss the protection of Stralsund
in favour of his Majesty of Sweden, and to that effect the Danes
forces should be drawn out of the garrison, for to give place to the
Swedens; in the mean time, the command was turned over upon Sir
Alexander Lesly, whom Colonel Holke did assist with the Danes' forces,
till they were removed, the absolute command being given to Sir
Alexander Lesly, as governor for his Majesty of Sweden.

In time of the stillstand, I took a furlough under my Lieutenant
Colonel his hand, & seal, to go by sea to Copenhagen, to be cured
there, seeing no chirurgian in Stralsund would undertake to cut the
bullet out of my knee, without hazarding me to be lame, which to
prevent, I choosed rather, though with infinite pain, to keep the
bullet a fortnight, till I came to Copenhagen, where happily I found 
better cure.

The eighteenth Observation.

Two things we must respect, so long as we live, our inward integrity,
and our outward uprightness, our piety towards God, and our reputation
amongst men, the one makes our life famous, the other our death happy,
so both together bring credit to the name, and felicity to the soul,
Then whensoever our breath is made but air, we shall be blessed,
leaving a sweet odour behind us, and men will regrate our loss, as at
this time they did our hurt.

He whom before I was wont to obey and visit, came now, and visited me,
I not being able to stir, my Lieutenant Colonel came to comfort me,
having need to be comforted himself by good advice, how to defend the
works the second night, a general fear having possessed the hearts
both of burghers and soldiers, and I, to encourage him, did tell him a
story of Augustus the Emperor, who being near death commanded, that
after his decease, all his friends should clap their hands, and laugh
unfeignedly, as the custom was when a comedy was well acted: even so
said I, though I was sorry at our loss; yet I was glad for being hurt,
when I looked to be killed, and having acted my part of the play, for
that time, and retired off the stage, all I could do was but to mind
my comrades of their duties. In the mean time, the enemies' cannon
having shot four great bullets of a hundred and sixty pound weight,
out of mortars, through the top of my lodging even to the bottom,
where I did lie, affrighting me still, when my feet were not able to
shift away my body; yet recommending my soul to God, I resolved, he
was well guarded, whom the Lord had a care of, and having delivered me
from many dangers, I still confided he would not suffer me to be
smothered under walls: For which and all his blessings I do infinitely
thank his Majesty, in giving me time to do anything, that may please
his Majesty, for my deliverance.

To make my Lieutenant Colonel laugh, I did tell him a story of a
vision, that was seen by a soldier of the Colonel's company, that
morning before the enemy did storm, being a predictive dream, and a
true. One Murdo Mac-claude borne in Assens, a soldier of a tall
stature, and valiant courage, being sleeping on his watch, awakened by
the break of day, and jogs two of his comrades lying by him, who did
find much fault with him for stirring of them, he replied, before long
you shall be otherwise stirred, a soldier called Allen Tough a
Lochaber-man, recommending his soul to God, asked him what he had
seen, who answered him, you shall never see your country again, the
other replied, the loss was but small if the rest of the company were
well, he answered no, for there was great hurt and death of many very
near, the other asked again, whom had he seen more, that would die
besides him, sundry of his comrades he told by name, that should be
killed: the other asked what would become of himself, he answered, he
would be killed with the rest: in effect, he describeth the whole
officers by their clothes that should be hurt: a pretty quick boy near
by asked him, what would become of the Major, meaning me, he answered,
he would be shot, but not deadly, and that the boy should be next unto
me, when I were hurt, as he was.

This discourse ended, I wished my Lieutenant Colonel to set all care
aside and to look to himself, and to the credit of his nation, in
maintaining of the place, till the relief should come, and so we
parted.

Here I did observe, that no city, be it never so strong, or so well
beset, nor no armour, be it of what proof it will, is able to
encourage a fearful heart, as in this city, and at this time, were
many of the burghers, soldiers, strangers, officers, of women and
children, who were tormented by the fear of death, and of their means,
whose fear was generally so great, that they were bereft both of
wisdom, and courage, as people given over, so that their fear in some
sort did frustrate their lawful defences: the like I did never see,
neither wish to see again, for the enemy could not, though victorious,
put them in a worse habit, nor make them seem more miserable, than I
did see them at this time, making themselves unfit to resist their
enemies, and they were all of them in mine eyes, like to the
swordfish, having weapons, but they wanted hearts; they had quaking
hands without use: and in a word, if the enemy had seen them, as I
did, he would rather pity them as cowards, than kill them like
gallants.

Notwithstanding of this fear, which possessed the burghers, and those
soldiers that had not been on occasion, yet our nation, that are ever
most courageous in greatest extremity, failed nothing of their wonted
valour, but having once retired to the ravelin, maintained it
courageously, repelling the enemies' valour, with resolution built on
virtue, and love of credit, so that they made their enemy with great
loss, to be frustrate of his hoped for victory, finding the valour of
the Scots tempered with constant resolution and vigorous spirits, his
fury was made to setle by little and little, till at last, resolution,
the strong armour of the discreet soldier prevailed against all the
shuffles and cries of the enemy, and the defender, seeing the storm
passed, and the tempest cease, he laughes and smiles, with as much
honour, quiet and safety, as before he suffered toil, grief, or
injury.

Here we see the use of treaty, and stillstand (or truce) ordained of
policy, that every man may press to win his own aims. The soldiers
that in six weeks before, were wounding, and killing one another, are
now coming and discoursing together as friends, where I did remark and
observe, that it is much easier to be reconciled with an enemy, than
to conquer him.

Now in time of these stillstands, by discourse they press to find out
one another's actions, and to observe one another's faults and
excursions, treasuring up against the day of advantage, for the
confounding of one another, at their first out-falling, and like the
crocodile, they slime one at other's way, to make one another fall,
coming in occasions again: and therefore it was the answer that Seneca
gave unto himself, when he asked Quid est homini inimicissimum? he
answered, Alter homo. Our enemies' studies are the plots of our ruin,
leaving nothing unattempted, which may induce our damage, and the
danger is ever most, when we see it not. Yet I think, he that can be a
worthy enemy, can, reconciled, be a worthy friend; and he that, in a
just cause, can fight against us, can likewise in the like cause,
being reconciled, fight with us, and if he be unworthy reconcile him
too, if it were but to be freed of his scandalous tongue, and that
also will be worth thy labour, and he that upon good terms refuseth
reconcilement, may be stubborn, but not valiant nor wise: for he that
wilfully continues an enemy, teacheth his enemy to do him a mischief
if he can: and that endeavour is well spent, that unmasks an enemy, or
makes a friend: for as the one begets a treasure; the other, it may
be, raiseth a siege; and that man is wise, that is kind to his friends
and sharp to his enemies: but he is wiser, that can entertain his
friends in love, and make his enemies like them, as our nation did
here at Stralsund, in keeping their master's love to the best, for
their loyalty, and in making their enemies think well of them, and
love them for their brave carriage and valour.

Likewise I did observe here the benefit that ariseth to a kingdom,
city or state through a good government; and what a blessing it was to
a town perplexed, as this was, to get a good, wise, virtuous and
valiant governor, in time of their greatest trouble, which shows that
we are governed by a power above us: for oft-times, that, which we
desire or fear, doth seldom happen. This city having feared the
Emperor's tyranny to come over them, desired the King of Denmark as
their protector, yet God, by his providence, gave them another, to
wit, the invincible King of Sweden, who provided them an able governor
in their greatest need, to wit, Sir Alexander Lesly, who immediately
after his entry took the command upon him, keeping both the Dane,
their soldiers, and the burghers under his command, and direction, as
worthy of his authority, flowing from the King his master of most
famous and of never dying memory, it faring then with Stralsund, as
with Sara; she became fruitful when she could not believe it, and they
became flourishing having gotten a Scots governor to protect them,
whom they looked not for, which was a good omen unto them, to get a
governor of the nation, that was never conquered, which made them the
only town in Germany free, as yet, from the Imperial yoke, by the
valour of our nation, that defended their city in their greatest
danger.

To conclude then, for the love I bear to the crown, that doth protect
them, knowing their dispositions by experience to be froward,
factious, and proud, having as yet some wolves amongst them, that the
fold may be quiet, let the factious heads be made higher by a pole
than their bodies, cutting off the tumultuous; whereby their governor,
by a majestic awe, may keep the rest in a strict subjection; lest
slackness and connivance may undermine an unsettled Government; for it
is no cruelty to deny false men liberty, that are so infected, though
there be some honest men amongst them; let them serve their governor,
and let him bear the sway, as becomes the dignity of the place, that
having once won the field, he may be sure to keep it: for though I
hate the evil people, for their former unthankfulness to our soldiers
and nation, yet the love I bear to their protector and governor, makes
me thus plain; whose happiness I wish to endure while there remaineth
a stone in the city, and his fame eternally.



The nineteenth Duty discharged of the out-fall made by Spynie's
regiment, and of their Retreat made good by Captain Mac-Kenyee.

The treaty dissolved, the new supply being come out of Denmark, Sir
Alexander Leslie being made governor, he resolved for the credit of
his countrymen, to make an out-fall upon the enemy, and desirous to
confer the credit on his own nation alone, being his first essay in
that city. And therefore made choice of Spynie's regiment, being their
first service, to make the out-fall, ordaining Captain Mac-Kenyee,
with the remainder of our regiment, in the Lieutenant Colonel his
absence, to second them, for making good of their retreat.

My Lord Spynie being present with his regiment, consisting of brave
and valourous officers, being all worthy cavaliers of noble descent,
and of good families, having action, valour, and breeding answerable
to their charges, they were desirous to gain honour and credit against
a powerful enemy, with whom they were to be engaged; they went on with
boldness and confident resolution, and falling into the enemies'
works, they forced the enemy to retire, and to give ground, even to
the body of their army: And delighting in the shedding of their
enemies' blood, who had shed so much of their country's blood before,
they pursued them hard, following them unto their main reserve or
battle, where they seized on their cannon: but the enemy being too
strong, and his forces still augmenting, they were made to retire with
the loss of some brave cavaliers, especially the loss of Sir John Hume
of Aiton, the first Captain of the regiment, who, after many bloody
wounds received, was taken prisoner, being a brave resolute cavalier,
of good carriage and moderation in all his actions, who after died of
his wounds with the enemy, being a prisoner long, and was much
lamented of all that knew him.

Here also was killed the valourous Captain Mac-Donald, who in valour
succeeded his worthy predecessors; for with his own hands, as is
credibly reported, he killed with his sword five of his enemies,
before he was killed himself. Divers also of these officers were hurt,
as Capt. Lundesey of Bainsho, who received three dangerous wounds,
Lieutenant Pringle, who was hurt also, and divers more, they being
made to retire, their powder being spent, to make their retreat good,
falls up Captain Mac-Kenyee with the old Scottish blades of our
regiment, to suppress the enemies' fury, they keeping faces to their
enemies, while their comrades were retiring, the service went on
afresh, where Lieutenant Seaton his company alone led by Lieutenant
Lumsdell (in absence of their own officers, being then all under cure)
there was lost of Seatons company above thirty valourous soldiers and
the Lieutenant seeing Colonel Holke retiring, desired him to stay a
little, and to see if the Scots could stand and fight or not. The
Colonel perceiving him to jeer, shook his head, and went away: in the
end Captain Mac-Kenyee retired softly from his enemy, keeping faces
towards them with credit, till he was safe within works. And then made
ready for his march towards Wolgast, to find his Majesty of Denmark.

The nineteenth Observation.

Here we see, that when his Majesty of Denmark did quit the protection
of Stralsund unto his Majesty of Sweden, Sir Alexander Lesly being
made governor, following the example of Justinian the Emperor, to put 
his authority in practice, he commanded out a party, and was obeyed by
those he commanded: which should encourage all brave cavaliers to
serve well and faithfully, where they serve, without spot or blemish,
that in the end they may expect so great a reward, from so great a
master, as we see here bestowed for valour and fidelity upon our
countryman, being trusted with such a charge on a frontier garrison,
though a stranger, before his Majesty's own countrymen; where he again
following the example of Alexander the Great, who caused a combat to
be fought with one of Darius' captains, before the army should fight,
and his captain returning victorious, he (I say) took that as a good
presage of his future fortune, in beating of Darius his army. Tacitus
saith also, that the Germans were wont to fight, and try their valour,
first after this manner, by parties, for presages of greater service
to follow. And we find, that the valorous General Scanderbeg, King of
Epirus, did fight many combats himself, for to give good presages of
future victories, whose fortune was till his death to be ever
victorious. The like fortune I heartily wish to this noble and worthy
cavalier, happy already and blest in bringing honour to his country,
being in all his time, beyond apprehension, happily excellent.

To conclude then this observation, here we may see the benefit of good
order, where those that were in great danger, are happily preserved by
the goodness of good order and discipline, and by the timely succours
of their valourous comrades, taking the enemies' blows and shots in
their own bosoms, to rescue their friends from danger, to the great
praise of that noble spark, Captain Mac-Kenyee, being full of worth,
as the purest oriental diamond, shining amongst the greatest stones,
who did scorn to turn face from his enemies, but retired orderly,
offending his enemy in defending his friends, till both he and they
were returned with credit, though with loss: for where order is kept,
as in this retreat was done by that noble spark, all things flourish
and thrive, and I wish from my heart, he had followed his profession;
for though he be honourable enough, as he is, none can blame me for
wishing him better, he having once commanded me, and shall still while
I live.



The twentieth Duty discharged of the regiment's March to Wolgast, and
of their Retreat unto Denmark.

HIS Majesty of Denmark having given over the protection of Stralsund
unto the King of Sweden, immediately after he did ship some forces of
foot and horse in Denmark, which he did land at Wolgast in Pomerania,
of intention to patronize the Dukedom of Pomerania against the
Emperor: And being come to Wolgast, his Majesty did recall the
remainder of our regiment from Stralsund, who were not then four
hundred strong at their out-coming, having lost in six weeks near five
hundred good men, besides officers; the regiment led then by Captain
Mac-Kenyee, in the absence of his superiors, he continued his march
towards Wolgast, where they joined with his Majesty's army: being no
sooner arrived, they were instantly commanded on service. The enemy
having fallen strong against his Majesty, he did plant fourteen pieces
of ordnance, and played on the King's battle, till his Majesty
perceiving the danger, not being bastant to resist the enemy, retired
confusedly in great haste to Wolgast; and having lost without fighting
the greatest part of his army, our regiment and the remnant of
Spynie's regiment had been cut off, had not Rut-master Hoome and some
of his comrades, of the Rhinegrave's regiment of horse charged the
enemy thrice, keeping them up till the most part of his countrymen
were retired in safety, and then were made by their enemies to retire
at the spurs themselves, having endangered their own safeties for the
good of their comrades. His Majesty finding the enemy pressing hard,
fearing much to be surprised or taken, he did give Captain Mac-Kenyee
charge to command the whole Scots that were there, and divers others;
and to skirmish with the enemy before the ports, till his Majesty were
retired, and then to make his retreat over the bridge, and to set it
on fire, which the captain did orderly obey, doing his Majesty the
best service was done him in the whole time of his wars, not without
great danger of the captain and his followers, where the bridge once
burning, he was then the happiest man that could first be shipped;
Ensign Lindesey brother to Bainsho was shot with a cannon-bullet in
his shoulder, and notwithstanding was brought off, and miraculously
cured.

The regiment thus shipped, they met with their Colonel, being come
from Scotland with the Recruit, who retired with his Majesty unto
Denmark, and were mustered.

The twentieth Observation.

In defence of this town of Stralsund, our regiment did lose near five
hundred men, and of the remnant escaped, both of officers and
soldiers, I do not think one hundred were free of wounds received
honourably, in defence of the good cause. Who will then say, but that
blood was better lost than kept, when it returns with advantage,
having brought credit to themselves and country? Let none then mourn
for the loss gotten so honourably. Let none then, I say, bedew their
eyes for them we  left behind us, seeing the gain is equal to the
loss, if not more; for them we had, we knew were not always to stay;
yet what we have gained, is permanent and eternal; those we lost, I
confess, we loved, yet that love ought not to be so violent as to undo
ourselves with wanting of it. Neither can we so slenderly forget their
memory, being our noble friends, and who were ornaments to our
regiment and country, and helpers of our credits. Shall we not then be
sorrowful for their loss, that lost themselves to make us renowned in
their deaths, and, while they lived, were our most faithful and loving
comrades, even unto their last breath? But since they are gone before
us, to take in quarters in heaven, following their great captain, who
hath made the way open for them, being stricken, as Job saith, by the
hand of the Lord, and yet placed at his right hand, shall we be sorry
for them? No; we will rather rejoice, and think we must follow them,
when we have fought that good fight against our enemies, we shall be
crowned with them in glory, and rejoice following the Lamb wherever he
goeth, and till then his right hand will sustain us, as before; for he
is our helper, and hath sworn by his right hand, and the arm of his
strength, that he will not forsake us, till we rest with him in glory.

Here also we see, that his Majesty having trusted our nation more than
his own, or the Dutch, he doth leave them engaged with the enemy, till
his Majesty's retreat were made sure, both first and last. Where we
see, that friendship and true service is best tried in extremity; for
no greater testimony can be given of true service, than when the
servant doth endanger his own life and honour for the relief of his
master; as that young cavalier, Captain Mac-Kenyee did here, being a
generous act, for the safety of a King, which ought to be recorded; to
vindicate his honour from oblivion, whose memory merits to be
rewarded, that others might imitate his noble example.

Here also we see, that sufferance in a noble manner causeth love, for
that young cavalier Henry Lindesey, then an Ensign, not able to help
himself, his comrades loving him dearly, and the more for his noble
sufferance, they helped him off from the cruelty of his enemies, to
preserve his life for a better occasion, who by God's providence was
miraculously healed, having lost a great part of his shoulder, a
wonder in an age, such wounds to be cured.



The twenty-one Duty discharged at Copenhagen, where the regiment was
completed again with the Recruit.

As all things are preserved by a glorious order; so his Majesty after
his retreat, beginneth again to make up the body of an army, to be
settled all winter in quarters within Denmark, that against the spring
he might either beat the enemy out of Holstein, or otherwise with his
sword in his hand, make an honourable peace: after which resolution
taken, there was order sent to my Colonel, to bring his regiment to
the fields, and to reform the weak companies, that have no recruit
brought over, and to strengthen the rest of the companies, till the
regiment was made complete.

Sir Patrick Mac-Gey having stayed in Scotland, his company was
cashiered, and Captain Annan's also, in place whereof the Colonel did
get from his Majesty two companies, that were sent over by Colonel
Sinclaire, (viz.) Captain George Stewart, and Captain Francis
Trafford, which were both joined to the regiment. The Lord of Fowles
having levied a company in Scotland, joined also to the regiment, &
John Sinclaire was made captain lieutenant to the Colonel's company,
Lieutenant Stewart being married, having stayed in Scotland with his
wife, his place was given to Eye Mac-Key, and William Brumfield was
made ensign to Captain Mac-Kenyee. The Lieutenant Colonel having quit
the regiment, I succeeded to his place, and his lieutenant Andrew
Stewart, the Earl of Traquair's brother, succeeded captain to the
company, Ensign Seaton being made lieutenant, the captain's brother
William Stewart was made ensign, Tullough his company was recruited,
and was full by his old officers Beaton and Johnson: John Monro his
company being recruited, long David Monro was made Lieutenant, and
long William Stewart Ensign; Captain Monro of Obstell his company
being complete, William Carre was made lieutenant, and Hector Monro
ensign. The regiment thus complete was mustered, and received a
month's means, together with a reckoning of their by-passed rests,
with an assignation on his Majesty of Great Britain, for the payment
of the moneys.

The regiment thus contented, the Colonel, Captain Monro of Obstell,
and Captain Mac-Key returning for Britain, the regiment being left
under my command, was directed to winter garrisons, as followeth.

The Colonel's company commanded by John Sinclaire as captain, John
Ennis lieutenant, and William Mac-Kenyee ensign, were quartered in
Langland, Captain Monro of Fowles his company was sent to lie in
Fehmarn, Andrew Monro being his lieutenant, and John Rhode ensign.

Captain Monro of Obstell his company was quartered there also, and the
foresaid officers.

Captain John Monro his company and his officers were also quartered
there.

Captain Forbesse of Tullough his company and officers were quartered
in Malline in Scania. Captain Mac-Kenyee his company and officers
foresaid, were quartered with me in Malline in Scania. Captain George
Stewart, Robert Hume Lieutenant, and John Sanders Ensign, were
quartered in Alzenburgh.

Captain Francis Trafford his company, being Welsh, with his officers
were quartered in a dorp in Scania.

Captain Andrew Stewart his company and officers were quartered in Lund
in Scania.

My company which was Lermond's, with the officers did lie in garrison
in Glueckstadt in Holstein.

The officers that were reformed went to seek their employments (viz.)
Captain Sanders Hay went to Sweden, and was made Major to Sir Patrick
Ruthven in Prussia.

Patrick Dumbarre was made Captain to a company of Danes soldiers.
There happened also a misfortune this winter in Fehmarn, where
Lieutenant Andrew Monro, a valourous young gentleman, was killed in
combat by a Dutch, called Ranso, and Lieutenant William Mac-Key
succeeded in his place, being made lieutenant to Fowles when William
Gunne was preferred by me, as ensign to the Colonel's company: the
rest of the garrisons lay in quiet all Winter, during which time his
Majesty's commissioners lay at Lubeck, treating for a peace with the
Emperor.

The twenty-one Observation.

In the firmament we see all things are preserved by a glorious order;
the sun hath his appointed circuit, the moon her constant change, and
every planet and star their proper course and place, the Earth also
hath her unstirred stations, the sea is confined in limits, and in his
ebbing and flowing dances, as it were, after the influence and aspect
of the moon, whereby it is kept from putrefaction, and by strugling
with itself, from overflowing the land. So that in this world, order
is the life of kingdoms, honours, arts: for by the excellency of it,
all things flourish and thrive; and therefore we see, that this order
is requisite to be observed in nothing more than in military
discipline, being the life of it. Regiments then maintained in good
order, the army can be but well ordered, and the army well ordered,
the king and country cannot but stand, both in peace and war, for
seldom we see any goodness in the refusing to obey good orders. And we
hear ordinarily, that one bad voice puts twenty out of tune, and that
it is the chief property of a good soldier, first to learn to obey
well, in keeping of good order, and then doubtless, in time being
advanced, he cannot but command well, so that here in ordering of
this, as in all things, we see vicissitudes and alterations, some
regiments made up and continue in florishing order, other regiments
reduced taking an end, as occasion and accidents of war do happen,
Spynie's regiment was reduced, and my Lord of Rhee's regiment is made
up again. Where we see, that as vicissitude maintains the world; even
so concord is a great means of continuance, as discord is too often of
discontinuance, and ruin. Likewise we see, that no estate is free from
mutability, and change, which is the great Lord of the world, who will
be adored and followed as soon as order doth fail: but where order is
kept, and concord (as in this regiment) change hath no place to ruin,
though well to alter; for order was so kept by this regiment, like to
brave soldiers, who in a running skirmish come up, discharge, fall
off, fly, and yet reinforce themselves again, having kept order in
their proceedings, which though now she admits of some change, being
reinforced again and joined together with the chaine of love and
respect, she admits of no confusion or ruin; but is ready again with
her brave soldiers being reinforced in a strong body to make head unto
their enemies, one day to be revenged of their former loss, as, God
willing, shall be cleared in the sequel of my discharge of duties and
observations, of this new reformed body of the old regiment.

My cousin Lieutenant Andrew Monro being killed in combat, I have more
than reason to condemn and disallow of that miserable sort of fight,
where oft-times the victorious puts himself in a worse case, both of
soul and body, than he that is killed. Yet this kind of fighting hand
to hand, called Monomachia, hath been much practised, both amongst
Pagans and Christians, even amongst all nations, as it is yet. Of old
it did serve for proof of things hidden, being in one rank with the
burning iron, and scalding water, to the end men might discern the 
innocent from the guilty: this kind of violence of proof was so
common, that Fronton King of Denmark made a law, as reports the Saxon
history, that all differences whatsoever should be decided by the
combat, and Leoden reports, that yet to this day they observe the same
in Muscovy. But wise men finding this custom deceivable, in deciding
the truth, and so uncertain, that many times the innocent doth
succumb; and therefore it was forbidden by the civil, and canon law,
as is evident by several ancient constitutions, inserted in the
Decretals.

Notwithstanding whereof, amongst the Romans it became so common, as to
be thought but a sport; which made the name of fighters esteemed of
amongst the Romans, as we read in the Cod. Titulo de gladiatoribus,
and therefore this custom being displeasing unto the Emperor
Justinian, he commanded all should be subject unto the judge, and
said, that valour without justice, was not to be allowed of. This
combat betwixt those two was well fought of both, in presence of many
witnesses; where it was thought, that the Dutch-man was hard, so that
a sword could neither pierce him, nor cut him. This fashion of
fighting is so common, that we need not illustrate it by examples of
histories, either ancient or modern; but who so would satisfy their
curiosity in this point, let them but read Preasack his Cleander, a
story well worth the reading. And truly daily experience teacheth us
(as in this accident) that the end of combats doth show often that he,
who appeals, often times doth receive the reward of his temerity,
which might be cleared by many examples, amongst the ancients. We have
one very notable, written by Quintus Curtius, where Dioxippus the
Athenian, that brave fighter being all naked, and smeared over with
oil, as the fashion was then, with a hat of flowers on his head,
carrying about his left arm a red sleeve, and in the right hand a
great batton of hard green timber, durst enter in combat against
Horrat Macedonian carrying on his left arm a buckler of brass, and a
short pike in the right hand, a jeddart-staff as we term it, or
something like it, and a sword by his side: at their approaching,
Dioxippus with a nimble slight, and a pretty cunning shift of his
body, eschewed the stab or thrust of the staff, and before the
Macedonian could have wielded the Pike, the other doth break it in two
with his cudgel, and quickly closing with his adversary gives him such
a knock on the shins, that he fell to the ground, his heels above his
head, took his sword from him, and would have killed him with his
baton, had not the King saved him. Thus much of combats, which for my
part, though I cannot allow of, nevertheless I should be loath to
refuse to fight in a just quarrel, but would rather refer the success
to God, to determine of, then to let that be called in question, which
is dearest unto me.



The twenty-second Duty discharged being the last under his Majesty's
service of Denmark, of our expedition by water unto Holstein.

His Majesty being resolved in April 1629, with his sword in his hand
to conclude a settled and a sure peace with the Emperor; or otherwise
to free Holstein and Jutland from the tyranny of the Imperial army,
and to that effect his Majesty did gather his forces together to a
head in Denmark, where they were to be shipped for landing at Angeln
in Holstein: so that orders were given to me, his Majesty having
provided shipping, to transport our regiment from all quarters, and to
meet at Angeln. Before our parting, Captain Forbesse of Tullough, and
Captain Andrew Stewart's companies were put on warships to lie before
Wismar, I having shipped with the rest of the regiment, we sailed unto
Holstein, and landed at Angeln: where the regiment being come
together, we were one thousand four hundred strong besides officers,
and having lain at Angeln till the peace was concluded, his Majesty
did thank off, or dismiss his army, save a few number that was kept a
month longer, till the enemy had marched out of the country: we being
discharged of service, and having gotten our honourable passes we were
directed, by his Majesty to the Rex-marshal toward Fyn, with orders
from his Majesty, that he should reckon with us, and give us
contentment accordingly. The reckoning made, we were forced to accept
of two parts, and to discharge the whole, having made no reckoning but
for us who were present, leaving our Colonel being absent, to make his
own reckoning thereafter with his Majesty.

Likewise his Majesty did give orders to the Rex-marshal to provide
shipping and victuall for our officers and soldiers, to transport them
for their country, which accordingly was obeyed. As also his Majesty
did give orders to ordain us, both officers and soldiers free quarters
in Elsinore, till the ships were ready to sail. So that we being free
from our honourable master his service, we were ready to imbrace new
conditions from a new master.

The twenty-second and last Observation on our Danes' service.

Here concluding our Danes' service, we see that the end of wars is
peace, and that the end of this peace was the beginning of greater
war, under a new master. Happy therefore is that man, or that regiment
that can say, while as they are thanked off, we have served truly and
with credit our last master; and then they may be assured of a second
master, having won a good name, as this regiment did, under his
Majesty of Denmark, in whom the least omission could never be found,
much less to have committed any gross error worthy imputation: And
therefore we were graciously dismissed, and honestly rewarded
according to the time.

Captain Andrew Stewart (brother to the noble and worthy Earl of
Traquaire) being soliciting business at Copenhagen contracted a fever
and died there, being in his comrades' absence honourably buried by
the Stadt-holder's direction; whose death, as untimely, was much
regrated by all his comrades, he being a valorous and expert
Commander.

Likewise John Hampeseede, an old true servant to my cousin the Baron
of Fowles, he dying of a fever at Angeln leaguer, was honourably
buried there.

This Danes' war thus ended, was the beginning of a greater war, as is
said: for the Emperor (in summer 1629, The Danes' peace being made in
August 1629) did send assistance of men unto the Pole, against his
Majesty of Sweden, under the command of the Field Marshal Arnhem,
which the next summer did bring the sword of the Sweden against 
himself. So that we see there is nothing here on earth to be expected
by us, more then a continual warfare. Lord therefore make us daily to
war in that spiritual warfare, serving truly the King of Kings and
Lord of hosts, fighting that good fight against our spiritual enemies,
where he that overcomes, receives for a reward (instead of worldly
glory) an immortal crown of glory in the Heavens.



The Colonel's Observation of the Kingdom of Denmark.

Having had the honour to have dined with his Majesty at his table,
then in the gorgeous, & pleasant palace of Fredensborg, taking leave
of his Majesty, having kissed his hand, I retired to Elsinore; where I
began to think, that this king could have said of his whole kingdom,
as Scipio said, you see not a man amongst all those, but if I command
him, he will from a turret throw himself into the sea: even so this
magnanimous king, to my knowledge, was of absolute authority in his
kingdom, as all Christian kings ought to be in theirs ever obeyed in
the Lord, without asking the head a reason; Why do you command us
thus? For we read that the favour of the Lord was in Judah, in giving
them one heart in doing, and obeying the commandments of the king, and
of their magistrates and principals, as I did clearly observe in this
Kingdom of Denmark the goodness of government, for the flourishing of
the kingdom; where Totus orbis componebatur ad exemplum regis. He
commanding, they obeyed; both lived in prosperity, the ruler or king
heroic, wise, noble, magnanimous and worthy.

The gentry, citizens and communalty obedient, which made their joy and
felicity to continue, in despite of their mighty foes, and that by
reason of his Majesty's government in military discipline, who doth
entertain a great number of officers yearly, having good allowance for
commanding of soldiers trained up in peace, against war, such as
colonels, lieutenant-colonels, majors, captains and other inferior
officers, which are still entertained at the country's charge, in
exercising of soldiers for his Majesty's employment, being alike ever
ready in all provinces for peace or war. Would to God we were so well
provided in our own country at home, and then we needed not to fear
any foreign enemy, that are enemies to God, to our king, and to our
religion.

And for the better maintaining of war, no kingdom or king I know, is
better provided of a magazine, then this magnanimous king, for arms,
brass ordnance (whereof every year his Majesty doth cast above a
hundred pieces) being sufficiently provided of ammunition and of all
sorts of fiery engines, to be used by sea or land, together with
armour sufficient for to arm a great army of horse. His Majesty is
also sufficiently well provided of shipping, and yearly doth add to
the number, which ships are built by two worthy Scottish-men, called
Mr. Balfoure, and Mr. Sinclaire, being both well accounted of by his
Majesty, who in like manner hath a reprobane at Copenhagen, for making
of cords and cables for his shipping and kingdom, where I was
informed, that in twenty four hours time, they were able to furnish
the greatest ship the King had, of cables and of all other tackling
and cordage, necessary to set out the ship.

Likewise by his Majesty's artisans within the Kingdom, all sort of
stuffs and silks are woven, sufficient to serve the Kingdom, and his
neighbours that please to buy.

Moreover this Kingdom is worthy commendation, for the order of justice
and laws, having their law-books deciding all controversies amongst
them, and if it come to any great difference, the King's Majesty, as
being above the law, sits in judgement as the interpreter and director
of justice, and according to his princely dignity, mitigates as
pleaseth his Majesty the law, and decides the controversy.

This kingdom also is praise-worthy, for the purity of their gentry,
being as ancient and noble, as any other kingdom, and can brag of a
purer and clearer blood of gentility, than many nations can: for they
never ally or enter into marriage with any inferior to themselves, be
they never so rich, if they be burghers or plebeians, they never marry
with them; and if one of their daughters will, through love, miscarry
in her affection, to marry a citizen, they will not thereafter do so
much as to honour her with their company, but on the contrary, she
loseth both her portion and honour, not suffering her to carry the
arms of her family.

Moreover, this nation is praise-worthy for their entertaining of
learning, and of the liberal sciences professed in their own
universities, where their children are well taught and trained up,
after a noble and heroic manner, within their own Kingdom, not only in
their Studies of the liberal sciences, but also in their exercise of
body, as fencing, dancing, singing, playing of instruments, and riding
of horses, and what else are noble recreations, as learning of foreign
languages, Spanish, Italian, French, Dutch, and such like, and
afterwards their youth being well travelled, returning from their
travels, they attend on the Chancellery, as under-secretaries to
statesmen, to enable them to be profitable members in the commonweale.
And being forisfamiliate, according to their gifts and qualities, they
are preferred to government and charges under his Majesty, in all
provinces of the Kingdom of Denmark, Jutland, Holstein, and Norway.

His Majesty also is praise-worthy, for his economy in keeping of
storehouses to feed oxen, and stalls for keeping of milch cows,
whereof is received yearly great income of moneys, for butter and
cheese made in great quantity by Hollanders in Denmark, Holstein, and
Jutland: which parts abound also with all sorts of fish, which
enricheth his Majesty's treasure infinitely, together with their
trading by sea to the fishing in Greenland, bringing great commodity
to the subjects, in serving themselves, as also in bringing of money
into the kingdom, by furnishing of others. Also this land abounds in
corn, which makes great cheapness in this kingdom, where I have lived
nobly entertained with two servants for twelve shillings sterling a
week, being a whole winter in garrison at Malmoe in Scania. Where I
did see and observe the custom used by the Danes' gentry in their
house-keeping, wherein they are not prodigal, but yet very noble, not
differing much from our own customs at home, entertaining many persons
attendant, but not with costly or dainty fare, but abundant in meat
and drink; obliging also they are in entertaining strangers of
fashion; they keep long tables, at which there sit sometimes above
thirty persons: ordinary tables they use besides, ordained for the
attendants of the family, who sit not till their masters have half
dined or supped: they keep also many horses, hounds and hawks, with
attendance answerable, which makes their families great.

Here I did observe, that the subjects do follow the example of their
king, in their apparel, in their virtues, and economy, where I did see
virtue to have been alike habitual in king, gentry, citizens, and
country, being all in their degrees extraordinary rich, not only in
money, but also in jewels and plate; nothing inferior, in my
judgement, to any neighbour country. It was observed in the court of
the Emperor Maximilian the second, a good prince and a virtuous, that
many lords and great seigneurs not only clad themselves according to
the colour he wore, but also had the same vessels and movables: the
greatest ladies also followed the Empress; so that those kinds of
clothing that before were disdained and out of request, were then
followed, all being clad with skins and leather. The Emperor and the
Empress not disdaining to carry and wear them, the rest followed: the
pearls and precious stones did rise to the great price, that they are
now at by the rich, that made the price so high, that the poor could
not attain unto them. To show this by example, we read of Sabina
Poppaea, to whom nothing was wanting, but shame and honesty, being
extremely beloved of Nero, had the colour of her hair yellow, like
amber, which Nero esteemed much of, in singing verses made on her on
the cithern: and from this came that the whole damsels of Rome and
Italy did like best to have that colour of hair in their buskins,
bracelets and clothing, and the amber, which before was in no esteem,
became very dear, seeing Nero esteemed of it; which makes Pliny
report, speaking of the comedians' apparel, that they carried so much
amber, that it was admirable to behold; which shows, that the examples
of great personages have great power, in matters of moment and
consequence, as it hath in things of less importance.

For as Villeius Paterculus spake of the Emperor Augustus, a good
prince teacheth his subjects to do well, and as he is the greatest in
estate, even so he is the greatest in example, the people casting
their eyes on their prince, sitting high, in sight of all, they
delight narrowly to consider all he doth and saith, and they look unto
the most hidden things of his actions, as through little holes: and
therefore before all places, the king's court ought to be holiest, and
clearest of all vices, and endued with most honesty, which betimes
will make the whole kingdom conform. To confirm this, we read in our
own story a memorable example; how the King Josina took pleasure and
delight to discourse much with physicians and chirurgians; in a short
time the lords and gentry did accommodate themselves to the prince's
humour, that many ages after, there was no noble family in Scotland,
that was not expert and well taught in dressing and healing the wounds
of the body. A knowledge very necessary for men of our profession,
that oft-times are lost for want of good cure. And we read, that King
JAMES the Fourth, following the laudable custom of his ancestors, was
very expert in this kind, in healing of wounds. A noble knowledge of
so noble a prince, and so great a captain, as he was! And the common
proverb is, that the little pretty dogs or puppies do anything to
please their mistresses; and we say, he smells of the pot he hath
licked. Here then you see the power of good and bad examples.

To conclude then. Let us learn by the good examples aforesaid, to
follow the virtuous examples of our noble master and King, not
neglecting the service and duty we owe to the King of Kings, since our
lives here are but like bubbles of the water, now seen, now vanisht.



THE LIST OF THE SCOTTISH OFFICERS IN CHIEF (CALLED the officers of the
Field) that served his Majesty of Sweden, Anno, 1632.

The Marquess of Hamilton General of the British army.
Sir James Spence General over Scots.
Sir Patrike Ruthven, governor of Ulm, and since General.
Sir Alexander Lesly governor over the cities along the Baltic Coast,
and since Field-marshal over the army in Westphalia.
General Major James King, since Lieutenant General.
Sir David Drummond General Major and governor of Stettin in Pomerania.
Sir James Ramsey General Major had a regiment of Scots, and since was
governor of Hanau.

Colonels that served then of Scots.
My Lord of Rhees Mackey Colonel to a brigade of Scots.
Sir John Hepburne Colonel succeeded to command the Scottish brigade,
and since was slain in France.
Sir John Ruthven Colonel to a brigade of Dutch, and since General
Major.
Sir James Lumsdell Colonel to a regiment of Scots.
Alexander Ramsey Colonel and governor of Kreuznach.
Robert Lesly Colonel to a regiment of Scots.
Robert Monro Baron of Fowles Colonel of horse and foot over Dutch, and
since died of his wounds at Ulm.
John Monro of Obstell Colonel to a regiment of Scots, and since slain
on the Rhine in the Wetterau.
Lodovick Lesly Colonel to a regiment of Scots, which was Sir John
Hamilton's.
Robert Monro Colonel to a regiment of Scots, which was my Lord of
Rhees'.
James Carre Colonel to a regiment of Scots, and since General Major.
Sir Fredrick Hamilton Colonel to a regiment of Scots and Irish.
The master of Forbesse Colonel to a regiment of Scots.
Alexander Hamilton Colonel to a regiment of Scots.
The Earl of Crawford Lindesey Colonel to a foot regiment of Dutch, and
since slain.
William Baily Colonel to a regiment of foot of Dutch.
Sir James Hamilton Colonel to a foot regiment of Scots.
John Forbesse Colonel to a foot regiment of Dutch, slain in France.
Hugh Hamilton Colonel to a foot regiment of Dutch.
Sir William Ballentine Colonel to a foot regiment of English.
Sir James Ramsey Colonel to a foot regiment of English, and since died
at London.
Alaxander Forbesse called Finness Forbesse Colonel to a regiment of
Finns.
Walter Leckey Colonel to foot.

The English Colonels served then.
Colonel Austin Colonel to an English regiment served in Germany.
Sir John Cassells Colonel to a foot regiment of English, which was
levied by Sir Thomas Conway; who was cast away on the coast of Denmark
with his Lieutenant Colonel George Stewart.
Sir George Fleetwood Colonel to a foot regiment of English that served
at this time in Prussia.

Scots Colonels that served at this time in Sweden, Leefland and
Prussia.
James Seaton Colonel to foot of Swedes.
Colonel Kinninmond Colonel to foot of Swedes, since dead.
Colonel Thomson Colonel to foot of Swedes, since dead.
Colonel Scot Cloonell to foot of Finns, since dead.
William Cunningham: Colonel to foot of Scots, in Prussia.
Francis Ruthven Colonel to foot of Dutch, in Prussia.
Sir John Meldrum Colonel in Prussia to foot.

Lieutenant Colonels who served then, whereof since some have been
advanced.
Thomas Hume of Carolside Lieutenant Colonel of horse; since a Colonel
in France.
Lieutenant Colonel Dowglas since a Colonel of horse in Germany under
the Swede.
Henry Muschamp Lieutenant Colonel, since was a Colonel and was slain
at Noerdlingen.
Alexander Lesly Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot.
Alexander Cunninghame Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot.
Lieutenant Colonel Vavazer, since a Colonel to foot.
William Gunne Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot of Dutch.
John Lesly Lieutenant Colonel, since Colonel to foot of Scots.
Lieutenant Colonel Finness Forbesse, since a Colonel.
Alexander Forbesse called the Bald, Lieutenant Colonel, since a
Colonel.
Robert Stewart Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel.
Hector Monro Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel, and being made
Knight Baronet died at Hamburg, and was buried at Buxtehude in the
Altes Land of the Elbe.
Sir George Dowglas Lieutenant Colonel, since ambassador for his
Majesty of Great Britain, in Prussia, died in Germany, and was
transported and buried in Scotland.
George Lesly Lieutenant Colonel, since Colonel.
John Lindesey of Bainshow Lieutenant Colonel, since slain at
Newbrandenburg.
Lieutenant Colonel Monypenny, Lieutenant Colonel to horse.
Alexander Lindesey Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in Bavaria.
John Sinclaire Lieutenant Colonel, was slain at Neumarkt.
William Stewart Lieutenant Colonel, succeeded to Sinclaire.
Henry Lindesey Lieutenant Colonel to Lesly the younger.
William Lindesey Lieutenant Colonel to horse.
James Henderson Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Sir Arthur Forbesse Lieutenant Colonel to foot, was slain in combat
near Hamburg.
Robert Weere Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in Saxony.
John Lyell Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
James Dickson Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in the Pfalz.
Sandelens Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in the Pfalz.
William Borthwick Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Macdowgall Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in Schwabenland.
James Hepburne Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in France.
Robert Hannan Lieutenant Colonel to foot, died in Alsace.
John Monro Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Robert Lumsdell Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
William Herring Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Sir James Cunninghame Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
William Spence Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
John Ennis Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Poytaghee Forbesse Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
John Forbesse of Tullough Lieutenant Colonel, was slain at
Noerdlingen.
George Forbesse Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Alexander Hay Lieutenant Colonel of dragoniers.
David Lesly Lieutenant Colonel to horse.
James Drummond Lieutenant Colonel to horse.
Kinninmond the elder Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Kinninmond the younger Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Francis Sinclaire Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
Gordon Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot of Dutch under the
Crown of Sweden.
John Henderson Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel under the Emperor.
William Troop Lieutenant Colonel slain in the Pfalz.
Potley Lieutenant Colonel to foot, under Sir George Fleetwood.
Arthur Mon-gorge Lieutenant Colonel to foot.
James Montgomery Lieutenant Colonel slain in combat.

Scots Majors.
Major Ruthven slain at Noerdlingen.
Major Mill.
Major Cunninghame.
Major John Forbesse.
Major David King, slain at Noerdlingen.
Major Bodwell slain at Wuerzburg.
Major Mackenyee, since General adjutant under the Field-marshal Lesly.
Major Sidserfe slain at Noerdlingen.
Major David Monro.
Major William Falconer.
Major Francis Sinclaire
Major William Keith.
Major Sanderson.
Major William Bruntfield died of his wounds at Buxtehude in the Altes
Land.

Diverse Captains and inferior officers of the nation followed the army
being in charge, whom I omit out of this List.



Table of Time spent and Distances Travelled.
The first Part.

Tuesday the tenth of October 1626 from Cromarty in Scotland to
Glueckstadt on the Elbe by Sea: Days 5: 300 Dutch Miles
We wintered in Holstein in good quarters: Months 6:
From Glueckstadt on the Elbe we marched to the Weser stream above
Bremen: Days 4: 12 Dutch Miles
On the Weser stream we remained: Weeks 10:
The tenth of July 1627 we marched from the Weser to Buxtehude: Days 3:
12 Dutch Miles
From the Altes Land we crossed the Elbe at Blakenese and continued our
Expedition to Boizenburg on the Elbe in Mecklenburg: Days 3: 10 Dutch
Miles
At Boizenburg we rested: 5 Days:
From Boizenburg to Ruppin in the Mark of Brandenburg we marched: Days
6: 18 Dutch Miles
At Ruppin we rested: 8 days:
From Ruppin we retired to the Isle of Poel on the Baltic Coast having
marched: Days 6: 28 Dutch Miles
At Poel leaguer we rested: Weeks 5:
From Poel by water to Heiligenhafen : Days 2: 40 Dutch Miles
From Heiligenhafen we marched to Oldenburg: Day 1: 3 Dutch Miles
At Oldenburg we were: Days 3:
From Oldenburg we retired in a night: Days 1: 3 Dutch Miles
From Heiligenhafenmon the Coast of Holstein to Flensburg by water:
Days 2: 40 Dutch Miles
From Flensburg to Assens in Denmark by water: Days 5: 50 Dutch Miles
Having arrived in Fyn in Denmark we were quartered in Denmark till we
went to Stralsund being: Months 8:
From Assens in Fyn we marched unto Lolland and crossed the
Angelandsbaelt twice being on the March: Days 5: 14 Dutch Miles
Having arrived at Maribo in Lolland we quartered our companies in
Maribo Rodby and in Nykobing where we lay in good quarters: Months 4:
From Maribo we marched to Rodby: Days 1: 4 Dutch Miles
We lay three days and nights in extremity of cold weather in open
boats before Rodby attending a fair wind and in the end were forced to
land and march a back : Days 1: 4 Dutch Miles
The sixth of April we marched to Rodby again in one Day: Days 1: 4
Dutch Miles
From Rodby we sailed to Fehmarn and landed in a Day: Days 1: 16 Dutch
Miles
From Fehmarn to Erkenfoerde by water alongst the Coast of Holstein in
one Day : Days 1: 16 Dutch Miles
From Erkenfoerde again being shipped we sailed alongst the coast
before Kiel in one Day: Days 1: 18 Dutch Miles
From Kiel we returned by water unto Grossenbrode in Holstein: Days 2:
34 Dutch Miles
At Grossenbrode in Holstein we lay weeks three where we did work and
complete a royal leaguer and a fort within it: Weeks 3:
From Fehmarn to Rodby by water we sailed back unto Lolland : Days 1:
16 Dutch Miles
From Rodby to our quarters in Maribo and Nykobing where we lay in good
quarters: Weeks 6: 4 Dutch Miles
From Lolland to Elsinore in Denmark we marched through Falster and
Zealand: Days 4: 18 Dutch Miles
From Elsinore we sailed unto Stralsund in Pomerania: Days 2: 60 Dutch
Miles
At Stralsund being beleaguered we lay seven weeks where we had great
pains and sustained great loss: Weeks 7:
From Stralsund we marched unto Wolgast: Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
At Wolgast we remained: Days 10:
From Wolgast we sailed to Copenhagen: Days 2: 60 Dutch Miles
At Copenhagen in Denmark the regiment was made complete again and we
were quartered in good quarters during eight months without any
hostile employment being treating for a peace: Months 8:
In April 22 we shipped at Malmoe in Scania in Denmark and sailed unto
Holstein towards the Isle of Angeln: days 3: 60 Dutch Miles
We lay at Angeln in Holstein till the Peace was concluded in the
latter end of May 1629 that we were thanked of or dismissed by his
Majesty of Denmark and were shipped again from Holstein to Elsinore
being by water: Days 3: 60 Dutch Miles
Summa: Miles by water and land travelled under his Majesty of Denmark
in: Years 3: 898 Dutch Miles



THE SECOND PART, OF MONRO HIS EXPEDITION UNDER HIS Majesty of SWEDEN,
discharged in several Duties and Observations.

THE MANNER OF OUR ENGAGEMENT WITH HIS MAJESTY of SWEDEN, in Anno,
1629,
And of the Colonel's Journey and mine unto Sweden in February, 1630.

Our regiment thanked of by his Majesty of Denmark in May, 1629, my
Colonel being in England, I hearing his Majesty of Sweden (much
engaged against the Pole in Prussia) did stand in great need of a
supply of foot, thought then, it was a fit time for me being out of
service, to offer my service unto his Majesty of Sweden; whereupon I
did direct David Martins auditor with my letters, and warrant to his
Majesty, to treat with his Majesty for a commission, and money for
bringing unto his Majesty a regiment of foot, over which my old
Colonel should command. His Majesty condescending to my desire,
dispatcheth my commissioner back again with a commission, and moneys
to me in the Colonel's name; and in his absence I did direct as a
beginning of the regiment, Fowles, Captain Monro, and my own Captain,
being three companies of the regiment unto Prussia, before the
Colonel's coming from England, and after there were sent unto Prussia
three companies, (viz.) Major Synnot's, Captain Bullion's, and Captain
Lermond's companies, which six for that year, remained in garrison in
Brownesbery in Prussia; other six companies of the old regiment, the
Colonel directed from Holland to Sweden, in November 1629, where they
remained in garrison till May, 1630, when they were sent into
Dutchland, commanded by the Colonel, whose company was led by Captain
Lieutenant Gunne, Lieutenant Colonel Lindesey his company was led by
Lieutenant Pringle, Captain Sinclaire, Captain Moncreife, Captain
Ennis, and Captain Beaton, made out the other six companies of the
regiment: Captain George Stewart, and Captain Francis Trafford, having
quit their companies for their better preferment: Captain Monro of
Fowles being advanced to be a Colonel of foot, his brother Hector
Monro succeeded as Captain to his brothers company, which was under me
in Prussia: thus far then may suffice, for the manner of our
engagements.

My Colonel and I, having wintered both in Denmark, in February 1630 we
crossed the Sound and took our journey unto Sweden through Scania. In
our way, we were nobly and courteously entertained by the governor of
Warden castle, and from thence were mounted with the Governor's best
horses, being convoyed by his servants, till we entered in Gottenberg,
where we rested two days, till the governor did provide us of passes,
guides and horses towards his Majesty, then at Stockholm in Sweden;
where on our journey we did visit that worthy cavalier, Colonel
Alexander Hamilton, at his work-houses in Urbowe, being then employed
in making of cannon and fireworks, for his Majesty of Sweden; from
whence the Colonel did convey  us to his quarter, where we were kindly
entertained and welcomed by him, and his officers: From thence we
continued our journey, and did visit Captain Sinclaire at his quarter,
where we were also well entertained, having stayed with him on Easter
Sunday, and from thence we travelled to Stockholm, where we had first
the honour of his Majesty's presence and conference; after kissing of
his Majesty's hand, we took our lodgings where we stayed certain days,
his Majesty being making preparation for the transporting of his
Majesty's army unto Dutchland.

The first Sunday after our coming, his Majesty did invite the
principal cavaliers that were in town of our nation, for to accompany
his Majesty at a feast appointed in honour of the order of the Garter,
where thirteen cavaliers of our nation did sit at his Majesty's table,
and were royally entertained. This feast past, his Majesty having
ordered his foot army in the Fields, after his new order of Discipline
of brigades, then first brought in use, at which time his Majesty
having shown unto my Colonel and his officers, the order of his
Majesty's discipline, in which order, his Majesty commanded to put my
Colonel's regiment, which was presently obeyed, insomuch, that his
Majesty was so well pleased with the capacity of my Colonel's soldiers
going so orderly and readily to their duties, that his Majesty did
wish in open presence of the army, that all his foot were so well
disciplined as my Colonel's regiment: for which, his Majesty would be
content to be indebted of a huge great sum of money, and having caused
the regiment [to] march by towards their quarters, his Majesty did
mightily and much praise the regiment for their good order; saying, he
hoped one day, to get good service of those men for his moneys;
shortly after this, his Majesty did ship his army for Germany, with
which, my Colonel and his regiment went also: I having gotten his
Majesty's patent over a free squadron, of the companies that were in
Prussia, I was directed to the Rex-Chancellor there, with orders from
his Majesty to his Excellence, to direct me and my squadron with all
diligence, after his Majesty unto Dutchland; according to which,
having arrived in Prussia, and delivered my commission to his
Excellence; I was immediately directed to my garrison to order the
companies for a muster, and being mustered, and paid of two months
means, there was shipping provided for me and my companies at the
Pillau, in August 1630, for transporting of us into Dutchland,
according to his Majesty's will and orders given unto me to follow his
Majesty, and our Ships being victualed, we attended the wind.



The first Duty discharged in the Swedens service of our Expedition by
Water from Pillau in Prussia unto the Coast of Pomerania at
Ruegenwalde.

The twelfth of August, 1630, having received his Excellence orders the
Rex Chancellor, for to ship my soldiers at the Pillau, and from thence
to transport them unto Dutchland, towards Wolgast in Pomerania, in
obedience to the orders, having divided the companies at the Pillau,
my own company, Captain Hector Monro's, and Captain Bullion's company,
were put with myself in a ship of his Majesty's called the Lilly-
Nichol; The other three companies, (viz.) Major Senott's, Captain John
Monro's and Lermond's, were put on another ship of his Majesty's,
called the Hound, our horses and baggage being put on a small scout or
boat, the wind favouring us, we being victualled for a week, we make
sail from the Pillau towards Pomerania, having calm weather for two
days: The third day with a strong wind, and a great tempest from the
West, we were severed from the fleet, and our ship striking a leak, we
were driven unto Bornholm road in Denmark, where the tempest being
past, we go ashore, to victual our ship anew: the wind favouring us,
we weigh anchor again, and setting sail, we take our course towards
Wolgast, being near the coast, the wind contrary, we were not able to
double our course, and our ship being leak, we durst not adventure far
from land, and putting forty-eight soldiers to pump continually by
turns, they were not able to keep her dry, and being overcharged with
much water, though there blew a great wind after us, we made but a
slow course, our resolution was, being turned back, and before the
wind, to make for Danzig as our best refuge: But keeping so near the
land, under night, we bayed within lands, the wind blowing hard with a
great tempest on the shore, being a shallow sandy coast, all sails
being up, by eleven o'clock at night, we struck on ground, our ship
old and weak breaks in the midst below, but kept fast above, our
soldiers coming all above hatches, they were pitifully drenched and
wet with the waves, and being in danger of out-washing, they tie
themselves with ropes to the ship sides; yet two that took a pride in
their swimming, (a Dane, and a Scot, called Murdo Piper) thinking by
swimming to gain the shore, were both drowned, the mariners setting
out one boat after another, were both broken, and they being feeble
fellows they lost courage; thus under the mercy of the raging seas and
waves, going higher then the masts over the ship sides, we patiently
attended the Lord's mercy with prayers, till one of the clock the next
day, during which time, I forced the mariners and soldiers, that could
best work, having cut the masts, and the ends of the cross yards, with
deals and the decks of the ship to make a float; being made, it was
tied to the ship within with tows, hanging at it, which the waves
could carry ashore, the float thus ready, with strength of men was let
down by the ship's side, whereon four of the most courageous soldiers
did adventure to go, some boors ashore having got hold of the tows,
that were bound to the float, with the help of the waves, draw the
float ashore, and being drawn back to the ship, we did continue in
this manner ferrying out our soldiers, till at last the most part were
landed, who being landed sought along the coast, and finding a boat,
did bring it with horses on a wagon, whereof we made use in landing
the rest of our soldiers, whereof I remained the last; till I saw our
arms landed. But our ammunition and baggage being lost, we were in a
pitifull fear, being near unto our enemies, and above Twenty Dutch
miles from his Majesty's army, being without fixed arms, and lacking
ammunition, we had nothing to defend us, but swords, and pikes, and
some wet muskets, the enemy being near, our resolution behoved to be
short, where having learned of the boors, how near the enemy was unto
us, I suffered none to go from us, lest we might be discovered to our
enemies.

After advisement I sent Captain Bullion with a guide, to the captain
of the castle of Ruegenwalde, belonging to the Duke of Pomerania,
offering if he would furnish us some fixed muskets, with some dry
ammunition and bullets, we would cut off the enemy that lay in the
town, and defend town and castle from the enemy for his Majesty, till
such time as his Majesty might relieve us, the proposition so pleased
the Captain; that he gave way to my suit, and withal, he, for fear of
such suspicion, goes unto the country, having sent a gentleman with
ammunition to me, to convey me a secret way unto the castle, where I
should receive fifty muskets, my captain retiring to me, with the
gentleman and ammunition, I marched till I came safe to the castle,
and then from the castle falling on the town, with commanded
musketeers, under the command of Captain Bullion, I stayed myself with
the reserve, my folks entering the town, the enemy aloft drew to arms:
thus service begun; my party being strongest, some of the enemy shot,
the rest got quarters and mercy, our watch duly set, the keys of the
town and castle being delivered unto me, my greatest care was then,
how to put ourselves in safety against our enemies, being at Kolberg
within seven miles of us, I begun to learn from those on the castle,
what passes did lie betwixt us and Kolberg, I was told of a little
river did lie two miles from us, which was not passable but at one
bridge, where I went to recognosce, and finding it was so, I caused
them to break off the bridge, where I did appoint a company of boors,
with arms, and horses by them to watch the pass, and if in case the
enemy should pursue them, they had orders from me to defend the pass
so long as they could, commanding them also at the first sight of the
enemy to advertise me, wherby they might be supplied, and I put on my
guard.

Being retired from the pass, immediately I did send a boor on
horseback, in the night, to acquaint his Majesty of Sweden (the army
then lying at Stettin twenty Dutch miles from us) with the manner of
our hard landing, and of our happy success after landing; as likewise,
disiring to know his Majesty's will, how I should behave myself in
those quarters, the enemy being strong, and I very weak, his Majesty
returned for resolution unto me, that I should do my best to fortify,
and beset the passes, that were betwixt me and the enemy, and to keep
good watch, and good order over the soldiers, and not to suffer them
to wrong the country people, whom I should press to keep for my
friends.

This order being come, I begun with the country boors, first, to
fortify the passages without me, and next to make skonces and redoubts
without the town, as also to repair the fortifications about the
castle, and in cleansing of the moat, that it might be deeper of
water; the other parts also without me, I brought under contribution
to his Majesty, by sending parties of dragoniers athwart the country,
in Hinder Pomerania, betwixt me and Danzig, being twenty Dutch mile in
length, which all in short time I did bring under contribution to his
Majesty. As also the enemy having had a magazine of corn, at
Ruegenwalde, and Stolpe, by our landing here, was made good for his
Majesty's use and his army.

Being thus busied for a few days, another ship of the same fleet,
being long beaten with the tempest at sea, at last was forced for
scarcity of victuals, to anchor on the same coast, being four hundred
men, of Colonel Fretz Rosse his regiment of Dutch, his Lieutenant
Colonel called Tisme Howsne did come ashore, entreating me to supply
him with victuals, which I did. In the meantime he asked my advice, if
he might land his soldiers there, I told him I had no counsel to give
him, seeing there was no necessity of his landing, and which was more,
his orders were to land at another part, so that he had to advise
whether he should follow his orders, or for second respects if he
might neglect his orders, so that on all hazards he landed his people
also, which were quartered with me in the town: Shortly after, he
would contest with me for command, which bred a coldness betwixt us.
Whereupon I again advertised his Majesty of our difference, desiring
his Majesty might dispose of the command; his Majesty offended with
the other, did send an absolute warrant unto me, to command him, and
the whole garrison at my pleasure, for the well of his Majesty's
service, during our being there, where we remained nine weeks,
fighting and skirmishing with the enemy, till Sir John Hepburne with
his regiment was sent by his Excellence the Rex Chancellor from
Prussia to relieve us.

The First Observation.

Having thus by the providence of God happily landed again on the fair,
fertile, and spacious continent of Dutchland, with a handful of old
experimented soldiers, able to endure all misery, toil, or travail,
being valourous to undertake any peril or danger, they were to be
commanded upon, being led by such a General as GUSTAVUS the
Invincible, their new master was: (under whose command and conduct, as
their supreme leader, and me, as his Majesty's and my Colonel's
inferior officer, they marched from the coast of Pomerania, out of
Ruegenwalde, through Dutchland, unto the foot of the Alps in
Schawbland.)

This city of Ruegenwalde in Pomerania, lies midway betwixt Danzig, and
Stettin, being alike distant, twenty Dutch mile from both, and is a
pleasant seat, being one of the Duke of Pomerania his chief Residence,
not distant above one English mile from the Sea, it doth abound in
corn, fruit, and store, cattle, horses of good breed, fishponds, and
parks for deer, and pastorage, whereof it hath enough, where we were
nobly entertained, and kindly welcomed of the inhabitants, especially
of the captain and his civil bed-fellow, to whom, under God, we were
beholden for our safeties, the remembrance whereof we are bound never
to forget.

Here, I did remark as wonderful, that in the very moment when our ship
did break on ground, there was a sergeant's wife a shipboard, who
without the help of any women was delivered of a boy, which all the
time of the tempest she carefully did preserve, and being come ashore,
the next day, she marched near four English mile, with that in her
arms, which was in her belly the night before, and was christened the
next Sunday after sermon being the day of our thanksgiving for our
deliverance, our preacher Mr. Murdow Mac-kenyee a worthy and religious 
young man, having discharged his part that day, after with much regret
did sever from us, and followed my Lord of Rhee our Colonel unto
Britain.

Being thus escaped from danger of sea, and from our enemies, I did
keep the soldiers ever exercised in watching, in working, in parties
against our enemies, lest that resting from hostile employment, they
should become seditious, immodest, and turbulent; and to this effect,
when they were not employed in parties against the enemies, I sent
them by parties in the country, on military execution, to bring the
possessors under contribution to his Majesty, making them hate and
renounce the Imperialists, whom formerly they were forced to obey; so
that by this means, the country was brought into subjection to the
King, and my soldiers were put under as good discipline and command,
as any served his Majesty; which discipline made their contiuance the
longer in the service: where it was rare to find one regiment in an
army, that did change so many officers as they did in four years, as
the observations on their duties will clear to the world, in despite
of their enviers whatsoever. But I hope no worthy spirit or Heroic
mind will think an evil thought of the virtuous.

We may see here, that in the greatest extremities, both officers and
soldiers have greatest need of courage, and resolution: For nothing
should seem hard to daring men, that are of courage, which never doth
beget, but the opinion and censure of virtue. For we see at this time,
that to dare was  the beginning of victory, being better to hazard to
save ourselves and others, then to be the instrument to lose us all by
flying, as some of our officers advised me at our landing, to march
back to Danzig, which if we had, the enemy getting intelligence, he
could with ease overtake us, and cut us all off, as he did, some years
before, cut off in the same country three regiments of Dutch who were
going to serve his Majesty against the Pole.

Here also, I found by experience, that the steadfast, and invincible
vigour of the mind rising against crosses, doth help much, especially
where necessity requireth such resolution. For being in the greatest
extremity of danger, resolving with God, I thought as my safest course
to bide God's leisure, I sat on the gallery of the ship, being assured
it would be the last part, that would remain together of the whole,
and being so near land, I was never dejected and cast down, nor did I
doubt of our safe landing, seeing we had victuals and were in hope,
the storm would not continue, being in the midst of August.

Here we may see by this Christian advertisement, that no part of our
life is exempted or freed from grief or sorrow: But on the contrary,
we are exposed to all kind of miseries and troubles, so that we see,
that children do suck with the milk of their Nurses, certain
beginnings of the evil to come, our misery growing as doth our age;
and we see it true: for the godly; they sigh and groan under the 
burden of their adversities, having no comfort they can enjoy, but out
of the written word of God, a fruit whereof the wicked hath no part.
Therefore they said well, who said, that philosophical precepts were
not so powerful to heal the wounds of the soul, as are those of the
word of God.

Men of our profession ought ever to be well prepared, having death
ever before their eyes, they ought to be the more familiar with God,
that they might be ever ready to embrace it, not caring a rush for it
when it came, doing good while they may. For now we flourish, in an
instant we wither like grass; now we stand, presently we fall, our
life carrying with it when we received it, the seed of death, and that
which did begin our life, doth open the door to it, to go away: For in
our birth, our end did hang at our beginning; and, according to the
custom of that worthy Emperor, our actions should be ever before our
eyes, as if presently we were to appear in judgment, before the
Eternal our God, and that cry should never depart out of our ears,
cried unto Philip King of Macedon, Philippe, memento mori, Philip
remember, thou must die: For man shall never behave himself as he
ought in this world, except at all times he have death before his
eyes, thinking on the hour and moment of his departure always,
contemning the exterior things of this world, giving himself unto the
inward cogitations, that do profit the soul and the life thereof,
rejoicing beyond all things in the testimony of a good conscience.



The second Duty discharged of our march from Ruegenwalde to Kolberg,
and from thence to Schivelbein, and of our service there.

SIr John Hepburne being sent with his regiment (from Prussia) to
relieve us, I was ordained with my folks to march before Kolberg,
where General Major Kniphowsen did command in the blockering thereof 
(which I did) and being come there, a post was assigned for us to
watch at. In the mean time, the General Major getting intelligence,
that the enemies' army (lying at Gartz and Greifenhagen, on the Oder)
had intention to relieve Kolberg, and so being in his march, he must
needs pass by the town and castle, of Schivelbein in the Mark, being a
pass distant but five miles from Kolberg, he thought expedient, to
recognosce the place, by sending of Colonel Hepburne thither, with a
troop of horsemen for his guard, and convoy; who having seen the
place, advised Kniphowsen to beset it with a garrison, being of
consequence to hold up the enemy, if he should march thereon with the
army, whereupon I was made choice of, with my folks to beset it, being
sent for in the night to break up, and to march thither in all haste;
I had command to speak with Kniphowsen in my going, for receiving
further orders.

The companies marched by; I following my orders desired to know what
the General Major had to command me, who gave me orders in writing, I
should march thither, and in case the enemy should pursue me, I should
fight to the last man, and not to give over the castle, though I
should be forced to quit the town: Receiving orders for some
ammunition, I took leave of Kniphowsen, and continued my march to
Schivelbein, then laid almost waste with pestilence, the inhabitants
being fled away, I had slight quarters for my soldiers, which being
quartered, having visited the town and castle, I appointed the manner
of our watch, and did beset the posts, from our guards, which were
kept both in the town and on the castle, and then I sent orders to the
boors of the Grafschaft, to come in the next day, with spades, shovels
and axes, for to repair the works, that were almost ruined, being a
scurvy hole, for any honest cavalier to maintain his credit by.

Before my coming, two troops of Bawtish's horsemen (viz.) Major
Roustene, and Long-fretts, were quartered there, who getting
intelligence the army was to march upon me, being horsemen, quit the
garrison to ourselves, and took them to the fields, to join with their
Colonel's regiment, being near hand, so that our quarters thus
enlarged, we were glad to be rid of their trouble, as they were to
eschew the enemies coming, serving better in the fields, then they
could do within walls: The horsemen gone, I was evil sped, for being
put on such a place with such orders, appointed to fight to the last
man, where no cavalier with credit could hold out twenty four hours,
being pursued by an army, except the Lord extraordinarily would show
mercy: Nevertheless, getting three days longer continuation before the
enemies coming, we did work all of us night and day, till we had
stacketed the wall about, the height of a man above the parapet,
having made a breast-work of earth within the walls round about, with
traverses within, for clearing out the enemy, if he had entered at a
breach; our work ended, and our ports reinforced with earth to resist
the force of petards; we see in the afternoon the enemies' squadrons
of foot and horse, about eight thousand strong, marching unto us,
having artillery conform, we finding them marching within reach, I
caused to salute them with two small shot, wherewith a Rut-master, and
a Lieutenant of horse were killed, which made the rest march out of
distance: The army drawn up in battle without reach of our cannon,
they sent a trumpeter summoning us to a treaty, he was answered; we
had no such orders, but we had powder, and ball at their service.
Whereupon they commanded a captain with a hundred and fifty musketeers
towards the port, directing proportionally to the rest of the ports:
our soldiers in the beginning before the ports killed of them above
thirty soldiers, and two lieutenants, I not being able to maintain the
town, retired with my folk on the castle: I being retired, the
burghers made up, set open the ports to the enemy, giving him
entrance, who did bring in his whole artillery, and ammunition to the
market place, and then sent to me a drummer to see, if I would render
up the castle upon good conditions, then they were in my power, but if
not, I should have no quarters afterwards.

They got their first answer again, and then the service begins anew on
both sides, and they begun before night to plant their batteries,
within forty pace of our walls, which I thought too near, but the
night drawing on, we resolved with fire works, to cause them remove
their quarters, and their artillery.

Having thrown some fiery grenades on the houses, and seeing they
wrought no effect, I hired a stout soldier with a pike to reach a fire
ball I had made (upon the top of the next house that lay to the
castle) which in the end was fired, so that the whole street did burn
right alongst betwixt us, and the enemy, who was then forced to
retire, both his cannon, and soldiers, and not without great loss done
unto him by our soldiers, by means of the firelight; where other two
officers, and eighteen of their soldiers were killed.

The day clearing up, I fell out after with fourscore musketeers, and
took thirteen Crabbats prisoners. The army leaving us for that time
they marched forwards for the relief of Kolberg, and I retired to the
town to comfort the burghers, for their loss sustained by the fire,
caused through necessity, having no other means to escape our enemies'
fury.

I being retired to the castle, and the enemy marching to Kolberg,
having made up eighteen dragoniers to march after the enemy for
bringing me intelligence, if his Majesty's forces from Stettin were
come betwixt the enemy and Kolberg, my party retiring shows, that the
Field Marshal Gustave Horne, and Colonel Mackey, that conmanded the
commanded musketeers, were joined with Kniphousen, Bawtish, and Sir
John Hepburne; and were lying over-night, before a passage betwixt the
enemy, and Kolberg.

The next morning being dark till nine o'clock with a thick mist, the
horsemen charging one another, they came in confusion on both sides,
being affrighted alike, retired from each other with the loss of
fourscore men on both sides: The particulars whereof I will not set
down, having not seen the service, though I was within hearing of
their cannon and muskets both.

Two horsemen of Bawtish's regiment, that had charged through the enemy
came, and reported to me openly, in presence of many soldiers, that
the Swedens were all beaten, I being offended at the manner of their
report, I caused to imprison both the horsemen, till I knew greater
certainty, and calling my soldiers together, I was prepared for the
enemies return. But he passing by a mile from us, I sent dragoniers to
cut off his passage, giving them charge to cut off the bridges, but
his dragoniers being there before mine, to be quit of their ill; my
dragoniers returned again in safety, allowing passage to their
enemies: within few days after, having escaped this inconvenience, I
was recalled from thence, by his Majesty's order, to join with the
Field Marshal Horne, then at Griffinberg, with a party of the army,
where before my  departing, I took an attestation, from the amtman of
the castle, of the good order and discipline, that was kept by us
there; And being glad I was rid with credit of such a place, I marched
to Greifenberg to find the Field Marshal.

The second Observation.

The foresight of a wise commander avails much, in preventing the
intentions of our enemies; First, in besetting the passages, through
which he might come upon us, which doth hinder his march in giving us
the longer time to be prepared for his coming: Next, the farther our
wings are spread without us, our body is the better guarded by good
intelligence: Thirdly, by this means, we can the better provide our
army with things necessary: Fourthly, the passages without being kept,
they being next the enemy, we can have the more timely advertisement
of our enemies designs, so soon as they are hatched.

This cavalier Kniphowsen, though he was unfortunate, he had both the
theory and practick befitting a commander; whom once I did hear say,
that one ounce of good fortune was to be preferred before a pound
weight of wit; which he knew well by his own experience; and to my
knowledge, though he was unfortunate himself, yet cavaliers under his
command, could learn by him much good order and discipline.

And though in his life-time, he loved not our countrymen;
Nevertheless, for the love I carried to his virtues, I would not omit
to make mention of his worth. No fear of danger, or death can be an
excuse to a man, to serve the public in his calling.

Before I was commanded to enter this town, the infection was great;
yet none of us did forbear to converse with the sick, though daily
examples of mortality were frequent amongst us; for on our watches, we
knew not the clean from the foul; Nevertheless, it behoved us all to
pass on our duties, as we were commanded; and though I know no reason
for it, fewer soldiers died of the infection than burghers.

Yet one rare spark, being a resolute fix soldier with a musket, as
ever I commanded, died here of the pest, called Andrew Monro, who
being but eighteen years of age, though little of stature, no toil nor
travail could overset him; and as he was stout, so he was merry, and
sociable without offence, such another was his cousin John Monro,
Kilternie's grand-child, who died of a burning fever, being alive
without fear before his enemy, and of a merry and quick disposition: I
made only mention of their names, because they lived virtuously, and
died with far more credit, then if they had died at home, where their
names had never been recorded for their worth and virtues.

It is the duty of a commander, to whom a frontier garrison is put in
trust, timely to fore-see all wants, and defects about the place he is
trusted with, as to repair the works, to provide it with victuals,
with powder, with ball, match and arms; for it were not good he had
his materials to seek, when he is resolved to begin his work.

Likewise his workmen, if they be not sufficiently furnished before-
hand, he will be forced to dismiss them, before his work be credibly
ended: his over-seers must be also good and diligent, otherwise, there
may be too many crevices in their building, and he himself must give
good example in overseing all, and in fore-seeing of all
inconveniences, not trusting unto others, to  discharge those duties,
he is bound to discharge himself; and in case of extremity of danger,
he must ever be the first himself to look unto it, and the last in
coming from it, otherwise he can neither maintain the place, nor his
credit.

He must also be very modest, and secret, in not revealing the dangers
he fore-sees, but be amending of them, for fear to discourage others.

Likewise we see here, that it is alike with a commander keeping a
strength sometimes, as it is with a body, whereof some members are
infected with a canker, that to preserve the body they must resolve to
lose a member, as it was with us at this time, being forced to burn a
part of the town, to preserve the rest and ourselves; otherwise, all
must have been lost.

But God favouring us by the wind, that obeyeth when he commandeth, and
the Element of the Fire also, supplying the defect we had of Water in
our graff (being but dry on that side) we were guarded with fire
instead of water, and that bravely.

The enemy being gone, we preserved the rest of the town in quenching
the fire.

Here also, we may see the benefit we reap, when frontier garrisons are
well beset, if the enemy fall into our land, as we are able to affront
him in his coming, so in his going, taking always prisoners of him;
and this is the right use of strengths; that when we suffer loss in
the fields, we have time to draw breath again, our garrisons being
well beset, as was seen in the peace made between the King of Denmark
and the Emperor. For if his Majesty of Denmark, had not built
Glueckstadt on the Elbe, he had hardly recovered Holstein again; even
so this garrison being set here, gave time (by the holding up of the
enemy) to his Majesty's Forces, that were come from Stettin, to be
before the enemy at Kolberg; for if they had fought better, I had
observed the more.



The third Duty discharged of our March to Priemhausen near Stargard,
and from thence to Stettin.

Being recalled from Schivelbein, we joined with the Field Marshal
Horne, at Griffinberg; taking our march towards Priemhausen, a great
dorp near Stargard; his Majesty being then at Gollnow, drawing his
forces together, he intended to try the enemy before winter, having
met with the most part of his forces at Priemhausen, the word was
spred, his Majesty had dealt out winter quarters, to move the enemy to
do the like, that they drawing to quarters, his Majesty's army being
together, they might take advantage of the enemy being settled in
their quarters.

We having stayed with the Field Marshal, till the Colonel went for
Scotland, accompanied with Major Monro, Capraine Francis Sinclaire,
master Hugh Mowat, and Lieutenant Barry; they being gone, his Majesty
commanded I should march to Stettin, and join with the regiment, and
to receive orders from General Major Lesley, being Commandant for the
time; where, by the way at Gollnow, I did speak with his Majesty,  who
told me, he was to prefer Captain Bullion, (being one of my Captains
then) to be General quarter master to horse; As also showed to me,
that he had employed my Colonel for new levies, and therefore he had
recalled me to remain with the regiment in his absence, recommending
unto me diligence, in keeping good discipline, and in defending of the
posts, which should be intrusted to our watching, seeing we were to
watch on Herr Tyvell his post: Thus his Majesty's admonitions
received, I was dismissed, to continue our march to Stettin, where we
being no sooner arrived, but General Major Lesly appointed me my
quarters and post to watch at.

The next day his Majesty directed Captain Dumaine to me, with an order
under his Majesty's Hand and Seal to place him captain over Bullion's
company. The order I reverently received, and appointed the cavalier
the next day in the afternoon to come to me, seeing the next morning I
was to ride to his Majesty, being loath his Majesty should diminish my
privilege, having the freedom by his Majesty's capitulation to place
the officers of the regiment, as they were vacant, and not his
Majesty, having once disposed of that privilege.

Being come to Gollnow, I moved Sir John Hepburne to accompany me
towards his Majesty to assist me; his Majesty asked whether I had
placed the captain, or not; I answered, that finding it prejudicial to
his Majesty's service, I had resolved to acquaint his Majesty first
therewith, seeing the cavalier, though otherwise sufficient, he lacked
language, to command the company being Dutch, his Majesty replied, he
would soon learn so much Dutch, as to conmand a company; and thus
said, his Majesty asked, on whom would I bestow the company; I
answered, to a cavalier that deserved well of his Majesty, called
David Monro, then my lieutenant: his Majesty turning to General
Banniere, replied disdainfully, what shall I think? He would place his
own Cousin, and not obey my orders: whereupon I returned to place
Captain Dumaine in obedience to his Majesty's will, for that time.

Major John Monro gone for Britain with his Colonel, disposed his
company to his Lieutenant William Stewart, who was younger Lieutenant,
then David Monro, yet once coming before him, he was still elder
Captain, and consequently nearest preferment, under that regiment,
through this change only.

Likewise, by the death of Major Synnot at Stettin, Captain John
Sinclaire, being a worthy cavalier, was preferred to be sergeant
Major, and Synnot's company was put by the lieutenant, and disposed to
Captain Semple: In like manner Lieutenant Pringle dying at Stettin,
Henry Lindesey was advanced to be his brother's Lieutenant.

During this harvest, 1630, the pest raged so at Stettin, that divers
brave soldiers of the regiment, were buried there; Nevertheless, a
great deal fewer died of them, then either of Dutch, or Swedens, which
was seen on our march towards Brandenburg, being stronger then other
regiments, that at their landing were twice stronger then we; for no
extremity of hunger, pestilence, or sword could ever make one of them
run away from their colours.

The Colonel being gone for levies, engaged my brother Obstell to bring
over a regiment of foot for his Majesty's service, Major John Monro
being preferred to be his Lieutenant-Colonel, and Captain Ennis his
Major, being gone for Scotland after the in-taking of Brandenburg.

The Colonel gave another commission for a regiment of English to Sir
Thomas Conoway, to whom Captain George Stewart (a brave and a valorous
gentleman) was preferred to be Lieutenant-Colonel, and Captain
Mongorge Major; but the misfortune happened, that in their over-going,
both the Colonel and Lieutenant-Colonel were cast away, being drowned
on the Coast of Denmark, and afterwards, the regiment having lost
three companies by Sea, the overplus were commanded for a time, by the
Major, which afterwards were disposed by his Majesty to Sir John
Cassels to be made up again to a regiment.

At this time, Colonel Lumsdell having brought over also a regiment of
Scots, Captain Robert Stewart came over his Lieutenant Colonel, having
served at first as ensign and lieutenant to Captain Mackenyee under
this regiment, and there after came again unto Prussia, Captain under
Sir John Hamilton's regiment, in May 1629. And was preferred after the
in-taking of Wuertzburg, having been before at the Battle of Leipzig:
during this time we lay at Stettin, his Majesty did take in both
Gartz, and Greifenhagen, and after retiring to Stettin, did prepare
for his march towards Neubrandenburg.

The third Observation.

As Vicissitude maintains the world; so all temporal things here below
are subject to changes and alterations: for the world itself was never
wholly under one long; and in commandment changes are most frequent;
being caused through the manifold accidents occuring in wars, as by
the frequency of our mortalities, in the profession of arms; And also
by the several intentions of men, according to their capacities and
several wits, which tend some times to good, sometimes to evil, and
oft to nothing, or to worse.

Likewise by example, here we see inferiors must yield to their betters
in some things, though without reason, giving way to princes that are
absolute. Yet it is the duty of the inferior to maintain his right,
lest he should be thought too simple, in over-passing it; For though
perhaps at first we be not heard; yet it may happen, that afterwards
we be not encroached upon, more in that kind; For as a general
commands his army; so should a colonel command his regiment, that he
may advance the virtuous according to merit, and good deserving, more
then by favour; If he would be well esteemed of, he ought to have the
understanding to prefer (for reward) the respective and the obedient,
and to hold back only those, who do not well understand either
themselves or others.

Here also we see, that sometimes it is easier speaking with kings by
their inferiors, than to proud generals, that although they bear the
title, lack the discretion, that should reason their commands. For we
find oft times many of them do command more through absolute
authority, then through either love, respect or reason to their
inferiors: and for my part, I had rather follow with little means a
commander, who would respect me in reason for his love, then to follow
a proud general, for greediness of means, that taking the snuff in his
nose would affront me without reason; such generals I did never
follow, neither will follow (though I should quit the wars) for my own
contentment.

We see oft-times, that the faults of the inferiors are laid on the
shoulders of their colonels, which should make superiors to make the
better choice of their officers, especially in eschewing those, as
pestiferous, who are inclined to factions, or given to sow sedition
amongst comrades, such are circumspectly to be avoided by the sound
judgement of the colonel, desirous to live in peace, with those who
ought to be his friends, that he may be the more able to offend his
enemies. When both love and fear are in the hearts of the inferiors,
then the command is not burdensome, nor the obedience slavish; for
sometimes, as good obeyeth, as he that commandeth, the title only with
the authority being laid aside.

Sundry cavaliers, that carried charge under this regiment in Denmark,
we see in the beginning of this new war; for having attained to a
little experience under this regiment, they are now like the eagle's
birds, that how soon they can but flee, they take command on
themselves, and that most worthily, knowing, that it is ambition
grounded upon virtue, makes the meanest soldier mount from the lowest
sentry, to the top of honour to be a general; as some of our worthy
countrymen have done under the crown of Sweden, to their eternal
glory.

To conclude this observation as I begun, seeing all things here are
but human, unstable, and but waves, and tossing, wherein there is
nothing sure, but that, which is tied to the anchor of true piety: fot
our very life, brings many things with it contrary to our expectation.
Therefore, we ought not to ask when, or where, but we should be ever 
mindful how we are prepared; for they live ill, that think they shall
live ever. Men will command, and be commanded so that they may live,
but not live so, as they are commanded to live well.



The fourth Duty discharged of our March to Neubrandenburg, and of the
In-taking of it.

His Majesty after overcoming his enemies at Gartz, and Greifenhagen,
having retired to Stettin, and made preparation for a happy new-years
march in the beginning of January, 1631. We broke up from Stettin,
taking our march towards Neubrandenburg, the earth clad over with a
great storm of snow, being hard frost, we carried along great cannons
of battery, and a number of small cannon, being well provided of all
things belonging to artillery; our little army consisting then of
eight thousand horse, and foot, having left the rest of the army under
command of the Field Marshal Horne, before Landsberg in the Mark: our
march the first night went no further, then beyond the pass of
Loeknitz, where we quartered overnight: breaking up the next morning,
we continue our march for three days towards Brandenburg, where there
lay in garrison as commandant, Colonel Marizane with five hundred
horse, and twelve hundred foot; being as complete to look on, as you
could wish.

His Majesty, being come by three o'clock in the afternoon, within shot
of cannon to the town, drew us in battle, and then divided out the
posts, where the brigades should lie, commanded out the horse watches,
to lie without the foot, other troops were also commanded forth for
battering the streets, and the rest of the horsemen, being directed to
quarters, The foot battle ordered, drums beating, colours advanced,
and flying, every brigade by divisions marched to their posts, where
being arrived, their watches duly set, the rest were settled in their
quarters, being commanded, both officers and soldiers, not to stir out
of quarters from their arms, but to attend on orders.

In our by-going, being within distance of cannon to the town, we were
saluted with cannon, hackbuts of crock, and with musket; where, within
a short time, we rendered unto them their exchange with the interest;
the service continuing so long, as they did (the night bringing
silence over all, till day begun to break again) and then at our post
there lay before the port, a little triangle, with a water-graff about
it, and a drawbridge, we passing through the graff, that was not deep,
stormed the triangle, and made the enemy retire within the town walls,
who fearing a general storm, did presently cause to beat a drum,
desiring a parley, which was granted; pledges delivered hinc inde, the
treaty went on, and the accord was made, and subscribed; they should
march out with bag and baggage, horse and foot, with full arms, which
should have a convoy to Hagelberg, and so accordingly they marched
out; and then his Majesty to refresh the army, caused to make quarters
for the whole foot within the town, where we lay two nights well
entertained.

His Majesty having a greater enterprise in hand, he commanded out a
thousand choice musketeers towards Treptow, two miles from
Brandenburg, and the enemy being acquainted with their coming, he did
retire to Demmin, the leader of the party leaving two companies in
Treptow, marched forwards with the party to take in a castle on a pass
lying in his way, betwixt Treptow, and Demmin; whereon were fifty
commanded musketeers; who after a little defence made for their
credit, did capitulate for quarters, being afraid of the army's
coming, they gave over both castle and pass. His Majesty (leaving a
few number of commanded men in Brandenburg, with a commissary, for
ingathering of contribution, and proviant for the army) he did break
up, and marched towards a little town, lying on the pass below Demmin,
called Loitz: where in the castle there lay above six hundred men of
the Imperialists, that might have foughten for good quarters; but
being careless of their watch, our commanded musketeers, having passed
the bridge, were suffered to enter within the castle, before the
garrison could get to their arms, and being thus surprised, they got
worse quarters, then if they had fought.

The soldiers and officers that first entered, made good booty; and
having got gold chains and money in abundance, by reason the
Imperialists had lain long there, who though they gathered the whole
money of the country, yet they had not the wit to transport it away,
being silly simple Italians, and without courage, the poorest officers
that ever I looked on, and unworthy the name of soldiers; for though
they knew of our march, they suffered themselves pitifully to be
surprised.

The Fourth Observation.

Notwithstanding of the extremity of cold, we see his Majesty's
diligence, neglecting no time, making use of winter, as of summer,
being an expert general, who in his judgement was nothing inferior to
the greatest general we read of, as do witness his valorous actions.
He seeing at our coming to Brandenburg, what advantage the ground
yielded to the enemy, to have hindered our coming unto it, As also
perceiving what hurt the enemy was able to have done us, before our
down-lying (having known their strength, that were within, both of
horse and foot) if he had been a resolute, and a courageous commander,
as he was not, he had tried our fore-troops, before our coming so
near, which made his Majesty judge they would not hold out long.

Here at this time, a young cavalier desirous of honour, and greedy of
good instruction, could have learned fron this king the way to command
well; as likewise with order to direct all things fitting, how to
pursue any place or strength he came before, as his Majesty did there,
being the first part, wherein I did observe his Majesty's dexterity in
command, discharging the duties of several officers, being but one
man, he never doubted to put in execution what he once commanded, and
it was well done; and no alteration was to be found in his orders;
neither did he like well of an officer, that was not as capable to
understand his directions, as he was ready, in giving them.
Nevertheless, he would not suffer an officer to part from him, till he
found he was understood, by the receiver of the order.

Such a general would I gladly serve; but such a general I shall hardly
see: whose custom was; to be the first and last in danger himself,
gaining his officers love, in being the companion both of their
labours and dangers; for he knew well how his soldiers should be
taught to behave themselves, according to the circumstances both of
time and place, before they were led to fight, and being careful of
their credits, he would not suffer their weakness, or defects to be
discerned, being ready to foresee all things, which did belong to the
health of his soldiers, and his own credit. He knew also, the devices
and engines of his enemy, their counsel, their armies, their art,
their discipline: As also the nature and situation of the places they
commanded; so that he could not be neglective in anything belonging to
his charge; and he understood well, that an army being brittle like
glass, that sometimes a vain and idle brute was enough to ruin them;
and to break them, like the brittlest glass that is.

His Majesty's further diligence, after the in-taking of Brandenburg we
see, he giving neither time, nor leisure to the nearst garrisons that
were at hand, to resolve, what they had to do; for one strength was no
sooner taken, but incontinent, the commanded musketeers, and horsemen,
were presently closing up the passages of the rest, before they could
either retire, or send for supply; And so being long, sleeping in a
careless security, some of them were taken, before they could be
prepared for to fight, or to take about their ports or bridges; so far
were they out of use with hunting, and making good cheer, that they
were surprised, inter pocula: having regarded their bellies, more then
their credits.

Where I did see, the saying of the prophet cleared, that saith, men do
annoy themselves, in gathering goods, and cannot tell who shall enjoy
them; For I think the Italians never minded, that the riches which
they gathered in Pomerania, should be suddenly transported from the
sun unto the northern crags and cliffs of Sweden; being led by the
Lion of the North, the Invincible King of Sweden, of never dying
memory.




The fifth Duty discharged of the In-taking of Demmin by accord.

General Major Kniphowsen, being come with a supply of horse and foot
to our army at Loitz, and being joined with us, his Majesty did give
him orders to desire from the Colonels of all regiments of foot and
horse (according to a Swedens custom used at such times) the list of
their marching men, and of their sick, the lists being severally
given; our army did effectivè consist of fifteen thousand men, of foot
and horse, able to fight.

The next morning every regiment of foot, according to custom, was
commanded to have a competent number of cannon baskets ready made, to
be transported the next day on wagons before Demmin, which we were to
beleaguer; Therefore this preparation was made before hand for the
batteries, the wood being scarce and far from thence.

The fourteenth of February, we did break up, horse and foot, and
marched towards Demmin from Loitz, our horsemen were directed to lie
without us, on both sides of the town alike, so that the town could
get no supply, without they would first beat our horsemen, and next
our foot; his Majesty remaining with the infantry, as his choice, we
encamped on a hill, and about it within cannon shot of the town, being
our best quarters in the extremity of the cold, without house or
shelter to defend us from the wind.

At our first drawing up in battle, a worthy gentleman called Robert
Rosse, one of our regiment, was killed with the cannon, being blowing
of tobacco before the regiment; died instantly, and was transported to
Loitz, where he was honourably buried in the Church, whose last words
were worth the noting, saying, Lord receive my soul.

His Majesty having first disposed of the horsemen, in giving them
their directions, the foot was standing in battle, under the mercy of
the cannon, behind this hill for two hours, while his Majesty was in
viewing and recognoscing both town and castle: which done, the guards
were commanded forth to their several posts, to the artillery, and to
his Majesty's baggage, then his Majesty directed General Major
Kniphowsen, and his forces, with the thousand commanded musketeers, to
take in the passage that went to the castle, on which service was
commanded Herr Tivell his Lieutenant Colonel, called [blank space] who
commanded the party; under whom was, with the commanded men of our
regiment, Lieutenant George Heatly, the service beginning hot on both
sides, striving for the pass, the Lieutenant Colonel was killed. At
which time Lieutenant Heatly being  shot, notwithstanding, behaved
himself valourously, being the first with his musketeers that cleared
the pass from the enemy, in making them give ground, he possessed the
mill on the other side of the pass, till the rest of the commanded
musketeers did follow the enemy to the castle; where Kniphowsen with
his forces did advance, the pass being free.

His Majesty having given orders where the batteries should be made,
giving General Banier charge to attend the army, as it begun to grow
dark, his Majesty accompanied by Colonel Tivell, went to appoint the
place where the approaches should begin, where the guards should be
kept that were to guard the workmen, in case of an out-fall: where
presently both the guards, and the men that should work, were
commanded forth, with sufficient officers to oversee them. Likewise
there were men commanded from every regiment proportionably, for
making the batteries, and a strong guard was appointed to guard the
cannon against an out-fall; others were commanded from every regiment,
to make more cannon baskets, and the furriers, with convoys, were
ordained to return to Loitz, for bringing of proviant to every
regiment.

This all orderly done, he that had meat in his knapsack, being free of
duty, could invite his comrade to supper, and make merry till he were
commanded on duty himself, where divers did eat that were not sick on
the morrow.

The enemy perceiving the next morning the guards by the approaches,
saluted them with cannon and musket, and were saluted again, though
not so kindly as friends do one another. The service continued the
whole day, his Majesty oft visiting the castle, being hardest pressed,
as of most consequence; for the castle once won, the town could not
hold out.

Upon the castle were seven companies of Colonel Holk's regiment, who
fearing to be blown up by a mine, entered in treaty, and were content
to take service under his Majesty, and to render their colours, which
immediately was agreed upon, and their colours brought to be planted
and spread on our batteries, as tokens of his Majesty's victory. The
cannon in the mean time from our batteries, thundering till night on
their works, they begun to be discouraged, finding the castle was
given over, they were out of hopes to maintain the town longer.

The next morning Captain Beaton of our regiment, having the guard in
the trenches, the enemy falling out strong, the Dutch retired and gave
ground, while our folk maintained their post valiantly in sight of his
Majesty, who commanded General Bannier with some musketeers of Herr
Tyvell's regiment and ours (led on by Major Potley an English cavalier
of good worth) to second the guards, and to beat back the enemy in
plain champaign, General Bannier advanced, the enemy playing hard with
cannon on them, Notwithstanding whereof, entering the skirmish, the
enemy was beat back not without great loss on both sides, where I
cannot but commend Bannier his carriage, being in sight of his King,
as his Majesty did commend our nation for their good behaviour and
charity: for a Captain of Bannier's regiment being left for dead on
the field, his countrymen for fear, refusing to bring him off, he was
voluntarily brought off by our countrymen, to their great praise, who
after disdaining his comrades and thanking our countrymen, he died of
pain and agony before night.

After this show made of courage, by the besieged, they being
discouraged, desired a parley, where Major Greeneland an English
cavalier then serving the Emperor, was sent out to make the accord
with his Majesty, pledges delivered by both, the accord agreed on was
subscribed, where it was concluded, the governor should march out with
flying colours, and arms, and with two pieces of ordnance, with bag
and baggage, and a convoy to the next Imperial garrison, providing the
governor should leave behind him all cannon, being threescore pieces
of brass, all store of ammunition and victual, and all spare arms, and
to march forth precisely the next day by twelve of the clock.

But had the governor the Duke of Savelly been so valorous, as those he
commanded, he might, in respect of the season & situation of the town,
have kept the city a month longer, so that to our judgments he was no
good soldier, knowing his General was able to relieve him.

The enemy thus marched away, and his Majesty having beset the
garrison, hearing General Tilly with a strong army had taken
resolution to visit his Majesty in Mecklenburg, he stood not long on
advisement, but out of hand disposed of his army courageously, wisely,
and circumspectly, as the event did witness his Majesty's good command
an resolution. Demmin, beset with Swedens, General Bannier was
ordained to stay there, for to command the garrison, and to keep
correspondence with his Majesty's, and with others in case of Tilly's
coming: General Major Kniphowsen was sent with his own regiment, and
six companies of my Lord of Rhees commanded by his Lieutenant Colonel
Bainshow to lie at Neubrandenburg, Major Sinclair with two companies
was ordained to lie at Treptow, the Grave Fonottenburg with his
Majesty's regiment of horse, and my squadron of foot was appointed to
lie at Malchin, his Majesty himself with the rest of the army were to
lie at Pasewalk, being the pass unto Pomerania, and to the Oder, Field
Marshal Horne being recalled with his forces from Landsberg, was
ordained to lie at Friedland: all having their instructions and orders
in writ, which they durst not pass one jot; to th'end, that wherever
Tilly's army would settle, the rest of our army from the several
garrisons, should come together to relieve the party besieged, if his
Majesty thought fitting. So leaving Demmin, having lost three hundred
men before it, our march holds out, according to our several orders
and instructions.

The fifth Observation.

ALL things were achieved unto here, by the goodness of a glorious
order, being seconded with skilful and valorous officers and soldiers,
obedient even unto death, every one by revolution keeping his certain
time and turn, and that with strictness, each being greedy of their
own honour and advancement, under this noble king and general who
liked of no wicked soldier, living out of compass and rule; such as
were birds of the devil's hatching, all such were banished from this
army, that was led by pious and religious Gustavus of never dying
memory; who could not abide any that would profane God's ordnance, or
that refused to give obedience to good orders.

Here at Loitz, before our rising to Demmin, I could not but pity,
though an enemy, the Italian governor, that commanded in Loitz, who
suffered himself, the place, and his followers to be surprised,
knowing of the army's approach: for we see by his example, that goods
evil conquest with great pains, are soon lost, going away with wings
swifter then the wind; whereof histories are full of examples, to
which purpose I will infer one story, I have read of Hugolene
Gerrardesque Depise, as records, Paulus Aemilius in the eighth book of
the French story. This Hugolene being a commander for the Pope over
the Guelfs, having chased a part of the Ghibellines that were with the
Emperor, terrifying the rest, he became so greatly renowned amongst
his own folk, that he commanded what he pleased, and was made lord and
governor of a city (as this Italian was here) being accounted noble,
rich, magnificent, and learned, he was married, having good issue, he
abounded in all riches, more than he could desire or wish, being
counted happy, and at his ease according to his own mind, and the
opinion of his friends; he made a feast on his birth day, and having
assembled his friends; being merry he fell in commendation of his own
worth and honour, extolling himself above the clouds so far, that he
begun to ask of one of his nearst friends, if he thought he lacked
anything to make him happy: the other considering the uncertainty of
worldly affairs, and the deceitful vanities thereof that perish in a
moment when the Lord pleaseth but to breathe, said; certainly the
wrath of God cannot be far from this thy great prosperity. Incontinent
the forces of the Ghibellines begining to stir, unexpected come about
the lodging, break in through the ports, kill his children, and take
himself, who begging life being refused, was miserably murdered, and
all his goods taken by the enemy in Italy, in the year 1288, to teach
all mortal men not to glory too much in uncertain riches, that come
but slowly and go away swiftly.

Those men that are meanly risen, may justly be checked here, that when
they have attained unto wealth, riches and honour, presently they will
begin to counterfeit the nobility, pressing to tread in their
footsteps, though not belonging unto them: for wealth attained unto,
it may be by unlawful means, should not make the owners too proud of
it, lest suddenly it may be lost, as chanced to Hugolene. Nevertheless
some fantastic officers, that cannot govern themselves nor their
wealth, they will hunt and hawk, with trains on prince's bounds (as I
have known some do being abroad) thinking themselves equal to princes.
whereof they were far short, and they will have their silver plate,
their gold, their silver, their jewels, their coaches, their horses,
their trains, and officers of houshold counterfeiting greatness and
great men, having, it may be, but little worth besides, suffering
themselves in their pomp to be surprised, their goods taken from them,
and then to be cast in a close dungeon or prison, till they die for
want, the reward of their pride; whereas it had been better, they had
lived with greater sobriety and modesty, and then if misfortune should
happen unto them, they would be the more respected, and consequently
the sooner set at liberty.

I have read of cavaliers that served long and truly with credit, whose
minds were not set on outward things perishable; but rather their
hunting was after a good name, renown and credit to leave behind them,
when all other things might be stripped from them; which in my opinion
were more to be commended then those that would counterfeit worth
being without it. But on the contrary, I have known some cavaliers,
that hunted after credit, did gain much renown, and were rich in
credit, though poor otherwise, leaving no more houshold stuff behind
them, but a spit and a pot, being so given to sobriety in their
lifetimes, that sometimes they were contented with a morsel of dry
bread from a soldier. Not that I would have any cavalier, that hath
merited well, to be careless to maintain himself in credit, according
to his charge, if by lawful means he can do it, and if plenty
increaseth, I would wish him timely to dispose of it, for his nearst
friends or succession in a part, and the overplus I would wish him to
bestow for the weal of the public, and the adorning of his country,
that after his death, the monuments of his virtue, and trophies of his
victories might live, and speak to succeeding ages, that such a one
hunted well in attaining unto honour, and perpetual renown and credit.

Here also by the example of a worthy master and leader, being the
Phoenix of his time, for a general, that he who hath seen his variable
essays, and learned to lay up the same in store, if he follow but his
master's precepts, and observe his orders, he cannot but in time merit
the title of a judicious commander; and doubtless one day having
passed his prenticeship well under such a master, he cannot but merit
honour and reward, and then may be made choice of for the service of
his King and country, before those who had not such experience under
such a leader. In remembrance of whom, I will infer an accident
happened his Majesty of famous memory, the time of his beleaguering.

His Majesty walking alone on a marsh that was frozen, of intention
with a prospective glass, to spy into the enemies works, the ice
breaking his Majesty falls up to the middle in water, being near my
guard where Captain Dumaine did command, who seeing his Majesty fall
in, went towards him, of intention to help him out, which his Majesty
perceiving, lest the enemy might take notice of them both, his Majesty
wagged his hand that the Captain might retire, which the enemy
perceiving, shot above a thousand shot of Musket at his Majesty, who
at last wrought himself loose, coming off without hurt, and sat a
while by our guard fire.

The Captain being a bold spoken gentleman, well bred, and of good
language, begun very familiarly to find fault with his Majesty, for
his forwardness in hazarding his Majesty's person in such unnecessary
dangers; on whom, at that time, the eyes of all Europe were fixed,
expecting their freedom and reliefs (from the tyranny of their
enemies) to come from his Majesty, and in case any misfortune or
sinister accident (as God forbid) should happen unto his Majesty, what
then would become of his Majesty's confederates, and which was worst,
what would become of many brave cavaliers of fortune, who had no
further hopes then to live, and to be maintained under his Majesty
their leader?

His Majesty having heard the Captain, patiently thanked him for his
good counsel, and he could not but confess his own fault, which he
could not well help, seeing his mind was so, that he thought nothing
well done which he did not himself, and so went to dinner, where
before he changed his wet clothes, in a cold tent, he called for meat,
and dined grossly, and taking a great draught of wine went and changed
his clothes, and immediately coming forth again, while as the enemy
had fallen out, as was said before in the discharge.

The time of this out-fall, our soldiers being commanded under Major 
Potley to beat back the enemy, going on service, there happened a
merry accident to one of our countrymen (then ensign to my colonel's
company) called James Lyle, being in sight of his Majesty, going down
a a steep hill, the enemy playing hard with cannon, the Ensign
happened to fall forwards, the wind blowing off his periwig, which
tumbled down the hill, the Major sware a great oath, the poor
cavalier's head was shot from him, and seeing him rise again without
his false head, sware the cannon had shot away the skin, with the hair
of his head being bald.

His Majesty at this time also seeing a Dutch captain's cloak about him
going on service, commanded to recall him, and to command out another,
which was a disgrace to the captain, whom his Majesty openly reproved,
saying, If he had intention to have fought well, he would have felt no
cold, and consequently the carrying of his cloak was needless.

In this mean time his Majesty looking on, from the enemies' battery a
cannon bullet came so near his Majesty, though he was really stout, he
was made to stoop, and behind his Majesty, the thigh was shot from a
Swedens Captain, belonging to the artillery, who died the same night.

Here I cannot let pass an oversight unworthily committed by General
Major Kniphowsen, while as the enemy was marching out, the guard of
the posts being committed to the Swedens, having got command from his
Majesty to let no officer nor soldier come within the town, till the
enemy was marched out; Kniphowsen pressing in was put back by the
captain that commanded: Whereupon Kniphowsen not knowing what
direction the captain had, or from whom, he lifting a baton, broke it
on the captain's head, which was evil thought of by his Majesty and
the whole officers of the army. Nevertheless, we never heard of the
reparation: so that I would never wish my noble friend to lie under an
affront, though done by any foreign King, for if I could not be
revenged, I would serve against him to be revenged, if not of him, yet
at lest of his, for which I crave pardon, having spoken rather like a
soldier than a divine, for nothing should divert my heart sooner from
my superior, than disdain or contempt.



The sixth Duty discharged of the In-taking of Brandenburg, and of
Major John Sinclaire his escape out of Treptow.

General Major Kniphowsen with his regiment and six companies of my
Lord of Rhees' regiment, commanded then by Lieutenant Colonel
Lindesey, were appointed to lie in Neubrandenburg: when as the enemy
lay down before Brandenburg, I was recalled from Malchin with my
squadron to join with Field-marshal Horne at Friedland, being
commanded to leave a Captain with a hundred musketeers behind me of
commanded men to beset Malchin: at this time also Major Sinclaire with
his own company, and Captain Semples, were commanded to beset Treptow,
which lay but two miles from Brandenburg; his Majesty with the rest of
the army, being at Pasewalk, Tilly with his army being engaged in the 
beleaguering of Brandenburg, consisting then of twenty-two thousand
foot and horse, having twenty-six pieces of ordnance, with all
furniture answerable, he beleaguered Brandenburg, thinking his Majesty
being so near, might be moved to engage his army with disadvantage to
relieve it: But his Majesty being more wise, and having had a greater
design in his head, he suffered Tilly to try his fortune against a
place of no such importance, as to engage a king and a crown, a
country and an army, in relieving of it; and his Majesty relying much
on the wisdom, discretion, and valour of General Major Kniphowsen, as
that of himself he was sufficiently able to make an honourable accord,
when better could not be. And in the mean time, to divert the enemy
from him, his Majesty did make a caracole with the half of his army
towards Schwedt on the river of the Oder, where he built a ship-bridge
over the river, and caused to fortify it with skonces, that in his
option he might come and go on both sides of the river, till Field-
marshal Horne might join with him.

General Tilly hearing the King was marched, and fearing some great
design, he pressed Brandenburg so much the harder, with continual
shooting of cannon till a breach was made, and then out of time
Kniphowsen did send his Lieutenant Colonel with a drummer to the
breach, to desire a parley, but being neglected by the enemy, as too
late. The parley refused, Lieutenant Colonel was killed, the enemy
having given orders for a general storm, which going on, Lieutenant
Colonel Lindesey and Captain Moncreiffe were both killed, and
Lieutenant Keith and Ensign Haddon, were also cut down in the fury,
with many a brave soldier besides, who being denied quarters, fought
valiantly to the last man.

The other Scots officers of the regiment, being within the town, as
Captain Ennis, Captain Gunne, Captain Beaton, and Captain Lermond,
with their officers and soldiers, were for the most part, taken
prisoners, with Lieutenant Lyell, and some other inferior officers,
Captain Ennis being on another post without the port, which was not
stormed at all, the enemy having entered on the other side of the
town, where in the fury they did put the most part to the sword, and
coming through the town port, upon Ennis his post behind him, he and
Lieutenant Lumsdell did leap into the graff, and saved themselves
through a marsh from the fury of their enemies, and came to us to
Friedland. Brandenburg thus taken in, a party was sent towards
Treptow, where Sinclaire did command, getting orders to take it in
also. But Sinclaire did behave himself valiantly in falling out upon
the enemy, who retired again without great hurt, and maintained the
town for two nights, till he had received orders from the Field-
marshal to quit it in the night. And after that he did join with us at
Friedland.

The Field-marshal knowing that Brandenburg being taken, the enemies'
forces would march upon him, and he having orders and instructions in
writing from his Majesty, he retired with his army over the pass
towards Anklam, the enemy advanced to Friedland, finding us to be
gone, they retired in haste back to Brandenburg, and from thence they
march back again to Ruppin, suspecting his Majesty had marched before
them towards Magdeburg: Tilly's army being marched, we retired to
Friedland, from whence Ensign Greame, with some dragoniers, was sent
to Brandenburg to take order for the hurt and sick, whom General Tilly
had left behind him, which were plundered,  and some others killed by
the Ensign and his soldiers, who had also run the same hazard by the
enemy his Crabbats, had they not retired in time; after whose return,
my musketeers being come from Malchin, we were ready to march.
The sixth Observation.

The cruelty and inhumanity used here by Tilly's army, giving so ill
quarters to our nation, to burghers, and to those that served at the
altar, was not long unpunished, at such places, as they least
expected.

And General Major Kniphowsen was not void of blame, for refusing a
treaty in due time, seeing he had no certainty of relief, and being
left to capitulate with the enemy, at his own discretion (by his
instructions he had from his Majesty) he ought to have embraced the
opportunity of time (which once past is not to be recovered) in
capitulating with the enemy for honourable quarters, rather than to
have brought himself and others to the slaughter, for he who delays to
embrace time when it is offered, must not press to recover it, and
oft-times good occasions in warfare are lost, when commanders are
ignorant of their enemies' doings. Therefore while time is, we ought
to be diligent and careful; for it is better to be in safety through
preventing, than basely to suffer under our enemies, occasion being
past, which oft-times in wars helps more than virtue itself: for if
Kniphowsen had embraced Tilly's offer when he might, our worthy
comrades had not suffered as they did, which sufferance after that
made cavaliers being freed out of prison, to seek conditions elsewhere
for their advancements, such as Captain Ennis, being first made Major
to Colonel Monro of Obstell, was afterward Lieutenant Colonel to the
master of Forbesse, after the death of that worthy cavalier Sir Arthur
Forbesse. Likewise Captain William Gunne, being come out of prison,
was after advanced by Sir Patrick Ruthven, General Major and governor
of Olme, to be his Lieutenant Colonel over the Dutch in Schwabeland.

Captain Beaton was made major, and afterward lieutenant colonel to
young Colonel Skeutte.

Captain Lermond also was advanced to be captain of dragoniers, and
James Lyel, having served long under Sir John Ruthven his regiment,
the regiment reduced, and the Captain levying again for the French
service, was pitifully murdered by knaves in Westphalia.

Henry Lindesey advanced to be captain of his Majesty's Leeffe regiment
under Grave Neles, after for reward of his virtue and valour, was
preferred to be lieutenant colonel to Colonel Alexander Lesly the
younger: Captain Brumfield was made major to Colonel Gunne, and after
that regiment was reduced, being under Sir John Ruthven, was pitifully
hurt in combat, and then resolutely died of his wounds at Buxtehude,
being much lamented by all that knew him, for as valourous and expert
an officer, as any of his quality was under our army: so that we see
here, that though the regiment suffered great loss at Brandenburg,
nevertheless the valiant officers were advanced according to their
former good carriage.

Likewise I cannot with silence here pass by the valourous carriage of
Major John Sinclaire at Treptow, in making a fair show of a bad game,
while as the enemy came before Treptow with a party of a thousand
musketeers, he not having a hundred musketeers within the town in all,
nevertheless fell out with fifty amongst a thousand, and skirmished
bravely and orderly with the enemy, and retired again with credit,
making the enemy think that he was a great deal stronger within walls.
I confess as it was well ventured, so the cavalier was beholden to
fortune, in coming so safely back. But I will not advise my friend to
make use of the like; for if the enemy had haply got a prisoner of
his, who could have showed his true strength, that might have caused
the loss of all. But the cavalier did hazard fair to gain credit: for
as he was valourous in conduct, and amongst others, even so being
singled out, he feared no man, as you shall see in the subsequent
observations before we end our march.

Here also I did observe the difference betwixt the King our master and
old Tilly; where I did see his Majesty, though younger, out-shoot the
elder in experience, who by winning of a dorp (which was afterwards
slighted) with the loss of two thousand men, over and above the toil
sustained by his army, and the loss of some cannon, he lost Frankfurt
on the Oder, where three thousand were put to the sword, in requital
of his cruelty used at Brandenburg.



The seventh Duty discharged of our march to Schwedt, and of our
reformation there, being made into brigades.

Tilly's army being marched back to Ruppin, the Field Marshal with his
army did break up from Friedland with horse, foot, and artillery
towards Schwedt to join with his Majesty, continuing our march for
three days to the pass at Loecknitz, where we rested two days, sundry
officers having taken forloughs of his Excellence to go unto Stettin,
to provide themselves of clothes and necessaries, expecting for a long
march, where I went also to see my wife and family; and having stayed
but one night, our march continued so far in prosecuting our
victories, that the enemy coming betwixt me and home, I was not 
suffered in three years time to return, so long as his Majesty lived,
which was much to my prejudice.

Being arrived at Schwedt on the Oder, and joined with his Majesty's
army, after our coming being drawn out to the fields, we were made
into brigades both horse and foot, where Sir John Hepburne being made
colonel of the brigade, his regiment, Colonel Lumsdell's, Stargate's
and ours, made up the brigade, where Lumsdell & I had the battle,
Colonel Hepburne his regiment made up the right wing, and Colonel
Stargate's the left, which on our march was changed by turns, and
thereafter was still called the Scots brigade commanded by Hepburne.
Sundry other brigades were made up, as the yellow or leeffe brigade,
commanded by the Baron Tyvell, the blue brigade, commanded by Colonel
Winckle, and the white brigade called Dametts, where having lain some
few days, we were preparing for our march towards Frankfurt on the
Oder.
The seventh Observation.

General Tilly was no sooner marched with his army, but incontinent,
the Field Marshal did follow his example, to join with his Majesty.
Where we may see, that these two wise Generals did soar in the skies
with their armies, casting boards like war ships, to get advantage one
of another.

We see here that cavaliers, though tied by God's ordnance to live with
their wives, being once severed and tied to serve, they cannot with
credit quit their charge to come to their wives. The King himself
being once engaged in the Dutch wars, was deprived for two years, from
the sweet society of his queen, which should teach women, and men of
meaner quality, after their examples, to be patient in absence; for
more love was never betwixt two, than was betwixt his Majesty and his
queen, no love could go beyond their love each to others, except the
love of Christ, God and man, towards man. For the love of this queen,
to her husband the king, did equal the love of the wife of Hieron,
whom we read of in Plutarch his Apophthegmes for her rare continence
and respect carried to her husband, she never felt the breath of
another's kiss, but her husband's. Which in my opinion, this queen of
Sweden could well for her love to her husband have done, if it were
possible, as is reported by Plinius of Arria, wife to Cecinna Paetus,
who being condemned to die, with liberty to choose the form of his
death, his wife going to visit him, did exhort him to die valiantly
with great courage, and taking good night of her husband, she struck
herself with a knife in the body, and drawing out the knife again
presented it to Paetus her husband, with these words, Vulnus quod feci
Paete, non dolet, sed quod tu facies: as one would say, the wound I
gave myself hurts me not, but the wound which you shall give grieves
me. We read also of Portia, Cato his daughter, and wife to Brutus, who
hearing of her husband's death, in despite of all that were about her,
filled her mouth with hot burning coals, and was suffocated for grief.
We read also a memorable story of the wives of the Menyans, recorded
by Plutarch in his fourth book of illustrious women, their husbands
being in prison and condemned to death, for having enterprised against
the King of Sparta; the Lacedemonian custom being to execute their
malefactors in the night, these noble women, under pretence to speak
with their husbands, being appointed to die, got license of the guards
to go within the prison, and having put themselves in place of their
husbands, whom they made to put on their gowns, taught them to cover
their faces with veils, as being extremely sorry, carrying their heads
downward, they escaped out of their hands.

Having inferred this discourse on a queen, yet wife to the best
soldier in our days, lest soldiers' wives should be worse thought of
thanothers, having seen more love, more indurance, better obedience,
and by appearance more chastity in them to their husbands, than ever I
did see in any other profession, I will here yet infer a rare example
of a soldier's wife, to encourage others to follow and imitate her
virtues. The story we read written by Barnard Scardeon in his third
book of Padua, that Blanch Rubea of Padua, being retired with her
Baptist de la Port, within the fortress of Bassean, pertaining to the
Venetians: Acciolen banished out of Padua with all his forces,
assailed the said place, being valorously defended, it was impossible
to get it, but by treason; Baptist not losing courage, though
surprised, running unto the port with his arms in his hand, but
suppressed by the multitude of his enemies having gotten entry, he was
killed by the hand of Acciolen; his wife Blanch did fight valiantly in
the conflict, being armed with steel and with courage, far beyond her
sex. The enemy being victorious, she was taken perforce, and brought
before the tyrant, who being ravished with her beauty, at first making
much of her, then desireth to ravish and bereave her of her honour,
she defending herself by words and prayers of entreaty escaped his
hands, and finding the window open skips down, where she was found
sore hurt, and half dead, but by the diligence of good chirurgians,
she was made whole as before, and was solicited by the tyrant again,
which she refusing to yield unto, being bound was forced by the
tyrant, she keeping her grief within herself, gets liberty to go see
the dead body of her husband Baptist; and pretending to do some
ceremonies about his corpes, and having opened the grave, she crying,
streached herself in the grave, and violently with her hands pulls the
stone that covered the grave over her, and her head being bruised, she
died presently above her husband: in the year 1253.

The Ancient Germans did marry their wives, on the condition they
should be their companions in travails and dangers; and as Cornelius
Tacitus reports, one husband married but one wife, being but one body
and one life. And Theogene the wife of Agathocles said, she was
companion of his troubles and adversity, as she was of his prosperity:
and being in love myself with the virtue of such women, rare to be
found, I will yet enrich this observation with a notable example, that
happened in the year 1466 betwixt Bonne, Lumbard or Greeson, and Peter
Brunore of Parme, as the Italian story records, which I here represent
in favour of virtuous women, to encourage that sex more and more to
the like virtue, being so pleasant wherever it is found to be seen.
Bonne born in the Woalky of Talhine, in the country of Greeson, in
which place Peter Brunore Parmsan one day walking alone, a brave
cavalier, and a knight well experimented in wars, leading his army, in
passing by he sees this young damsel feeding her sheep in the fields,
being little of stature, of brown colour, not pleasant, or fair to see
to, but very merry, playing then with her fellows; wherein she showed
a certain quickness of spirit, that the knight Brunore looking on her
attentively, observing all her gestures, and hoping of some great good
of her, caused to take her, and lead her away with him against her
will; that in time being accustomed with him, he made her divers times
change clothes, and clad her at last like a boy, by way of pleasure
and recreation of spirit, leading her oft a-hunting, and using her to
ride, and spur horses, and other exercises, wherein she showed her
quickness and dexterity; and though the cavalier did keep her but for
pleasure, recreation, and pastime; nevertheless, she did set herself
to serve him with a love and diligence incredible, in such sort, that
willingly she could endure all manner of labour, trouble or toil of
body or of mind, that Brunore could not undergo, and went ever with
him, as with her master, in all his journeys, assisting him in all
dangers, following him on foot, and on horseback, through dales and
mountains, by water and by land, with an entire and faithful
obedience, without over-leaving of him, or without grudging in any
sort: she went also with him towards Alphonse King of Naples, for at
that time this cavalier and knight Peter Brunore, did serve under
Francis Sforza which party he after quit; but having afterwards
changed his mind, he resolved to quit Alphonse King of Naples, and to
retire to serve his former master, the count of Sforza, and while as
he was making preparation for his flight, the business not being so
privily carried, but that the king perceiving it, secretly caused to
apprehend Brunore, and cast him into prison, where he was kept long
without hope of relief; Wherefore Bonne being restless, till she
should see the day when the knight Brunore were at liberty, she went
to all the princes and potentates of Italy, and to the King of France,
to Philip Duke of Burgoigne, to the Venetians, and to many more, of
whom she attained letters in favour of her dear and well beloved
master, so that Alphonse won by such requests and the entreaty of so
great men, was as it were constrained to set Brunore at liberty, and
gave him unto that valorous warrier that did for him; who having
gotten him loose, to do yet greater service to her master, did obtain
so much by her means at the Venetians' hands, that they accepted of
Brunore unto their service, and was made leader to the army of so
great a republic, and there was a great pension ordained for his
entertainment, by which deeds of friendship, the knight did know the
faith, the virtue, and the valour of his Bonne: he esteemed it not
honest to keep her longer as a servant, as he had done till then, but
married her, keeping her as his lawful wife, making still great esteem
and account of her, following her counsel in all his affairs of
weight, and importance, during which time, he attained unto great
reputation under the Venetians, his enterprises still coming
fortunatly and happily to pass. This valiant dame of his was still
seen in arms, when occasion was offered to fight, and when it was
needful to lead the infantry, going before, she appeared like a
magnanimous leader and warrior, being very capable in warlike matters,
whereof she gave divers times good proof, especially with the
Venetians against Francis Sforza at that time Duke of Milan, where she
made herself known, while as the castle of Panon besides Bresse was
lost; her courage did appear so great, that every one did wonder at
it, for being armed from head to foot, showing herself more
courageously then any other at the storm, the targe on her arm, and
the cutlass in her hand, she was the means the place was recovered. At
last the Venetians having great confidence in Brunore, and in the
counsel and valour of Bonne his lady, he was sent for the defence, and
keeping of Negrepont against the Turks, where by the fortifications,
they two made while they remained there, the Turks had never the
courage to hurt or impeach them; in end, Brunore dying, and buried
with great respect and honour, Bonne his lady returning towards the
Venetians, for to get her husbands pension confirmed to two of her
sons, and falling sick, caused to make a tomb of great charges, which
she desired to be perfected before her death, and being dead, she was
buried there, in the year 1468. Therefore it was well said, that there
were three things seemed pleasant in God's sight, the love betwixt
brethren, the friendship betwixt neighbours, and man and wife
continuing in union  and mutual loyalty. Who likes to read a pleasant
story to this purpose, let him read Nauclerus' treaty of the Emperor
Conrad the third, in his wars against Guelly Duke of Bavaria, who was
forced for his safety, to retire within Rhinesberg, where the town
being taken by accord, by the persuasion of ladies, he would grant no
other condition, but that the women should transport themselves out of
the town in safety, with so much as they could carry, and no more,
where one taking the Duke on her back, the rest of the wives their
husbands, the accord thus kept, and the Emperor Conrad moved to
compassion, beholding their love and virtue, pardoned the Duke, and
restored the town to their former liberties. And Bodin in the preface
of his history reports that Laurence de Medicis was healed of a
grievous disease, by reading of this story without any other help; I
wish it may work the same effect upon all those that made it,
especially the female sex, in making them follow the virtuous examples
of these noble ladies, in loving their husbands beyond all other
things whatsoever, and those that will not be moved thereto, I wish
them the death of that Roman lady, reported of by Quintus Curtius and
Titus Livius, called Publia Cornetia Annea, who lived twenty years
without once offending of her husband, and seeing him die, contracted
such grief for his death, that she threw herself into the grave with
her husband, where she died, and lay with him. This wish I hope cannot
be taken in ill part by the virtuous ladies, that are like Cornelia:
but I fear there is none such at all. To conclude then this point of
my observation; in my judgment, no women are more faithful, more
chaste, more loving, more obedient nor more devout, then soldiers'
wives, as daily experience doth witness, and none have more reason to
be so, than some of them, whose husbands do daily undergo all dangers
of body for their sakes, not fearing death itself, to relieve and keep
them from dangers. To th'end you may see, that the noble parts and
virtues before mentioned, are not proper alone unto the feminine sex,
I will here infer some notable examples of the good will, love and
faithfulness of husbands to their wives, especially soldiers, whereof
amongst many, for the present, I will, to content the reader, mention
two or three, that are notable, whereof one happened at this time in
our warfare, worthy to be recorded, of that noble, valorous, pious and
worthy cavalier, the Field Marshal Gustave Horne; the pest having
entered his lodging, and taken away two of his children, seized on his
virtuous lady, daughter to the Chancellor of Sweden; the cavalier's
love was so great, that in the extremity of her sickness, he never
suffered her to be out of his arms till she died, and then caused her
to be put in a silver coffin, that she might be transported for her
country, to be buried amongst her friends; and his love was so great
unto her, that after her death, though a young man, he could never be
moved to lead his life with any other woman. Another example we read
in the story written by Pliny & Valerius Maximus, that is very notable
to this purpose. Sempronius Gracchus, finding two serpents coming out
of his bed, enquired of theologues what might that accident presage?
they answered, that if he killed the she serpent, his wife should die,
and if he killed the he serpent, he should die himself; he loved his
wife Cornelia so dearly that he commanded to kill the he serpent, and
shortly after he himself died. Also that which we read of Meleager son
to Danneus is notable, who would not rise out of his chair, for the
relief of the town he was in, for his father, mother, brethren, or
sisters, all crying and calling for his help, who nothing cared for
their ruin: but how soon Cleopatra his wife came to him, desiring his
help, and telling him, the enemy was already entered the town, and was
setting the houses on fire; this stony-hearted man, who before could
be moved by nothing, at the desire of his wife, went to arms against
the enemy, and repulsing them back, saved the town from wrack and
ruin, and the citizens from death: for this Meleager (as all honest
men ought to do) esteemed his wife and himself but one; so that he
could deny her nothing. Here it may be, some will allege, he was John
Thomson's man. I answer, it was all one, if she was good: for all
stories esteem them happy, that can live together man and wife without
contention, strife, or jars, and so do I. And, in my opinion, no wife
can be ill, that wants the gall; for the gall in the body is the seat
of choler, from which the love of man and wife should be free, and as
of gall, so of despite, of anger and of bitterness.



The eighth Duty discharged of our March to Frankfurt on the Oder, and
the in-taking of it, the third of April 1631.

The twenty-fourth of March 1631, his Majesty having disposed of his
army, in putting them in good order of brigades, horse and foot,
through the several occasions and accidents happening in war, his
Majesty before his march, finding the enemy lay strong in the Silesian
and at Landsberg, lest he might fall down unto Pomerania and Mark, to
disturbe the new forces that were expected to come from Prussia, and
from Scotland, his Majesty directed Field-marshal Horne, with a part
of his horse that crossed the bridge at Schwedt unto Pomerania, and
the Warthe, to collect the forces there, for to be fured and led
towards the Warthe and Landsberg, to give the enemy somewhat to think
on, while as his Majesty might march with the rest of the army
(consisting then of ten thousand foot and horse) towards Frankfurt,
where under the command of the Field-marshal Tuffenback, and the Grave
Von-Schonberg governor of Frankfurt on the Oder, there were drawn
together of the Imperialists near nine thousand foot and horse.
General Tilly, with this main army then lying at Ruppin, after his
return, from Brandenburg with two and twenty thousand foot and horse,
his Majesty then not being sure, neither of his brother in law the
Duke of Brandenburg, nor yet of the Duke of Saxony, though the league
was ended with the King of France, his Majesty's affairs thus standing
doubtful, we marched towards Frankfurt, with a resolution to pry into
the enemies' designs, more than anyways resolved for a beleaguering,
having such strong enemies and armies about us, without assurance of
our pretended friends and confederates: yet having continued our march
till within a mile of Frankfurt, our enemies retiring out of all
quarters were come into one body at Frankfurt, who having joined, we
did hear the enemy was almost as strong within, as we were without,
and he having of us the advantage of the town behind him for his
retreat, we expected no other thing, than that the enemy should come
out, and offer us battle. Wherefore his Majesty himself discharging
the duty of a General Major (as became him well) having sought the aid
and assistance of Sir John Hepburne, beginneth to put the army, horse,
foot, and artillery in order of battle, the commanded musketeers, as
his forlorn hope, advanced before the army, having placed platoons of
them by fifties, to march with his squadrons of horse, all being in
even front, the sign given for advancing, trumpets sounding, drums
beating, colours displayed, advanced and flying, every commander
directed and appointed on his command and station; the magnific and
royal King leads on; this royal army marching in battle order for half
a mile, as comely as one body could do, with one pace, and one
measure, advancing, stopping, moving, and standing alike, till at last
coming near the town, and finding no hostile rencounter made by the
enemy, we halt standing a while in battle, and then resolved, being
the enemy durst not meet us in the fields, we would press on the
sudden to be masters of Frankfurt, or not at all; knowing of the
nearness of our enemies, and of the great strength they had together:
and seeing we were not sure of the princes, we resolved the taking of
time was the best for us; and incontinent, his Majesty commanded out
the most part of his cavalry, to make a caracole behind us, betwixt us
and Berlin, fearing General Tilly with his army might come behind us,
whiles we were engaged with the town, keeping only of all the cavalry
the Rhinegrave and his regiment, besides the infantry, in case of out-
falling, to second us against the horsemen, that were within the town.

The cavalry thus directed, his Majesty then perceiving the fear of his
enemies, having voluntarily fired their fore-town (took their fear as
a presage of his future victory) commanded a part of the commanded
musketeers to go in, through the fore-town being on fire, and to lodge
themselves, being advanced to the very port, till such time as his
Majesty should dispose of the rest of the army, in directing every
brigade apart to their several posts. The yellow and the blue brigade
were directed to lodge in the vineyards on the side of the town next
Castrene, being commanded to advance their guards before them, while
as the rest of the brigade should lodge and lie in one body at their
arms, to be still in readiness in case of an out-fall; the white
brigade, called Damits brigade, was appointed to lodge in the fore-
town, to guard the commanded musketeers that lay betwixt them and the
danger, at the port right under the walls. Hepburne his brigade was
commanded to lie near unto the other port, and to advance their guards
also; the rest of the commanded men to lie near vnto the other port,
and to advance their guards also; the rest of the commanded musketeers
being commanded by Major John Sinclaire, were commanded to lie on a
height near a church-yard, that was direct before the enemies' works,
besides which, there was a battery made, and the artillery and
ammunition of the army (as commonly was usuall) was placed behind our
brigade, and the Rhinegrave's horsemen behind us; all things thus
ordered and placed, commanded folks out of all brigades were commanded
out proportionally for making of cannon baskets, and for casting of
trenches.

Then, according to custom, his Majesty himself and Colonel Tyvell went
to recognosce near the wall, where Colonel Tyvell was shot in the left
arm, his Majesty then making openly great moan for him, alleging he
had no help then, but of Hepburne; in the same instant my Lieutenant
David Monro was shot in the leg with a musket bullet, and my Major
John Sinclaire, commanding the commanded musketeers near to his
Majesty, where the battery was making, the enemy hanging out a goose
in derision, they presently fell out above two hundred of them upon
our guard, who received them with volleys of musket, and they being
too strong for the guard, his Majesty commanded the major to send an
officer and fifty musketeers more to second the guard. Nevertheless,
the enemy still pushing our guard backwards, making them give ground,
incontinent his Majesty commanded the major with a hundred musketeers
more to fall on, and to resist the enemy in relieving the guard, which
the major suddenly obeyed, making the enemy retire with greater haste
than he advanced, where their lieutenant colonel and a captain were
taken prisoners, and after the major taking in a church-yard, that lay
right before the enemies' works, and keeping his guard there, he did
keep the enemy under awe, so that we were no more troubled with their
out-falling, though diverse of our officers and soldiers were hurt by
them from their works, the church-yard being no shelter for our guard,
that lay just under their works. On Sunday in the morning, being Palm
Sunday, his Majesty with his whole army in their best apparel served
God; his Majesty after Sermon, encouraging our soldiers, wished them
to take their evil days they had then in patience, and that he hoped
before long, to give them better days, in making them drink wine
instead of water they were then drinking, and immediately his Majesty
gave orders unto General Bannier, to command all the brigades to be in
readiness, with their arms, against the next orders: this command
given, some of the commanded men, that were under Sinclaire,
suspecting a storm, provided themselves of some ladders.

By five of the clock in the afternoon, his Majesty coming towards our
brigade, called for a Dutch captain under Hepburne's regiment named
Guntier, and desired him to put on a light corselet, with his sword
drawn in his hand, and to take a sergeant and twelve other good
fellows with him, and to wade through the graff, and then to ascend to
the top of the wall, and to see if men could be commodiously lodged,
betwixt the mud-wall of the town, and the stone-wall, and then to
retire so suddenly as they might, which being done, his Majesty
getting resolution, that there was room betwixt the two walls to lodge
men, the brigades being already in battle, they fall on at a call, the
captain being retired without hurt; wherupon his Majesty directed
Bannier and Hepburne with our brigade, to pass the graff, and to
storm; And if they repulsed the enemy from the outward wall, to lodge
under the stone wall, betwixt both the walls, and if the enemy
fortuned to retire to press in with him; the like orders given to the
rest of the brigades, all being in readiness, his Majesty having a
number of cannon great and small charged on the batteries, caused to
give notice at all posts, that when the cannon had discharged, the
first salvo in the midst of the smoke, they should advance to the
storm, as they did, where in passing the graff, we were over the
middle in water and mud, and ascending to storm the walls, there were
strong palisades, so well fastened and fixed in the wall, that if the
enemy had not retired from the walls in great fear, we could not, but
with great hazard, have entered.

The enemy feebly retiring, our commanders and leaders following their
orders received from his Majesty, we press to follow in after the
enemy, at a great sallying port, that was betwixt both the walls, that
opened with two great leaves, where they entered: after their retreat,
they planted a flake of small shot, that shot a dozen of shot at once;
besides which there were set two pieces of small ordnance, that
guarded also the entry, and musketirs besides, which made cruel, and
pitifull execution on our musketeers, and pikemen, the valorous
Hepburne, leading on the battle of pikes, of his own brigade, being
advanced within half a pike's length to the door, at the entry he was
shot above the knee, that he was lame of before, which dazling his
senses with great pain forced him to retire, who said to me, bully
Monro, I am shot, whereat I was wondrous sorry, his major then, a
resolute cavalier, advancing to enter was shot dead before the door,
whereupon the pikes falling back and standing still, General Banier
being by, and exhorting all cavaliers to enter, Colonel Lumsdell and
I, being both alike on the head of our own colours, he having a
Partizan in his hand, and I a half Pike, with a head-piece, that
covered my head, commanding our pikes to advance we lead on shoulder
to shoulder, Colonel Lumsdell and I fortunately without hurt, enter
the port, where at our entry some I know received their rest, and the
enemy forced to retire in confusion, being astonished at our entry,
they had neither wit nor courage, as to let down the portcullis of the
great port behind them, so that we entering the streets at their
heels, we made a stand till the body of our pikes were drawn up
orderly, and flanked with musketeers, and then we advanced our pikes
charged, and our musketeers giving fire on the flanks, till the enemy
was put in disorder.

After us entered General Banier, with a fresh body of musketeers, he
following the enemy in one street, and Lumsdell and I in another,
having rencountered the enemy again, they being well beaten, our
officers took nine colours of theirs, which were to be presented to
his Majesty, and the most part of the soldiers were cut off, in
revenge of their cruelty used at Neubrandenburg, but some of their
officers got quarters, such as they had given to ours.

This regiment defeated, we directed an officer with a strong party to
possess the bridge, and that to hinder their escape: their passage
being cut off, they were also cut down themselves, till the streets
were full of dead bodies, and that the most part of our soldiers and
officers disbanded to make booty, leaving me and a few number of
honest soldiers to guard my colours, which disorder, I confess, stood
not in my power to remedy. Thus far for Lumsdell's part and mine,
which I dare maintain to be truth.

And as I have spoken truth of our own actions, without ostentation,
which no man can controll that is friend to virtue: I will now relate
other men's actions, so far as I know to be truth by relation of my
honest comrades.

Lieutenant Colonel Musten, being appointed to command the musketeers
of Lumsdell's regiment, and of my Colonel's, then under my command he
seeing us entered did follow after us, and commanded those he led on
execution apart, giving no better quarters than we did. The Dutch also
remembering the enemies' cruelty used at Brandenburg, they gave but
slight quarters.

Major John Sinclaire, as I was credibly informed, being accompanied
with Lieutenant George Heatly, being both resolute and stout, were the
first that came over the walls with ladders, who at their first entry
having but a few musketeers with them, they were charged on the
streets by the enemies' cuirassiers, or best horsemen, where they were
forced to stand close, their backs to the wall where they entered, and
to give several salvos of Muskets upon the enemy, till they were made
to retire.

Likewise after we were entered, the yellow and the blue brigades,
being esteemed of all the army both resolute and courageous in all
their exploits; they were to enter on the Irish quarter, where they
were twice with great loss furiously beaten off, and were cruelly
spoiled with fireworks thrown by the Irish amongst them. But at last
they having entered, notwithstanding the inequality of their strength,
the Irish though weak stood to it, and fought with sword, and pikes
within works a long time, till the most part of the soldiers fell to
ground, where they stood fighting, so that in the end, Lieutenant
Colonel Walter Butler, who commanded the Irish, being shot in the arm,
and pierced with a pike through the thigh, was taken prisoner, so that
the next day, it was to be seen on the post where the best service was
done: and truly had all the rest stood so well to it, as the Irish
did, we had returned with great loss, and without victory.

The fury passed, the whole street being full of coaches and rusty
wagons richly furnished withal sorts of riches, as plate, jewels,
gold, money, clothes, mules and horses for saddle, coach and wagons,
whereof all men that were careless of their duties, were too careful
in making of booty, that I did never see officers less obeyed, and 
respected than here for a time, till the height of the market was
passed: and well I know, some regiments had not one man with their
colours, till the fury was passed, and some colours were lost the
whole night, till they were restored the next day, such disorder was
amongst us, all occasioned through covetousness, the root of all evil
and dishonesty.

At last the execution passed, his Majesty entered himself, being
guarded with the Rhinegrave, and his horsemen, who immediately were
commanded to cross the bridge, and to follow the enemy at their heels,
being on flight towards Glogau, where the Field Marshal Tuffenbacke,
the Count of Schonberg, and Mounte De Cuculé had retired with such as
escaped.

His Majesty having but scarce quartered in the town, the fire
beginning to burne the city accidentally; orders were given with
stroke of drum with a bank beaten in all streets, that all officers
and soldiers, under pain of death, should repair presently to their
colours, on the other side of the Oder, in the outer works, where Sir
John Hepburne was ordained to command within the works, except such as
were appointed to guard the ports of the town, his Majesty's quarter
and the generals lodging on the market place, where a strong guard was
kept to suppress plundering, and the insolency of soldiers.
Nevertheless these orders proclaimed and published, many disobeyed
remaining in the town for plundering.

In this conflict, the enemy lost near three thousand men, besides the 
officers that were killed (viz.) four Colonels, Herbenstine, Heydo,
Wallenstein and Ioure, and above thirty six officers were killed.

Likewise there were taken prisoners, Colonel Sparre with five
Lieutenant Colonel of Dutch and one Irish cavalier, that behaved
himself both honourably and well; colours also they did lose, as I did
see the next day made Count of before General Bannier, forty-one, and
cornets of horse nine.

On our side were lost also at least eight hundred men, whereof the
blue and yellow, for their parts, lost five hundred.

His Majesty also did get here a great deal of provision for the army,
as corn, ammunition, and eighteen pieces of ordnance.

The next day his Majesty appointed General Major Lesly as Governor
over the town, giving him orders to repair the ruinous works, and
walls, as also orders were given for burying of the dead, which were
not buried fully in six days, in th'end they were cast by heaps in
great ditches, above a hundred in every Grave.

The next day we were ordained to assemble our regiments, and to bring
them together in arms, that they might be provided of what they wanted
of arms, having lost many in their disorder.
The eighth Observation.

His Majesty going to rencounter his enemy, before his rising from his
royal leaguer at Schwedt, did wisely dispose of his army, in making it
into brigades, that coming unto the action, he should not need to
think on the theory, when it were time to practise, as many young
commanders are forced to do, beginning to learn of others, that which
is defective in themselves, who are to be pitied, that undertake to
lead others being ignorant themselves: but this wise general, at this
time, did not only order his army, as he would have them to stand in
battle, but also knowing the gifts, and several parts, his chief
officers of the field were endued with, he disposeth of them, in
appointing such places for them, in fighting against their enemies, as
did best befit their virtues, which all he knew before hand, partly by
his own experience, and partly, by enquiring of others, their
qualities and virtues.

Secundo, his Majesty doth forecast with himself, what the enemy, being
strong might intend against him, and accordingly, he foresaw wisely
how to prevent him, in dividing his army, by sending the Field Marshal
on the one side of the Oder with a part of his army, going himself on
the other, leaving the bridge and passage at Schwedt well fortified
and beset with soldiers, to the end, that which of both army's might
be constrained to retire over the bridge, being safe might then
conveniently join with the other.

As his Majesty was wise in foreseing what might happen, he was also
diligent, in taking time of his enemies on the sudden, before they
could come together; so that after this victory obtained, his Majesty
did not only get elbow room by the enemies removing over the Elbe and
the Oder; but also he did gain time to settle his affairs with the
princes; for those who would not before this victory, scarce keep
correspondence with his Majesty, afterwards his Majesty having freed
their country from their enemies, they were then content to entreat
for his friendship, by their ambassadors, and he like to a cunning
gamster, taking the ball at the right rebound, embraced their
friendship, and confederacy, having bound them  up, in a more strict
manner then before till in th'end, they were forced to dance after his
pipe.

Here likewise I did observe, that it is never good, to trust too much
unto our own strength, as our enemies did, who at their banqueting,
and inter pocula, before that the storm went on, though hearing the
noise of our cannon, they fell a laughing, as wondering what the
Swedens meant, thought they to fly over the walls, and granting he
could enter, were they not so strong as he? Many more idle discourses
they had,extolling themselves in their pride, boasting of their
strength and courage, not setting God before them, they disdained and
contemned their enemies, but suddenly in an instant they found their
own follies, being brought unto fear and astonishment, so that at
last, their wits confounded, and consequently their actions confused,
and their enemies, though weak instruments, by the power of the God of
armies were made strong and courageous, for punishing them in repaying
of their former barbarity, and cruelty used by them at Neubrandenburg,
where we see, the lord repayeth their wickedness, when they least
expected.

Tiffenbacke, the field marshal was much to blame for his command,
being so strong within the town as we were without, that he did not
adventure to fight us in the fields, or at least, to have tried our
conduct and valour, with a strong party: his not daring to adventure
with us made us the more courageous and resolute to seek him, though
with disadvantage, having once found him to be a timorous enemy,
keeping himself close within walls, for we know well, the greater his
strength was within, if once we entered, his confusion would be the
greater: for a multitude within a strength especially horsemen, many
servants and baggage breede ever confusion, for avoiding whereof, the
governor had the more reason to have tried us in the fields, whereby
he had encouraged his garrison, who seeing he durst adventure to meet
us without, being retired, they would not be afraid within walls.

So it is never good to resolve to be always the defender, but rather
according to the time, and circumstances, sometimes to try fortune, as
well by pursuing, as by defending, that our credit may not be called
in question, neither for too much slowness, nor for too much
forwardness, but still to press for the mediocrity, being the true
virtue of fortitude, without which no soldier can attain commendation,
if he do participate of either extremes, as this field marshal did,
staying within walls. Yet some, I know will object, that I ought
rather to praise the actions of the enemy, to make ours the more
glorious, to which I answer, ours at all times, as here, were so
splendid, that no Lustre could be added unto them, our leader Gustavus
being Illustrissimus himself, and the favourite of Fortune, to whom
all things succeeded fortunatly by taking of time, the most precious
of all things, especially in wars, which sometimes helps as much as
virtue itself.

The forwardness and courage of Major John Sinclaire, and of his
colleague, Lieutenant Heatly, is not to be over-passed, they being the
first gave good example to enter this town, in going over the walls
with ladders, with a weak party of fifty musketeers, that ventured to
follow them, which were hardly received by the enemies' horsemen,
nevertheless they valorously defended themselves, and made their
enemies to retire with loss, so  that, as my intention here, is not to
over-praise my friends virtue, I would not on the other part be silent
in giving them their due, answerable to their merits, and no more.

We see also by experience daily, that at all times, as here, no man
ever served God for nought, who rewardeth men, though not through
merit in respect of his God-head, of whom we can merit nothing, yet of
his infinite bounty is ever ready to reward them truly that do serve
him: his Majesty with his army having served God in the morning, at
night he was made victorious over his enemies.

And that his Majesty in the afternoon on the Sabboth pursued his
enemies, there was a necessity in it: General Tilly's army being on
their march for the relief of the town, his Majesty was forced to take
the opportunity of time, which once being past doth never return.

Here we may see the evil, that fear bringeth within a city or strength
causing disorder and confusion, but if all those within this town had
stood to their defence as Lieutenant Colonel Butler did and the Irish,
Frankfurt had not been taken.

Therefore, when resistance is not made, as it ought to be, the victory
is easily attained: for nothing encourageth more, then good example,
Et contra. And I did observe here, that no nation esteemed good
soldiers, are inferior to the Dutch in maintaining a storm, or in
extremity of danger, they being otherwise good soldiers for obedience
to command, in watches, marches, working about works, and in doing all
other duties befitting their profession, being in company of others.

Pike-men being resolute men, shall be ever my choice in going on
execution, as also in retiring honourably with disadvantage from an
enemy, especially against horsemen: and we see oft-times, as we found
here, that when musketeers do disbandon, of greediness to make booty,
the worthy pike-men remain standing firm with their officers, guarding
them and their colours, as being worthy the glorious name of brave
soldiers, preferring virtue before the love of gold, that vanisheth
while virtue remaineth.

This vice of avarice is alike common to the superior officer, and to
the inferior soldier, which oft-times makes the superior to be
despised as well by the common soldier, as by his betters: And
therefore public employments of command should never be given to such
greedy persons; for as sparing in a private person is commendable,
being done without hurt to another; even so the virtue of liberality
is due to him that is publicly employed: as also he ought to have
splendor in his carriage, and not to give evil example to others his
inferiors, if once he be honoured with command in leading of others. I
must then again condemn this kind of avarice, that makes men for booty
abandon their colours and their duty, they being the cause oft-times
of the overthrow of their worthy comrades standing to fight, when they
were employed in making of booty, for which many time, they are
contemned, and their money taken from them by the multitude, with
disgrace and danger of their lives: for though sometimes they make
booty, they have not the fortune to enjoy it one quarter of an hour,
thanking God to be rid of it with their lives, though not with their
credits.

It is the duty of valiant commanders, and of brave soldiers, when 
ever fire entereth into a city, strength or leaguer, suddenly with
their arms to repair to their colours, lest at such times, the enemy
being near [at] hand should be ready to take advantage: but here the
baser sort of soldiers, neither for obedience to his Majesty's
command, nor for love of their officers, nor of their own credits,
would stir to attend their colours, though the enemy had showed
himself to pursue the city.

Here also, the enemy was to blame, for leaving provision and
ammunition behind them, whose duty it was rather to destroy it by fire
or water, then to leave it to their enemies. But we see, there is no
counsel against the Lord invented by man, able to work, blessed be his
name for ever.



The ninth Duty discharged of the in-taking of Landsberg on the Warthe
by accord.

The fifth of April 1631, his Majesty having left Frankfurt on the Oder
well beset, under the command of General Major Lesly, who had
direction to see the fortifications repaired, as likewise, General
Bannier was left to command over the army, his Majesty having taken
two and twenty hundred commanded musketeers, eight hundred horsemen,
twelve piece of cannon great and small, with ammunition answerable,
with spades, shovels, and axes, where the Colonel of the artillery
called Leonard Richardson, was commanded to go with them for to attend
his charge: As also Colonel Hepburne was commanded to lead the party,
and I was sent as Lieutenant Colonel, to second him in this
employment. Colonel Hepburne having viewed the party, and taken notice
that all things were in good order, commanded the party to march,
having had a blacksmith, that dwelled at Landsberg, for our guide, we
continued our march, the first day, being come within four miles of
the town, we quartered at a pass on the highway, and the next morning
breaking up, we marched forwards, till on the way, our fore-troops did
meet with a regiment of Crabbats, where, after long skirmish and loss
sustained by both the parties, in th'end, the Colonel that led the
Crabbats being deadly wounded, retired to the town, casting off all
bridges behind them, which hindered us for a day.

The eight of April, we lay down before a skonce royal, built on a
strong pass, betwixt us and the town. This skonce well fortified was
well provided of cannon; It had also a wide graff of running water,
and a draw-bridge, which was taken up at our coming, and then they
discharged their cannon on us; where at first there were killed some
six soldiers: the night drawing on, our watches set forth, I was
appointed by his Majesty to be captain of the watch, being ordained to
oversee the making of the batteries: As also I was commanded to set
forwards our works, both for intrenching, and for running our lines of
approach to the skonce, wherein I was so busied, that the whole night
I went never off my feet, but from one part to another, having had
sundry alarms, though not of continuance.

His Majesty having taken quarters in the nearst dorp, he left two
rutters to attend on me, that if the enemy should fall out against us,
incontinent one of them might be sent to acquaint his Majesty, who
having rested for that night, coming before day to visit the works,
and finding them not so far advanced as he did expect, he falls a
chiding of me, notwithstanding of my diligence used the whole night,
in keeping the soldiers still at work, with the small number of
materials we had to work with. But no excuse, though true, would
mitigate his passion, till he had first considered on the
circumstances, and then he was sorry he had offended me without
reason. But his custom was so, that he was worse to be pleased in this
kind, than in any other his commands; being ever impatient, when works
were not advanced to his mind, and the truth is, our country soldiers
cannot endure to work like the Dutch; neither when they have taken
pains, can they work so formally as others.

Our batteries being ready against the morning, the whole day our
cannon played on the skonce so fast, as they could be charged, but to
no purpose, the earthen wall being so thick and so well set together,
that they scorned us and our cannon both.

His Majesty seeing nothing to be effectuated this way, resolved to try
a second way, by the advice of the blacksmith, that knew all the
passages towards the town, notwithstanding that the whole land on that
side was covered over with water: This blacksmith advised his Majesty,
to cause a Float-bridge to be made, and then setting over the water,
he would lead us through shallow passes, where we might come behind
the skonce, cutting off their passage from the town, and then the
skonce wanting relief might be ours.

according to this plot, his Majesty commanded Lieutenant Colonel
Dowbatle, with two hundred and fifty dragoniers for foot, and me with
two hundred and fifty musketeers to follow the blacksmith, and to
surprise the enemies' guard, which being done by us, we were commanded
to make the place good, till Colonel Hepburne with a thousand
musketeers should be sent after to second us, Dowbatle and I having
fortunately surprised the guard, making them retire to the town,
leaving the skonce in our power; Colonel Hepburne being advanced
towards the skonce, took it in on accord, and the soldiers were made
to take service, and their officers made prisoners.

In this time Dowbatle his dragoniers having followed the enemy with
hot skirmish within shot of their walls, his powder being spent,
desired I should fall on and relieve him and his, as I did, continuing
the service till we made the enemy retire over a bridge that was hard
by the town, so that I was forced, for our own safeties, having lost
divers soldiers, that were killed with the cannon, to divide my
soldiers, making the half of them to cast up a running trench, while
as the rest were hot skirmishing with the enemy, being in danger of
both cannon and musket, but my soldiers once getting in the ground, we
fortified ourselves against their cannon, and resolved in case of
their out falling, to maintain the ground we had formerly won, with
the loss of our blood, having lost in one half hour above thirty
soldiers, whereof six were killed with the cannon.

The enemy finding the skonce was lost, and us so far advanced on the
strongest side: Field-marshal Horne with his forces marching on the
other side that was weakest, they presently did send a drummer on our
side to parley for quarters, whom I received, and being hood-wink't,
he was sent with a convoy to his Majesty, who condescended to the
treaty, and pledges being delivered, the treaty went on; the accord
subscribed, his Majesty came and thanked Dowbatle and us, for our good
service, where large promises were made unto us of reward, and to
Colonel Hepburne also, for taking in of the skonce.

The enemy being strong in the town, and above twice our strength, his
Majesty resolved to send to Frankfurt for more forces, both of horse
and foot, to come to him before the enemy was suffered to march out of
the town, to whom conditions were granted to transport four pieces of
ordnance, and the soldiers to march out with full arms, bag and
baggage, with drums beating, and flying colours, and a convoy of
horsemen towards Glogau.

His Majesty having beset the garrison, as soon as they marched out,
having seen their strength, we were ashamed of their carriage, being
the eldest troops, and the choice, by report, of the whole Imperial
army, who cowardly did give over such a strong town, being without
necessity, and in hope of relief.

One of my Captains called Dumaine, having contracted a fever here
before Landsberg, being removed to Frankfurt died there, and being
buried, my Lieutenant David Monro was preferred to be captain of his
company, and Ensign Burton was made lieutenant, and Bullion his
brother having taken his pass, my sergeant Andrew Rosse was made
ensign to Captain David, and William Bruntfield was preferred to be my
lieutenant, and Mongo Gray Ensign.

This town being taken, both Pomerania and the Marks of Brandenburg
were cleared of the Imperialists, being sent up unto Silesia.

The next Sabbath, his Majesty, that was ever ready to reward good
servants for virtue, he caused to make our guide the blacksmith (being
a stout fellow and a crafty) Burgo-master of the town, who did get
from his Majesty two hundred ducats besides.

His Majesty on the Sabbath day in the afternoon suffered the principal
officers of his army (such as General Banier, and Lieutenant General
Bawtis, and divers others) to make merry, though his Majesty did drink
none himself; for his custom was never to drink much, but very seldom,
and upon very rare considerations, where sure he had some other plot
to effectuate, that concerned his advancement, and the weal of his
State.

The ninth Observation.

This town of Landsberg being a Frontier garrison lying near the
borders of Poland on the Warthe, the having of it made Pomerania sure,
and the Mark, giving unto his Majesty the freer passage unto Silesia;
and therefore it was that his Majesty did use the greater diligence
and celerity in obtaining of it, with as great honour and reputation,
as could be imagined, in respect of the inequality of strength betwixt
us and our enemies: As also in consideration of the situation of the
place, being on the one side fortified  by nature, yet beyond nature
and probability of reason. This strong garrison was forced to yield to
Gustavus, who was Mars his minion, and Fortune's favourite, or rather
their master, as we see by his frequent victories obtained against his
enemies, who, though strongest, are made to submit to the weakest
party, where we may see, that as industry is fruitful, so there is a
kind of a good angel, as it were waiting ever upon diligence, carrying
a laurel in his hand, to crown her. And therefore it was, that they
said of old, that Fortune should not be prayed unto, but with hands in
motion, which made this valiant king love ever to be busied in
virtue's exercise, befitting a general, that carried a mind as this
invincible king did, while he lived, still rising to blessedness and
contentation.

It is commonly seen, that those who fear least are commonly overcome,
as became of Frankfurt on the Oder, and this town also: and though
victory we see be from God, yet to overcome an enemy, the courage and
skill of commanders is very requisite and necessary. And where good
military discipline is observed, as was done here; there confidence
doth arise, persuading us, we can do what we please. Of this opinion
was our leader, and our army never doubted of their own valour, nor of
their leader's good conduct, which made our victories the easier to be
gotten.

Here also we see the goodness of intelligence; for had his Majesty not
gotten the blacksmith, or some other like unto him, to have been
intelligencer and guide to win through the shallow trinkets he led us,
to the dam upon the head of their watch, who were surprised; hardly
could we have overcome this town, on such a sudden, for without this
good of intelligence, which is so necessary, and of so great a moment
in wars, nothing, or very little can be effectuated in unknown places.
For good intelligencers are so requisite in an army, that no means
ought to be spared on them, providing they be trusty: for one design
or secret of our enemies well known, may bring all the rest we desire
to a wished end, or at least, preserve us and ours from danger. This
blacksmith, that was our guide in leading us towards our enemy, at our
first on-going on service, the enemy playing hard with muskets,
nevertheless he went on without fear, undertaking alike danger with
ourselves, but finding in time of hot service some falling besides
him, our powder being a little wet, and not giving so good report as
the enemies did, he then said, he would return to his Majesty, and
send us better powder, yet I think, though here there did appear some
lack of constant resolution in him, that time, exercise, and frequency
of danger would make him a brave fellow, being of a strong and a good
able body, but in my opinion, the stoutest of men, till they be a
little acquainted with the furious noise of the cannon, will naturally
fear and stoop at the first.

Likewise his Majesty was to be commended for his diligence by night
and by day, in setting forwards his works; for he was ever out of
patience, till once they were done, that he might see his soldiers
secured and guarded from their enemies; for when he was weakest, he
digged most in the ground; for in one year what at Schwedt, Frankfurt,
Landsberg, Brandenburg, Werben, Tangermuende, Wittenberg, and
Wuerzburg, he caused his soldiers to work more for nothing, than the
States of Holland could get wrought in three years, though they should
bestow every year a ton of gold: and this he did, not only to secure
his soldiers from the enemy, but also to keep them from idleness. When
they were not employed on service, they were kept by good discipline
in awe and obedience, and that with as great moderation, love and
discretion as could be.

And his Majesty knew well, that our nation was of that nature, that
they could take to heart the austere carriage of their commanders,
were they never so good. For while as sometimes, through his Majesty's
impatiency, he would cause to imprison some of our countrymen, without
solicitation, his Majesty was ever the first did mind their liberties;
for he knew their stomachs were so great, that they would burst or
starve in prison, before they would acknowledge an error committed
against their master, except it were of negligence.

Moreover, nothing can more discourage a city, fort, or strength, that
is beleaguered, than when they see their secrets discovered, and their
passages from relief cut off; as it was seen of those that yielded up
the skonce to Sir John Hepburne, being contented to come in the
colonel's mercy, seeing themselves barred from all relief.

Likewise the duty of leaders, that lead men on service, ought to be
limited with discretion, and not to advance further than with
conveniency they may retire again, if need be, left by too far
advancing, they not only endanger themselves, but also engage others,
for their reliefs, to endanger all: and a fault committed in this
kind, through too much forwardness, merits a harder censure, than
remissness with discretion, seeing in the latter, a man is but
censured alone, but committing the former error, he loseth himself and
others.

Here also we found by experience, that the spade and the shovel are
ever good companions in danger, without which, we had lost the
greatest part of our followers. Therefore in all occasions of service,
a little advantage of ground is ever profitable against horse, foot,
or cannon. And for this it was, that the best commanders made ever
most use of the spade and the shovel, and that in such ground as was
found most commodious for their safeties.

We see also here his Majesty's disposition in entertaining his
officers kindly after victory, esteeming them not as servants, but as
companions in his mirth, as a wise master ought and should do to those
he finds obedient to his commandments, encouraging them another time
to undergo any service or danger for his sake, that was so kind and
familiar with them, joining their hearts as well with his love, as
with his bounty; for he knew well nothing was more able to bring
victory next under God, than good commanders: As also his Majesty
knew, that to be courteous unto his officers was the way to triumph
over his enemies.



The tenth Duty discharged of our March to Berlin, and from thence to
Spandau, and back to Bernau.

The eighteenth of April 1631, the enemy being marched out of Landsberg
towards Glogow, his Majesty having beset Landsberg with a garrison, we
marched back to Frankfurt on the Oder, where we did rest us with the
army till the twenty-ninth of April, during which time, there were
ambassadors going mutually betwixt his Majesty and the Duke of
Brandenburg: at last having condescended on some points, his Majesty
broke up with the army, and marched towards Berlin, and were quartered
by the way at a pass called Pankow, being one of the Duke of
Brandenburg's hunting houses, and from thence we marched to Berlin,
where his Majesty was royally entertained by the Duke, and that his
Majesty might think he was welcome, after the feast the castle of
Spandau was delivered in his Majesty's custody, where incontinent
Colonel Axellille, with four hundred Swedes were left in garrison,
being a strength one of the fastest in Germany, fortified well with
fosses and counterscarps of free stone, and an earthen wall above,
having one hundred and fifty pieces of cannon on it, and arms for
twenty thousand foot and horse, with ammunition answerable; Provided
also sufficiently with store of victuals for an army of ten thousand
men for a long space: and though the garrison were Swedes, they were
sworn to obey the Duke; and his Majesty was obliged by his royal word
passed to the Duke, to restore it again whenever the Duke desired to
have it, if the Duke of Saxony should not join with his Majesty
against the Emperor.

The third day after the agreement, the whole army broke up, and
marched to another pass, three miles from Spandau, called Potsdam,
where we lay not intrenched the space of ten days, till his Majesty's
ambassadors were returned from the Duke of Saxony, with an answer,
that the Duke would not assist his Majesty for the relief of
Magdeburg, neither yet would the Duke grant to his Majesty free
passage through his country, which was the loss of many poor souls
within Magdeburg, being cut off by the cruelty of General Tilly's
army, having surprised the town that was never taken before, sparing
neither man, woman nor child, but putting all alike cruelly to death,
and in the end, the town was burnt down, which was occasioned by the
breach of the Duke's promise, in not assisting his Majesty of Sweden,
being on his march to relieve it.

His Majesty not assured of the Duke of Brandenburg behind him, our
army turning faces about, we marched back to Spandau, and lay down in
the fields in order of battle, where we remained certain days, till
such time as it behoved his Majesty, for keeping of his royal word, to
restore back to the Duke the castle of Spandau, and his Majesty's
garrison being brought out, it was manned again by the Duke's forces.

The castle restored, his Majesty was so incensed against the Duke,
though his own brother-in-law, that he swore to take in Berlin, which
was the Duke's residence; as also he was resolved to take the Duke
prisoner, except he would join in confederacy with him, without the
Duke of Saxony; whereupon our army did break up, and marched towards
Berlin in hostile manner, and lying down before it, the Duke not able
to resist, entered in a treaty with his Majesty, and to move his
Majesty the more, the Duchess and her mother with a train of great 
ladies, came to the fields to entertain his Majesty, with offering in
the Duke's name all due respect to his Majesty, and promising all
things should be done by the Duke, what his Majesty would desire. To
which his Majesty answered merrily, that if the Duke would not end
with him friendly before night, he would send the Duchess and all the
ladies prisoners to Sweden, and the Duke should follow.

Incontinent the treaty begun; the Duke getting short time to resolve,
was forced to end with his Majesty, and to join in confederacy with
him, offensive and defensive, against the Emperor, and that without
the Saxons' consent: and in the treaty it was concluded, the Duke
should give a great supply of men, moneys and artillery to his
Majesty, for the advancing of the wars, besides the ordinary
inquartering of his Majesty's army; and the payments of the monthly
contribution, out of the Duke's lands was also agreed upon, and
commissioners were appointed, for the ingathering of the first term's
contribution: during which collection, his Majesty's army was laid in
quarters to refresh them, till his Majesty should retire from Stettin,
being gone thither to give presence to the Russian ambassador, and his
Majesty being returned from Stettin the twenty ninth of June he
quartered in my quarters in Bernau, where we had orders given us to be
in readiness to march to old Brandenburg on the first of July.

The tenth Observation.

HIS Majesty could never be assured of the Prince's friendship, till
first he had forced their enemies to give ground, being made to leave
behind them Pomeranian Mecklenburg, and the three marks of
Brandenburg, without any Imperial garrison, except one was left in
Greifswald, but so soon as the Duke of Brandenburg did see the enemy
retiring, and his Majesty prevailing, he then begun to enter in
treaty, and to give his Majesty assurance of his loyal friendship, by
subscribing of certain articles condescended upon betwixt them, at
Berlin in June 1631.

On this march, though short, we had many variable resolutions and
changes, which were caused by the changable accidents happening in the
course of this war, which made his Majesty's resolutions to vary, as
the time changed, sometimes through fear of his strong enemy,
sometimes by suspecting the Princes, who were also affrighted and
feared, being astonished in their minds, they were not able to discern
what was most profitable for them, so that their doubting and fear
suffered them not to hazard any notable thing, in assisting his
Majesty against their common enemy; but still lingered to join with
his Majesty, expecting the enemy would prevail, and then they would
join with the master of the fields, as ordinarily is done over all
Dutchland in all degrees, from the highest to the lowest, they wagge
as the bush doth resolving ever to quit their best friends in
adversity.

Here we see the inconstancy of the Duke's friendship, that will not be
friends as well in adversity, as in prosperity: for when fortune
favours us; all the world would seem to laugh on us; but when we are
but once kicked in the heel with any malignant chance of misfortune,
then our supposed friends fly from us, at a far distance, while they
see us like to be tossed by the tempest of adversity. But as soon as
they see the tempest over-passed, and fortune beginning to smile on us
again, then begin they (as the Princes did) to return, and to desire
to be made partakers of our good fortunes, though they had no mind to
taste of the bitter cup of his Majesty's adversity; but once seeing
the sweet commodity of the peace, which they, their country and
subjects did reap by his Majesty's valour (with the hazard of his
person, and the lives of many cavaliers who followed him) then their
enemies being far removed from them, they desire his Majesty for their
Admiral, to attend when he makes sail, having seen he did valiantly
ride out the storm, promising again when his sails were full, to bide
by him; and to follow him till death should sunder them. But if they
had been generously minded, they had embraced the danger, and taken
part with his Majesty when honour was to be got, in the midst of
greatest danger; since common danger doth conjoin the coldest friends,
to go together against their common enemies. Likewise here we may see
and observe a royal King most loyal in keeping his princely parole and
promise to the Duke his brother, in rendering back Spandau, though to
his disadvantage, keeping his covenant, albeit he should lose thereby,
teaching, by his own example, all cavaliers to keep their word, though
given to their enemies. For his Majesty knew well, that nothing was to
be thought more unworthy in a prince or common-weal, then to break
word or promise; for of all virtues in a prince truth is the chiefest,
which once being lost returns not again.

His Majesty taking to heart, that the Duke had so peremptorily sought
the restitution of this strength, his Majesty being free of his word,
and his garrison marched forth, he incontinent marched to Berlin, and
got both the Duke and the city into his power, in interchange of the
castle of Spandau, which then his Majesty knew how to get again, as he
did shortly after. Where we may see, there is no oratory of such force
to gain both men and women, as a strong well conducted army, as this
was.

Here also we may see, what evil oft-times doth happen by cunctation,
or delays, as doth witness the overthrow and ruin of Magdeburg, the
citizens whereof, in their prosperity, would not suffer a soldier to
enter into their houses, but made them build huts and tents along the
wall; which wall, for their pride, was alike brought low with the
ground, where before their death for their pride they were punished
with fire and sword, so that they having disdained soldiers, they were
by the enemies' soldiers justly rewarded, being denied of mercy in
their greatest extremity, and the houses, they so much esteemed of,
cannot this day be seen, what for houses they were, and his Majesty
his wisdom is commendable, who seeing Magdeburg lost, the enemy
strong, the Dukes wavering, contrary to his mind and custom, his
Majesty retired with his army back to Spandau, and from thence to
Berlin, making himself sure of the one, though not of the other,
leaping the dike where he found it weakest, and missing to catch a
goose, he thought it sure to catch the goslings, though he was his
good brother, he did look to his own standing, fearing General Tilly
and the Saxon might join together, not being far different in
conditions, to make his retreat sure, his Majesty did beset Spandau
again with a Swedens garrison.

At this time a great number of Hamburg merchants, amongst which were
some English, going by the army with great packs, were seized upon,
and their goods taken from them, whereof his Majesty being made
foreseen, orders were given, that the whole packs, under pain of
death, should be brought to his Majesty, as they were, our army being
very hungry, and almost brought to discontent, for lack of moneys, his
Majesty in a fair way, was content to restore the Hamburgers' goods,
providing the merchants amongst them would advance upon bond and
surety, to his Majesty two hundred thousand dollars, to give some
contentment to his hungry army, which the merchants condescended unto
& advanced the money, wherof the English advanced no part:
Nevertheless they had favor showed unto then, in the restitution of
their goods, by the request of the cavaliers (who interceded for them
to his Majesty) their countrymen both Scots & English.

This kind of favour shown to merchants by soldiers occurrs not often:
for sometimes the soldiers (the worst sort of them) measured the packs
belonging to the merchants with the long ell, and if this sort of
dealing should but only happen to the churlish merchant, it were the
less to be regarded; but honest soldiers should be ever honest in
their dealings towards the rank merchants, that have worth and
discretion to respect cavaliers being in need, and common soldiers
also, as I have known by experience some worthy English merchants to
have done worthily, in relieving the necessities of the common
soldiers of their countrymen, and therefore in my esteem, of all
nations, for their charity, they do best merit the name of gentlemen
merchants.

We see also here, that notwithstanding of the terms his Majesty did
stand unto with the Duke of Saxony, and with Tilly, who might have
come to have made a visit in Brandenburg his lands, where our army
were laid in quarters: Nevertheless, his Majesty was not afraid to
leave his army, and to return to Stettin to give presence to the
Russian ambassador, and to dispatch him; being alike ready to govern
the affairs of the state, as he was to fight against his enemies, he
stayed not long, but having recollected his forces, that were come
from Sweden, Prussia and Scotland; giving them orders to march to old
Brandenburg, his Majesty getting intelligence Tilly was gone from
Hessen, he then begun to make the best use of the time.



The eleventh Duty discharged of our March to old Brandenburg.

The first of July, the Swedens of Axellile his regiment, that lay in
Bernau, and we did break up, having got orders to march to old
Brandenburg, being appointed then for the General rendezvous of our
army to come together at. This Bernau is a town in the Mark of
Brandenburg, renowned of old, for brewing of good beer, which during
our residence there with the Swedes, we did merrily try, till that we
had both quarrelling and swaggering amongst ourselves, who before our
departure again were made good friends, reserving our enmity, till we
saw our common enemy, and so we marched together following our orders
towards old Brandenburg, taking but easy marches, being without fear
of an enemy, and being tied to no particular diet, we took quarters,
where we found the best entertainment to be, either in dorp or town.

Notwithstanding our easy march and good quarters, there were some
under both the regiments unworthy the name of good soldiers, who in
their march leaving their colours, and staying behind did plunder, and
oppress the boors, for remedy whereof, the soldiers being complained
on, accused and convicted, they were made, for punishment to suffer
gatlop, where they were well whipped for their insolency.

Likewise on this march, some of our soldiers in their ranks, their
colours flying, did beat one another, for which oversight I did
cashier a sergeant, after I had cut him over the head, for suffering
such abuse to have been done in his presence, where such insurrection,
amongst soldiers being in their arms, might have brought the whole
regiment into factions, where I alone was too weak, for all my
authority, to command them asunder. And therefore such faults ought
ever to be suppressed at first, and to be stilled by any officer, that
chanceth to be nearest him, who did give the first evil example.

Having marched three days, the fourth we arrived at Brandenburg, the
pest raging in extremity of the heat in the city, we were commanded to
quarter without in the fields, and presently there was a certain
quantity of the works about the leaguer appointed for us, within four
days to complete and make ready: during which time, Robert Monro Furer
to Captain Hector his colours, died of the pest, and was much
regrated, being a youth of good hopes.

Here also did die of the plague, Segeant Robert Monro, Cull-crags son,
and Andrew Monro was executed at Stettin, for having, contrary to his
Majesty's articles and discipline of war, beaten a burgher in the
night within his own house, for whose life there was much solicitation
made by the Duchess of Pomerania, and sundry noble ladies, but all in
vain, yet to be lamented, since divers times before he had given proof
of his valour, especially at the siege of Stralsund in his Majesty's
service of Denmark, where he was made lame of the left arm, who being
young was well bred by his parents at home, and abroad in France,
though it was his misfortune to have suffered an examplary death, for
such an oversight committed through sudden passion, being Summum jus,
in respect that the party had forgiven the fault, but the governor,
being a churlish Swede, would not remit the satisfaction due to his
Majesty and justice.

The eleventh Observation.

This regiment in nine years time, under his Majesty of Denmark, and in
Dutchland, had ever good luck to get good quarters, where they did get
much good wine, and great quantity of good beer, beginning first with
Hamburg beer in Holstein, and after that in Denmark they had plenty of
Rostock beer, and now at Bernau, and thereafter they tasted the good
Calvinists beer at Zerbst, and our march continuing out of low
Germany, towards the upper Circles of the Empire, as in Franconia,
Swabland, Alsace and the Pfalz, they were oft merry with the fruits
and juice of the best berries that grew in those circles, for to my
knowledge, they never suffered either penury or want, I being the
leader, but oft-times I did complain and grieve at their plenty,
seeing they were better to be commanded, when they drank water, then
when they got too much beer or wine. But my choice of all beers is
Zerbster beer, being the wholesomest for the body, and clearst from
all filth or barm, as their Religion  is best for the soul, and
clearst from the dregs of superstition.

Being once at dinner with the Rex Chancellor of Sweden, having drunk
good Zerbster beer, he asked me what I thought of that beer; I
answered it pleased my taste well, he replied merrily, no wonder it
taste well to your palate, being it is the good beer of your ill
religion. I asked his Excellence how the good wine on the Rhine would
taste at Mainz, being the good wine of a worse religion; he answered,
he liked the wine and the beer better than both the Religions. But I
said, to be his excellence's neighbour, near Mainz in the Pfalz, at
Kreuznach, I would be content to keep mine own religion, and to drink
good Rhinish wine for my life time.

Nothing is more necessary on a march, then to keep good discipline,
without which there is no order, nor fear of God amongst officers,
that will suffer their soldiers to grind the faces of the poor by
oppression, from whence oft-times doth come the unfortunate, and
unhappy events of warlike enterprises and expeditions: for where the
fear of God is taken away, there the common-weal must needs decay, and
then the ruin of the people doth follow.

Likewise we see here, that all that come to the wars, (as many foolish
men do think) are not killed, but some die, through one kind of death,
and some by another; so that we ought ever be prepared and ready, not
knowing how, when, or where to die. Happy then is that man that is
prepared to die, as if he should die to morrow; for many have I seen
rise well in the morning (the time of these wars) who went not to bed
at night. Our care then should be still, to meditate on the end, that
it may be good, and then doubtless we shall die well.

The infection being great at this time, in Brandenburg I contracted a
sudden fit of sickness, that was vehement, and therefore did not
continue above forty-eight hours: It was so vehement, that if I had
not suddenly overcome it, doubtless it had overcome me, but praised be
God, then I banished death by imagination, as I did divers times
before, yet at last, I know he will have about with me, but my
confidence is, that by the help of the Conqueror I will overcome him
in th'end, as my captain and leader hath done, who is gone before me,
and opened a door to me to enter at, where I may sing triumphing over
my enemies, with those that follow the lamb in the Communion of the
Saints blessed for ever.



The twelfth Duty discharged of our March from Brandenburg over the
Elbe at Tangermuende and from thence to Werben.

IN the midst of July our army did break up from Brandenburg, and
marched towards Rathenow, the imperialists having left it, being
marched towards Tangermuende, his Majesty advanced with the commanded
musketeers, and a strong party of horse, who having set through the
river of the Elbe, they surprised the enemy at Werben, where a
Lieutenant  Colonel was taken prisoner, and then after Colonel
Dowbatle with his dragoniers did take in by surprise also
Tangermuende, before his Majesty was come with the party, and being
come, immediately he caused to set over the river a ship-bridge, which
was fortified before the entry; over which our foot army did pass, and
our horse with the cannon, ammunition and baggage, did wade through
the river, where never one was seen to pass with cannon before, so
that without impediment our cannon and baggage for the most part, came
safely through, but those wagons that were lightest, being loaden with
boors' trash, as it came lightly, so it went lightly with the stream.
Et meritò.

The Imperialists at Barleben, hearing we had crossed the Elbe, took
them to their flight, to provide betimes for their winter quarters;
Wolmerstat also was taken by a weak party of our horsemen; having
heard our army had crossed the river of the Elbe, such a fear came
among them, that they never looked behind them, but still fled,
directing post upon post to General Tilly to retire back from
Thuringia, being minded unto Hessen, who receiving news of his
Majesty's crossing the Elbe, he turning faces about, with his whole
army continued his expedition backward to find us at Werben, before we
could be entrenched, as he thought.

But where he did but march with his army in the day time, we with
spades and shovels, wrought ourselves night and day in the ground, so
that, before his coming, we had put ourselves out of danger of his
cannon.

General Bannier, with the rest of our army coming after us, took in
Havelberg in his way, and beset it with a strong garrison, where
General Major Kagg did command, to whom was conjoined my cousin Fowles
his regiment, after he had taken the castle of Bloe in Mecklenburg in
his march, with his own regiment alone, where they made good booty,
but their soldiers got but sleight quarters, as Bannier did give at
the in-taking of this town and castle of Havelberg.

The twelfth Observation.

AT this time I did remark the great, wonderful, rare and extraordinary
mercy of God towards our leader the King's Majesty, and his royal
little army, which, before our removing from old Brandenburg, was much
infected with the plague of pestilence, so that we knew not the sick
from the whole: for of our regiment alone, there died in one week,
above thirty soldiers, and being but removed six days, at our down-
lying at Werben, we scarce knew there was any infection amongst us, so
that in a months time, we were miraculously rid of it, and for mine
own part, I neither know, nor can conjecture any reason for it
(chiefly being in the dog days, and in a leaguer) but the Lord's mercy
towards his Majesty and his army, being at this time, far inferior in
strength to our enemies.

Many examples and testimonies of God's favour towards his Majesty I
did observe on this march: for such terror was put in their hearts, by
his Majesty's victory obtained at Frankfurt and Landsberg, that they
fled, where once they did hear of our coming, being persuaded and
informed by their consciences, that, if his Majesty were victorious,
they should get no better  quarters, than were given by them at
Magdeburg, which made them quit strong garrisons, before they would
attend or abide the danger.

Wherefore we may plainly conclude, that they do not merit the name of
soldiers, nor yet the title of courageous commanders, that did succumb
before they saw or felt the dint of their enemies valour. Fie then on
such commanders! If they were of my friends, I would allow them a pin
higher on the gallows, then is allowed for common offences: for such
cullions that quit places for fear, not seeing their enemies, are
unworthy the name of soldiers; but I think they were too rich, and
consequently, they grew too feeble.

Likewise here I did rejoice, and was glad, when I did observe that it
is not, nor was not peculiar to any still to have overcome, or to be
victorious: the Imperialists, I know by experience, and so did the
regiment I commanded, had their time of the victory against the King
of Denmark (where I did learn to make a retreat) but now being come
under another leader, there fortune began to change and to retire from
us, we learning under the invincible Gustavus, to advance orderly,
never falling off, but ever keeping faces to our enemy, a brave lesson
learned from a brave commander. So that we see here, victory keeps no
constant dwelling, being now here, now there, yet we see, that it is
best kept with counsel and virtue, neither can I think, but fortune,
and chance hath a great hand in it, for it is a greater matter to use
victory well, then to overcome, and all victors have an insatiable
desire of their prosperous fortune, never appointing an end to their
desires; And nothing brings victory more, next unto God, then good
commanders, whereof King Gustavus the invincible had many.

Here also at the in-taking of Havelberg, General Bannier did well in
giving the soldiers some liberty of booty: to the end they might prove
the more resolute another time, for soldiers will not refuse to
undergo any hazard, when they see their officers willing to reward
them with honour and profit.



The thirteenth Duty discharged at our royal leaguer of Werben on the
Elbe against General Tilly his army.

About the midst of July 1631 his Majesty's forces being come together
of horse and foot, he did resolve to set down his leaguer at Werben on
the Elbe, where the river of the Havel enters into it, and spying a
parcel of ground, the most commodious that could be had, for
situation, and air, having first the commodity of transportation by
water, on the River of the Havel running into the Elbe at the leaguer,
whereon all provisions could be brought for maintaining of his army;
He had also the whole country on the other side of the Elbe, behind
him as his friends.

This leaguer lay along the side of the River on a plain meadow, being 
guarded by the River on one side, and the foreside was guarded by a
long earthen Dike, which of old was made to hold off the River from
the Land, which Dike his Majesty made use of, dividing it by skonces
and redoubts, which defended one another with flankering, having
batteries and cannon set within them, alongst the whole leaguer: he
did also set over the river a ship-bridge, for his retreat in need, as
also for bringing commodiously of provision and succours, from the
country, and garrisons on the other side, as Havelberg, Rathenow,
Perleberg, and others.

In like manner his Majesty did fortify the town of Werben for his
magazine, being close to the leaguer, with works about it, which
defended the leaguer, and the leaguer-works were made to defend the
town also, so that they could relieve one another being in most
distress, and both the town-wall and leaguer-wall, were so thick and
firm of old earth, faced up with new, that no cartow could enter into
it. The bulwarks on which the batteries were made for the cannon, were
also very strong and formally built, and they flankered one another,
so that none could find but folly in pressing to enter by storm; And
betwixt the flankerens were left voids, for letting troops of horse in
and out, with slaught-booms before them, where strong guards were kept
for defending the passage.

And on the one side of this leaguer were planted above one hundred and
fifty pieces of cannon, great and small, besides those that were
planted on the town works, and our whole horsemen were quartered
within the leaguer.

The manner we were ordained to watch this leaguer, every brigade of
foot had such a portion of the leaguer appointed for them to watch and
maintain by fight, in case of a storm, which part they had fortified
themselves, and brigades of horse were ordained to attend particularly
on a foot brigade, to second them, if that the enemy, at a storm,
should beat the foot back from their posts, then the horse brigade was
ready to charge, till the foot might be recollected by the diligence
and valour of their officers: for besides the watch ordinary on the
posts, the whole brigades of foot stood in readiness at all alarms
behind the guard, and the horse brigades did stand in battle behind
them. Likewise without the leaguer, there were squadrons of our
horsemen to stand in readiness at one end, that while as the enemies
foot should march on to the storm, our horsemen might charge through
to the end of the leaguer, where they were to be received again within
the leaguer, being hardly followed, so that the judicious reader can
easily judge, what a difficulty it was to storm such a leaguer.

Being thus provided to welcome our enemy, his Majesty hearing of his
enemies' near approach with a strong army, his Majesty did resolve
like a wise General to try his enemies' courage in the Field, before
they should come near to discourage his little army. And therefore his
Majesty commanded out a strong party of two thousand musketeers, and a
thousand horse, which party he did lead himself, and finding by his
intelligence Tilly's army were advanced so far, as to Wolmerstat, his
Majesty ante omnia, called in unto the leaguer all the garrisons,
which were without on that side of the river, whereon the enemy did
march, and getting good intelligence of the enemies' fore-troops,
being four regiments of horse, the best of Tilly's army (viz.) Colonel
Harmsteans his regiment of cuirassiers, Mounte Cuculie's regiment,
Holk's regiment of cuirassiers, and Corramino his regiment, which were
all about forty two cornets of cuirassiers, being quartered beside
Tangermuende, not knowing how near they were come unto the valiant
Gustavus, that, though a King, would not stand on a ceremony, to make
the first visit unto such valourous cavaliers of their worths, and to
make his Majesty's visit the more graceful (though less acceptable 
well I wot) he did send the Rhinegrave and Colonel Collenbagh, with
five hundred dragoniers, and their own two regiments of horse, to
salute them at their quarter in his Majesty's name, honouring them
first with a salvo of muskets, lest they should think it discourtesy,
to have come unto them without sending before, which being mistaken by
the enemy, the skirmish went on, Colonel Harmstean was killed, Holke
and Cornel Corramino fled, so that the enemies' fore-troops were
driven to confusion, having lost twenty-nine cornets, the troops
whereof were defeated and ruined, so that our horsemen did make good
booty, having gotten horses, and a great deal of riches. The enemy in
this conflict did lose above a thousand men, and his Majesty's loss
was great also, having lost his own sisters son, the young Rhinegrave,
being killed on his first exploit, being the seventeenth of July; the
cavalier's death was much regrated by his Majesty and the whole army,
but the exploit ended, his Majesty did retire towards the leaguer,
having left some officers and horsemen, that had followed in the
flight General Tilly, and Colonel Holke, dogging them to their
quarters, where both hardly escaped untaken. The Swedens disappointed
of their onslaught, retired after his Majesty to their leaguer, and
having put a terror in the enemies' army, by this defeat; he did get
four days longer continuation, to put all things in good order against
their coming; during which time, the enemy was busied in recollecting
of his scattered troops, and in putting his army in good order,
forgetting of his revenge.

His Majesty as soon as he came back, did send incontinent orders to
all the chief officers of the army, to come instantly to his tent,
where being come, he asked their advice, whether it were best, the
enemy being strong, timely to retire over the Elbe, or that he should
bide their coming before the leaguer, and finding no man to answer
him, all turning it over upon himself, being wise, knowing that
counsel would be allowed of by a King, but according to event; but his
Majesty perceiving their intentions, he resolved to abide the enemies'
coming, whatever might follow, and instantly he gave all officers and
commanders of brigades charge to see their works accomplished, and
finished, for if the enemy would stay but three days, he would be no
more afraid of him, than if he were in the strongest Island could be
imagined, being he was assured, GOD would fight for him, and with him,
and besides, he knew he had as good commanders and soldiers of horse
and foot, as Tilly was able to bring against him, and which was more,
he could get his army longer and better entertained than Tilly could
get, seeing he had the country to enemy, which was his Majesty's
friend.

This resolution being taken, his Majesty went to visit the leaguer,
being accompanied with the Marquess of Hamilton, come then from
Britain, with an army of six thousand foot, as complete as could be
desired to be seen for personages of men, in complete arms, being well
arrayed, and furnished of artillery, and of all things fitting for the
adorning of an army, his Majesty being exceeding glad of such a timely
supply, he did most heartily welcome the Marquess, by entertaining him
with graceful countenance  and respect, in giving him such
entertainment as the time could afford, and in the interim, his
Majesty went along with his Excellence, to let him see the
fortifications and preparations he had made against Tilly's coming,
which being so near, made his Majesty after some considerable
discourses had with the Marquess concerning his army, wherein his
Majesty declared he was sorry the Marquess with his army were arrived
in such parts of the country, that was ruined, and not able to
entertain his Excellence, and his army with bread, much less to be
furnished with necessaries convenient for them, or with such as his
Majesty would willingly bestow on them, if the country, or his power
were able to furnish it. Other private discourses they had together,
concerning the service, that the Marquess with his army was to be
employed on: And his Excellence having received his Majesty's
instructions, being both pressed by shortness of time, his Excellence
was graciously dismissed, to return to his army, then being come upon
the Oder, being then the most ruined part within the Empire, by reason
both the armies had lain there above a year before; which caused that
Summer both famine and plague, the smart whereof his Excellence's army
suffered at their first coming, where they died of the plague above
two hundred a week, so that it was impossible for them to subsist
long; and the plague was so rife, that his Excellence's servants and
family, were not free. Nevertheless, none can say, but for the well
and furtherance of the good cause, they did arrive in a good time,
having diverted from his Majesty a great part of the enemies' forces
towards Silesia, being more afraid of their coming, than of an army
twice stronger, and the diversion thus made, was a great furtherance
to the joining of his Majesty with the Duke of Saxony, and
consequently of his Majesty's advancement in Dutchland, and of his
victory obtained against his enemies at Leipzig; for nothing doth more
cross the designs of a mighty enemy, than to hear a foreign supply of
valiant men to come to his enemy, which no doubt, would force to alter
his former designs, which once altered unadvisedly in haste, might mar 
the happy event of his former conclusions.

Likewise, his Excellence being dismissed, the Landgrave of Hessen, and
Duke Barnard of Weimar, did come unto his Majesty, with the offer of
their service, (knowing his Majesty had gotten a supply to his army
out of Britain, which did encourage them, and the most part of the
towns of the four upper circles of the Empire, to offer to join with
his Majesty in confederacy, having seen the appearance of the strong
party his Majesty could make, being assured of the friendship and
concurrence of Great Britain,) they were both graciously accepted of,
and so much the more, that they were the first did hazard with a
private convoy to come to his Majesty through their enemies; for which
his Majesty did thank them, who the next day were dispatched to
return, for advancing of the cause in doing his Majesty good service,
by collecting of more forces, as they did soon after.

They being gone, the twenty-two of July General Tilly, with his mighty
army, did present himself before our leaguer, about two of the clock
in the afternoon, and begun to salute us with thirty-two pieces of
great ordnance of their carriage, discharging through and through our
leaguer, till he made us to draw to our arms, and stand in battle,
horse and foot, under the walls, which did shelter us from his cannon,
where we stood till night, looking for his on-falling, requiting and
honouring him now and then with interchange of cannon-bullets, till it
began to grow dark, that he retired his cannon to the body of his
army, having lain all night in battle, without being entrenched,
though strongly fortifird without him, with strong guards, both of
horse and foot, having his Crabbats and dragoniers without them again.

His Majesty having commanded out strong horse-guards to watch without
the leaguer, I was commanded,as least worthy of a thousand,that night
to watch without the leaguer, with five hundred commanded musketeers,
which were ordained to lie in readiness, betwixt the enemies' array
and the leaguer, almost a cannon-shot from our works, getting orders
from his Majesty himself, how I should keep good watch, and how to
behave my self, in case of the enemies' pursuit, and being come the
length of the ground appointed for me to watch on, having consolidated
the body of my musketeers in the safest ground I could find for them
to stand on, their arms rested, and in readiness. First I caused set
out my perdues without my other sentries, not trusting the giving of
an alarum altogether to our horse sentries, and then to the end the
enemy might not surprise us being sleeping, I ordained the half of our
musketeers to stand for two hours in readiness, till the sentries were
relieved, and then I suffered the other half to rest them, so long as
the other did before; and thus orderly we passed over the night's
watch, having had sundry naughty alarums in the night without
continuance. Our duty was to be the more strict, having received
command of his Majesty, not to quit that ground, except the enemy by
greatness of strength, would beat me from it, and then I should retire
orderly skirmishing with the enemy, our faces to them still, and our
arms, giving fire on them till we came under our walls, so that, by
that means the leaguer would get time to be in readiness to receive
them.

By the break of day, friend to valour and courage, the enemies' horse-
guards begun to skirmish with ours, who being stronger, made our
horsemen to give ground, the commander of the watch sent to me for a
supply of fifty musketeers, which I accordingly did send, with a
lieutenant, giving him charge how to behave himself, who having a
little skirmished with the enemies' dragoniers and horsemen, was made
to give ground also, and having commanded out a captain with fifty
musketeers more, he was also repulsed, I wondering at their carriage,
advanced to recognosce the bounds they were on, and spying an
advantage of ground, I took out a hundred musketeers, giving a captain
charge to remain by the remnant of my musketeers, and putting a hedge
betwixt us and the enemy, we advanced till we were in even line with
them, and then giving a salvo amongst them, incontinent we made the
enemy retire, so that our horsemen did advance to their former
stations: his Majesty having heard the service, ordained the Army
should be in readiness, and coming forth from the leaguer, accompanied
with General Lieutenant Bawtish,and BaronTyvell, where his Majesty
begun to enquire of me, how all passed, which accordingly I related.
But though his Majesty was pleased, yet he checked me for leaving of
the reserve to another, when I went on service, which I confess was
more suddenly done than wisely, and ever after, I promised to
hisMajesty to avoid the like oversight, though it succeeded well.

His Majesty incontinent, since they had tried his guards, he would
also try in earnest, what for officers and soldiers they did command,
and to that effect, his Majesty sent orders to the leaguer to command
out eight hundred horsemen of hagapells, and a thousand musketeers,
with four small field pieces of cannon, with the five hundred
musketeers I commanded on the post, which all being set in order, his
Majesty directed the colonel of his Leese regiment Here Tyvell to lead
on the foot towards a dorp, that lay near the enemies' army, and his
Majesty with General Lieutenant Bawtish commanded the horse, taking
the cannon along with them, and coming near the enemies' guards,
consisting of a thousand cuirassiers, having given fire with the
cannon amongst them, they charged furiously with the horse in midst of
the enemy, and putting them in disorder, they cut them down from their
horses as they retired at the spurs, being still followed unto the
body of their army: And our musketeers falling up alike, discharging
amongst them, the enemy at first in great fear was almost put in
confusion, the most part of their horsemen being abroad on forage,
their guards did stand to their arms, till the army was drawn in
battle, and their horse spanned, or put before their cannon; during
which time our soldiers continued in giving fire; amongst them, till
his Majesty did give orders for our retreat, which made, giving now
and then faces about, skirmishing with cannon and musket, and then
retiring again orderly being pressed thereto by their cannon, giving
fire after us, and their horsemen calling up ours in our rear, till at
last we being, retired the length of my post, our cannon being able to
reach them, they were made to make a stand, and I was ordained with my
musketeers to remain on our former post, his Majesty and the rest of
the party being retired within the leaguer. Incontinent from our
Batteries, our cannon did play again within the leaguer, which
continued the whole day, doing great hurt on both sides, where the
whole time, I with my party, did lie on our post, as betwixt the Devil
and the deep sea, for sometimes our own cannon would light short, and
graze over us, and so did the enemies' also, where we had three shot
with the cannon, till I directed an officer our own batteries,
acquainting them with our hurt, and desiring they should stell or
plane the cannon higher. In the morning also we lost on the skirmish,
thirteen soldiers, besides those were hurt. The day thus passed, I was
relieved at night, and the next morning, before day, General Tilly
made a show of on-falling on our Leaguer, by making all his trumpets
to sound, and his drums to beat, making a great noise, we being
prepared to receive them. The morning being dark,with a cloudy mist,
so that none could see, the enemy being retired with his army, having
broke up, at night he marched towards Tangermuende, and the day being
cleared up, his Majesty with a strong party went forth to drive up
their rear, with six small pieces of ordnance, even to the body of
their main army, which consisted then of twenty-six thousand men;
while as we were not in the leaguer, and at Havelberg, twelve thousand
men, foot and horse, till afterwards that the Field Marshal Gustave
Horne did come from the Oder towards Rathenau, with four thousand
complete soudiers, and General Tilly having lain some few days, at
Tangermuende, suffering daily losses by his Majesty's parties; at
length,through scarcity of victuals, he was forced to march unto
Halle, and in the Saxon's country, being made weaker by six thousand
men than he came down, having had to do with the Invincible Gustav,
who still did out-shoot him out of his own bow, having had the right
hand of the LORD for his assistance.

The thirteenth Observation.

HIS Majesty wisely made choice of a fit place for his leaguer, being
commodious for transportation of victuals unto his army, without being
in danger of his enemies. In like manner we see his Majesty's wisdom
in making his friends sure behind him (viz.) the Duke of Brandenburg,
the Dukes of Pomerania and Mecklenburg, from whence his victuals and
his supplies must needs come, and as his leaguer was commodious for
furnishing the army, so it was commodiously situated for defence
against the enemy, the one half, or back, being naturally defended by
the course of the water running by; and on the other side, it was
defended by the town, and by the help of the old dike, which easily
was fortified.

His Majesty's wisdom also was seen, by keeping of his soldiers still
in action, never suffering them to be idle (as a wise General ought to
do) for either they were employed on marches, or lying still, in
working, or in fighting by parties, or in gross, as occasion offered:
For this General knew well, that he was but the carrion of a man, and
not a man, that did live idle, having in a living body but a dead
mind.

Here also I did remark and observe, Homo homini quid interest: for we
find a great difference betwixt his Majesty's welcoming of Tilly to
Werben, and the Field Marshal Twifenbacke his welcome made to his
Majesty before Frankfurt on the Oder; who never did present himself in
the fields, though almost as strong as we were: but here we find the
contrary, that notwithstanding of Tilly's strength, being twenty-six
thousand men, Gustavus was not afraid to have invaded his fore-troops
with a weak party, and did defeat them; showing unto us the difference
betwixt commanders, by his own valourous example, encouraging his
little army before the enemies' coming; he would not first meet his
enemy with an army, but having strengthened his leaguer with Baniers
forces, and called in his weak garrisons from danger, and then taking
all victuals out of his enemies' way, bringing it within his leaguer,
he then armed with courage and resolution, adventures to rencounter
his enemy with a party, and having tried them to their loss, he
retired again with credit, preparing his leaguer, being strongly beset
with men, ammunition and victuals, he was not afraid to be taken
unawares, as the French were within Philippsburg, not being provided
to oppose their enemies, for their sloth they were cruelly murdered.
Teaching others, by their examples, not to trust too much in security,
be the place never so strong, if they be left unto themselves, and
grow careless, they must needs suffer under the Tyranny of their
enemies.

Likewise his Majesty, not trusting to his own wisdom, he did call his
chief officers to counsel, asking them, what was to be done (as wise
commanders ought to do) and finding them all by silence to rely on his
Majesty's will, giving orders for all things that were to be done
before their coming, he resolved to stand to it, being truly
courageous, as he did not adventure rashly, without asking his
officers' advice, knowing once their resolution agreeable to his own,
he was not inconsiderately afraid of his enemies' strength, though
mighty and strong, neither was he unprovided against their coming.

his Majesty's dexterity of command is seen here, by the order of his
discipline, in giving good orders for watching: First he divided the
posts, and appointed what footmen or brigade should watch on the
several posts, as they were severally fortified by themselves, to the
end, no man might blame their own work, for insufficiency to hold out
the enemy. As also he appointed several brigades of horse to second
the posts severally, every one knowing where to repair in time of
service: As also he did instruct them of the manner they were to
fight, in resisting the enemies' entry: As also in case of their
entry, he did instruct both foot and horse, how and in what manner
they should be repulsed again, promising, according to his wonted
custom, to be a companion both of their travails and dangers, and that
he should never leave them, till first they should quit him, and that
he would promise as he was a royal King.

A worthy saying of a worthy king and general, whose prudence and
wisdom in command, was ever answerable to the dignity of his majestic
person, that ought and should be endued with infinite virtues, since
infinite were those things he had to foresee, and which are needful
for a man of his place. Infinite chances, and altogether divers, every
moment were set before him, in so much, that Argos' eyes were too few
for him, not only in respect of the weight of his command, but also in
respect of the wit and prudence which was requisite for him.

All other commands belonging to a soldier are so inferior to this of a
general, that almost they are nothing in respect of this, who amongst
others his great gifts, he must know severely to command, and softly
to bear with others. As also, he must learn patiently to give place to
others' contumacy, and he must not only be powerful to strengthen for
his own affairs, but also he must weaken his enemies, and chiefly, he
must make war by policy, without giving battle, or travail (as this
wise General did deal twice with old Tilly) who was forced after a
long march, having but visited him, and seen his orders, to retire
again, with the loss of many men, without any detriment or hurt at all
to his Majesty's own litle army, which he kept ever to the best, by
preserving them from their enemies, and by supplying of them, as they
became weak, so that their weakness could never be truly discerned.
Who would not then admire the wisdom and foresight of this General, in
preserving this little army, at this time, for a second fitter
occasion? Who ever then was so worthy of the honourable title of a
general as he? For though he had been no king, he was a brave warrior,
and which is more, a good man, magnificent, wise, just, meek, endued
with learning, and the gift of tongues, and as he had strength of
body, and a manlike stature; he had also the ornaments of the mind,
fitting a brave commander: he knew how to dally, and weary an army led
by such an old general as Tilly was: for though he did vaunt, he had
beaten two kings before, in an open field, the third king made him,
for all his experience and old years, to be thought but a child again,
having made him traverse with his army, before in the winter, from
Ruppin to Neubrandenburg, and back again to Magdeburg, finding the
King did lie in surety at Schwedt, till he was gone, and then took in
both Frankfurt and Landsberg: and again, he made him retire from
Thuringia to Werben, for a visit, and then forced him to return again
to Saxony, with the loss of six thousand men, without effecting
anything for his coming, not the least advantage; undoing himself and
his army by the seasons, sometimes with the extremity of cold, in the
midst of winter, and at this time, he made him march in the midst of
the dog days, for lack of victuals, and his Majesty having discouraged
this old general and his army, he thought then, it was fit time to
follow, and to search him out, till he was made to fight.

This resolute King did not sleep long, in suffering Tilly's bravado
made before Werben to be unrepaid, having the next morning hunted, and
chased his cuirassiers with a few number of Hagapells, to the midst of
their army, having with honour retired again, he thought Tilly was
engaged to storm his leaguer, in revenge, but all could not wind or
draw him to it: But was forced through hunger to retire, all
provisions being taken out of his way, for his Majesty knew well, when
they should be oppressed with hunger at their coming, they could think
on no generous exploit: for oft-times an army is lost sooner by hunger
then by fighting, and hunger itself is crueller a great deal, than the
sword; For to hunger, and to fight valiantly, doth not agree with
nature, and in an army hunger is more intolerable then the thundering
of cannon and musket: arms do resist arms, but to resist hunger, no
fort, no strength, no moat or fosse is able to do it.

To conclude then this my observation, when God is with us, all things
succeed well unto us, as did with this fortunate King Gustavus, who I
knew did fear God; and I persuade myself, by his example, and after
him, by the example of another Gustavus, Field Marshal Horne (who
truly feared God in his calling without pride or ostentation) many
others under them following their examples (though soldiers) did the
like. Therefore no wonder, that they and those who followed them, were
happy in their enterprises, having had such leaders: for that is most
sure and infallible, where most fear of God is, and true piety, there
is most happiness; and this piety is enough to save princes. And on
the contrary, without her, armies can do nothing, horse or strength of
man, gold or money can do nothing. Let us then following the example
of this King, who was godly, seek to the King of Kings for his
Kingdom, & the righteousness thereof, & then surely all other things
will go well with us, as it did with our master and leader.



The fourteenth Duty discharged of our March from Werben to our leaguer
at Wittenberg.

The certainty of General Tilly's march with the army unto Saxony being
come unto his Majesty, and that he was to join at Leipzig, with the
forces were come to him from the upper circles of Germany, as also out
of Italy; which being joined together, his resolution was to spoil the
Duke's country, or to force him to turn Imperialist: which being
understood by his Majesty, his Majesty very wisely resolved to prevent
him in this, as he had done in his former intentions: And therefore
with diligence, bringing together the whole strength of his horses,
with two thousand dragoniers, he marched towards Rathenow, where Field
Marshal Horne did lie, with a part of the army, to whom he gave orders
to be in readiness, on his first advertisement, as also, he appointed
General Banner, to recollect and bring up such forces as were levied
in the Marks of Brandenburg, and to be in readiness at his Majesty's
appointment for a march.

In like manner his Majesty did leave the care of commanding the
leaguer at Werben to General Lieutenant Bautis, so far as concerned
the command of the cavalry, and Sir John Hepburne was ordained to
command, and to care for the foot, which being done, his Majesty
continued his march towards the pass of Wittenberg, for to meet Field
Marshal Arnham, who was appointed by the Duke of Saxony to treat with
his Majesty, for confirming of the alliance and confederacy formerly
treated betwixt his Majesty and the Duke, in time of the treaty, his
Majesty being in hopes, of a happy conclusion, he did direct orders to
the Field Marshal Horne, and to General Lieutenant Bawtis, to break up
with both their forces of horse and foot, and to march towards
Wittenberg. Likewise order was sent to Colonel Cagge to break up from
Havelberg, with his regiment, and with Colonel Monro of Fowles his
regiment, for to join both with the army, on their march (which
continued orderly to the rendezvous appointed to meet with the Field
Marshal being within four miles of Wittenberg, where we did come
together, and immediately the Field Marshal did put the army in good
order of battle, horse, foot and artillery; the baggage also was
placed and directed to march apart from the army.

On Sunday the twenty eighth of August 1631, we continue our march
towards Wittenberg, where a mile from the town we rejoiced at the
sight of our master and leader, Gustavus the invincible, who with the
party did join with us, and immediately he took the pains to bring
that royal army in order of battle, where on the sudden, his Majesty's
dexterity in command did appear to the great contentment of the whole
army, and marching a while in battle order, having halted near the
part, where our leaguer was appointed to be, we were commanded to
encamp for that night on the field, as we stood in battle. The next
morning, the leaguer being divided in several quarters, and our
quarter-masters, and furriers, having made their right designation of
every regiment's quarter, and having divided their quarters
proportionally amongst the companies, they being ready, every brigade
whose quarters were first designed, marched unto the leaguer,
possessing themselves with their quarters, they begun orderly to place
their colours and their watch; then every particular comradeship did
strive, who could best provide themselves of convenient lodgings,
where we were to rest for a week.

Lieutenant Colonel John Monro, being come before his colonel from
Scotland with a company, he was made to march from Stettin to Werben,
and from thence to Wittenberg, being then ordained to march with our
regiment, with whom did come from Scotland, Robert Monro, Kilterne's
son, out of love, to see his friends, who contracting a fever at
Wittenberg, died there, and was honourably buried.

The fourteenth Observation.

HIS Majesty, like a wise and prudent general, we see would not stir
from his leaguer at Werben, till first he was made certain by good
intelligence, of his enemies' design, counsel and resolution, which
being well known, his Majesty then resolved, by preventing of them, to
make them unprofitable: and truly the discoverer of such, plots and
counsels ought to be well rewarded, seeing by the discovery of our
enemies' designs, we were made to resist his intended evil against us.
Happy therefore are those intelligences that come in time, and there
ought to be no delay used, in taking that counsel that cannot be
praised, till the turn be done, and things once deliberated should be
quickly done, and though he be a brave fellow, who doubts in advising,
yet in action he ought to be confident, as Gustavus was, getting
intelligence of the enemies' design with celerity, he took his horses
and dragoniers with him, and leaving his foot and cannon, he advanced
to the pass of Wittenberg, for to prevent Tilly, who was striving to
make the Duke turn Imperialist; but Gustavus wisely taking the ball at
the right rebound, he did turn the Duke, by God's providence, both
soul and body good Swede. Where clearly we may see the Lord's powerful
hand and providence in this, as in all human affairs, suffering things
sometimes to take delays. Notwithstanding of man's instant urging, the
Lord defers to his appointed time, that the glory may be given unto
himself alone, and not to man's wit or policy. For as the rudder in a
ship doth with a little motion govern all the ship: even so, God the
director and governor of the world, doth move the whole, himself not
stirring. And as there is one God in the heavens, that governs all the
frame of the earth: so the Lord hath his substitutes on earth, whom he
hath made above their fellows in judgment, and heroic virtues, yet he
himself keeps the prerogative above them all in commanding them, to
let us see, that all the event, and conclusions of kings' projects and
intentions, be they never so powerful, avail nothing to the
furtherance of their intentions, till they first acknowledge them to
come from the fountain God, that distributes them again on his
servants, when he pleaseth, that they may learn to glorify him, and
not their own wit or policy, which is so much as nothing, till he
consent. This God then, the author and doer of all things (and of this
union and confederacy) that eternal (I say) and provident God-head,
that governs the motions of the Heavens, the stars' variable courses,
the elementary changes, all things above, and beneath the earth,
ruling and governing, spreading, where he pleaseth his light beams
from his eternity, and with a wink, piercing into the bowels of
heaven, earth and sea, he doth not only go before them, but in them,
seeing and knowing all, and governing them all, his will is so, that
he converts our noisomeness unto health, and our sins being ill, he
turns them unto our good: that eternal governor triumphs in the
chariot of his providence, and if willingly we follow him, then
freely, as his soldiers, if unwillingly, we must follow him, as
captives and servants. We see then here by God's providence, the Duke
was contented to join his army with the King's Majesty's army being
come to Wittenberg, to go conjunctis viribus against their common
enemy the house of Austria, and the Catholic league.

It had been good for Magdeburg this union had been sooner concluded,
but the Lord would not have it, seeing their punishments, by General
Tilly's army (their scourge) was decreed long before. But now the Duke
of Saxony terrified by their example, thinks it better to prevent such
another wound, by joining with his Majesty, being made wary by others'
fall: for it is better late to thrive then never, and it is better to
prevent evil, than to suffer; and it was better for the Duke of
Saxony, to blush in time, then out of time to grow pale; for now being
taken at the rebound, Tilly's army being at Leipzig, seeing his own
house on fire to be relieved, he offers his service to his Majesty,
damning himself, soul and body, if ever he will forsake his Majesty
and his Crown, if then he would but help him to beat the enemy out of
his country again: So that he, which could not be tied with one knot
before, is now hard tied by four great points, which he was made to
condescend unto, on his honour and credit, to have been kept
unviolable. And his Majesty getting him once thus bound, the way to
make him sure, was to make him fight, that having dipped his hands
once in the blood of his enemies, he was not suddenly to be clensed,
and this was the manner to tie him harder, than the custom was of old
amongst the Germans, who were wont (when they entered in confederacy)
to draw blood in a goblet of both their browes, and drink of it
mutually, for the more strict observance of their fidelities to each
others. But shortly after this confederacy was made, much German blood
was drawn, and of other strangers' blood, to make the tie so much the
harder, and before the tie was broke, his Majesty's blood was shed, to
the perpetual disgrace of him, that after his Majesty's death,
forgetting his honour and credit, did violate his confederacy made
with the crown, as with the King our master, of never dying memory.



The fifteenth Duty discharged of our March over the Elbe at Wittenberg
to Bad Dueben.

The conjunction agreed upon betwixt his Majesty and the Duke of
Saxony, all things sealed and subscribed, his Majesty gave orders to
break up with the army, and to cross the Elbe, over the bridge at
Wittenberg, for to join with the Duke's army; the orders were obeyed
with great contentment, and entering into Saxony, we quartered the
first night not far from Bad Dueben, the place appointed for our
rendezvous; the next morning we marched thither, and were drawn up in
battle on the Fields, where in the afternoon the Duke's army arrived,
being drawn up in battle within cannon shot of us, the whole officers
of our army, were commanded to be in readiness on horse-back, to
convey his Majesty for to welcome the Duke and his army, which for
pleasing the eye, was the most complete little army, for personages of
men, comely statures, well armed, and well arrayed, that ever mine
eyes did look on, whose officers did all look, as if they were going
in their best apparel and arms to be painted; where nothing was
defective the eye could behold.

This show seen by his Majesty and his officers; his Majesty returning;
the Duke with his followers did convey his Majesty to the sight of our
army, which being called to their arms, having lain over-night on a
parcel of plowed ground, they were so dusty, they looked out like
kitchen-servants, with their uncleanly rags, within which were hidden
courageous hearts, being old experimented blades, which for the most
part, had overcome by custom the toil of wars; yet these Saxon gentry,
in their bravery, did judge of us and ours, according to our outsides;
thinking but little of us; nevertheless, we thought not the worse of
ourselves. The ceremony passed, we were all remitted to take rest for
that night in our former quarters: the next morning, by break of day,
we were called up to march, where both our armies were ordained to
march on several streets; one rendezvous being appointed for us at
night, within a mile and a half of the enemies' army; where being come
to our rendezvous by four o'clock in the afternoon, and drawn up in
battle; our guards drawn out to watch, were directed to their posts,
and then we resting by our arms, as we were in battle, we slept lying
where we stood, that in case of an alarm, we were not to be found in
disorder, being ready to fight where we stood.

Immediately after the army was settled in quarters, news was come to
his Majesty in post, that the castle of Leipzig was given over by
accord to the enemy: As also that General Tilly with a mighty and
strong army, was come a mile from Leipzig, and was preparing for a
fight: which news did no ways alter his Majesty's countenance, being
resolved before for the like, to have sought him to fight. So that
being both willing, and so near, it was easy bringing them together;
our baggage was appointed to go back to Bad Dueben, our horse and foot
watches were strengthened, and we were in readiness, and refreshing
first our bodies with victuals, we slept till the next morning.

The fifteenth Observation.

Nothing earthly is more pleasant to be seen, than to see brethren in
Christ conjoined against God's enemies, for advancing of the glory of
God, in promoting of his Gospel, and for setting at liberty those poor
souls (our brethren in Christ) that were kept long under the yoke and
tyranny of the house of Austria, and the Catholic League their mortal
enemies. Who would not then, for their liberties that were banished,
(that they might one day retire to their possessions) who would not, I
say, be willing, yea more, who would not rejoice (having such a leader
as Gustavus was) to hazard their lives for the weal of the public; yea
more, for the promoting of Christ's Gospel? Surely for mine own part,
I was most willing and wished long to have seen a day, wherein I might
hazard my life in this quarrel, in being one of the number of
fighters, before I did come at it; for many reasons, but especially
for the liberty of the daughter of our dread sovereign, the distressed
Queen of Bohemia, and her princely issue; next, for the liberty of our
distressed brethren in Christ; and thirdly, for my better instruction,
in the profession of arms, which is my calling; for having before seen
many occurrences that did belong to our calling, I longed to have seen
a battle fought in the fields in such a quarrel, being led by such a
magnanimous King, of heroic spirit, that had much more on hazard that
day than I had, who had only to hazard but my life and credit; while
as he a King was to hazard his life, his crown, his reputation, and
all for strangers.

Having thus the night before meditated, I found a motion rejoicing my
heart, in making me resolute, to fight in this cause; being tied in
duty, not only for my person, but also tied to give counsel and
direction, as the Lord did enable me, by giving instruction, good
heartening, and good example to others, who were bound to follow me,
as I was bound to follow my master the King; seeing the Lord by his
providence, had brought me thither, with a number of my friends to
follow, and obey him, as they were bound by oath to obey me. And then
I thought with myself, after I had awaked from sleep, going on to
march, that my life was much like a tale, and that we should not care
how long this life of ours should last, but that we should be careful,
how well our life should be acted: for it is no matter, where we end,
if we end well; and we should not ask, when, or where, but we ought to
be ever mindfull, how we are prepared going to fight. Nature did beget
us miserable, we live over-burdened with cares, and like a flower, we
vanish soon away, and die. Our hunting then here, and our care should
be only for a perpetual good name to leave behind us, that so being
absent we are present, and being dead, we live.



The sixteenth Duty discharged on our Fight at Leipzig.

As the larke begun to peep, the seventh of September 1631, having
stood all night in battle a mile from Tilly's army, in the morning,
the trumpets sound to horse, the drums calling to march, being at our
arms, and in readiness, having before meditated in the night, and
resolved with our consciences; we begun the morning with offering our
souls and bodies, as living sacrifices unto God, with confession of
our sins, lifting up our hearts and hands to Heaven, we begged for
reconciliation in Christ, by our public prayers, and secret sighs, and
groans; recommending ourselves, the success, and event of the day unto
God, our Father in Christ; which done by us all, we marched forwards
in God's name a little, and then halted again, till the whole army,
both the Duke's, and ours, were put in good order: our army marching
on the right hand, and the Duke's on the left, our commanded
musketeers marching in the vanguard, being in one body before the army
consisting of three regiments, whereof two of Scots, and one Dutch,
all musketeers, led by three Scots colonels, men of valour and
courage, fit for the command concredited unto them, being made choice
of, as men, that could fight exemplary to others: (viz.) Sir James
Ramsey, called the Black, Sir John Hamilton, and Robert Monro Baron of
Fowles; we marched thus, both the armies in battle, horse, foot, and
artillery, till about nine of the clock in the morning, we halted half
a mile distant from the Imperial army; that were attending us in
battle; consisting of forty four thousand men, horse, and foot, our
army, consisting of thirty thousand men, whereof, to my judgement, his
Majesty's army; were eight thousand foot, and seven thousand horse;
The Duke also, would be eleven thousand foot, and four thousand horse;
having refreshed ourselves with victuals, leaving our coaches behind
us. The whole army did get green branches on their heads; and the word
was given, God with us: a little short speech made by his Majesty,
being in order of battle, we marched towards the enemy, who had taken
the advantage of the ground, having placed his army on a place called
God's Acre; where their General did make choice of the ground most
advantagious for his foot, artillery, and horses; he also did beset
the dorps, that environed the ground, which was left for us, with
dragoniers and Crabbats: to encumber our wings by their evil
neighbourhood: yet, notwithstanding of all the advantages he had of
ground, wind, and sun; our magnanimous King and leader; under God,
inferior to no General we ever read of, for wisdom, courage,
dexterity, and good conduct, he was not dejected; but with
magnanimity, and Christian resolution, having recommended himself, his
army, and success to God, the Director of men and angels; able to give
victory with few against many; He ordered his army, and directed every
supreme officer of the field, on their particular charge and stations
committed unto them, for that day: As also he acquainted them
severally, of the form he was to fight unto, and he appointed platoons
of musketeers, by fifties, which were commanded by sufficient officers
to attend on several regiments of horse; and he instructed the
officers how to behave themselves in discharging their duties on
service. Likewise he directed the officers belonging to the artillery,
how to carry themselves; which orderly done, the commanded musketeers
were directed to their stand where to fight; his Majesty then led up
the four brigades of foot, which were appointed to be the battle of
the army, with a distance betwixt every brigade, that a regiment of
horse might march out in gross betwixt the brigades, all four being in
one front, having their ordnance planted before every brigade, being
four pieces of great cannon, and eight small; whereof, four stood
before the colours, that were the battle of the brigade, with
ammunition and constables to attend them; on the right hand pikes,
before the colours were the other four pieces of cannon, with
ammunition and constables conform; and on the left wing of pikes and
colours were placed the other four pieces of cannon, as we said
before.

Behind these four brigades were drawn up the three brigades of
Reserve, with their artillery before them, standing at a
proportionable distance behind the other four brigades, with the like
distance betwixt them, as was betwixt the brigades of the battle.

The brigades of horse which had platoons of musketeers to attend them,
were placed on the right and left wings of the foot, and some were
placed betwixt the battle of foot and the reserve, to second the foot
as need were; other brigades of horse were drawn up behind the reserve
of the foot brigades.

The Field Marshal Horne, General Banier, and Lieutenant General
Bawtish were commanded to over-see the horsemen, his Majesty, the
Baron Tyvell, and Grave Neles, were to command the battle of foot; Sir
James Ramsey, as eldest Colonel, had the command of the fore-troops,
or commanded musketeers; and Sir John Hepburne, as eldest Colonel,
commanded the three brigades of reserve: Our army thus ordered, the 
Duke of Saxony and his Field-marshal Arnhem, having ordered their army
(whereof I was not particularly inquisitive of the manner) they were
ordained to draw up on our left hand, and being both in one front thus
ordered, we marched in battle a little, and then halted again, till
his Majesty had commanded out some commanded horsemen, on the wings of
the army, a large distance from the body, to scour the fields of the
Crabbats; we marched again in order of battle, with trumpets sounding,
drums beating, and colours advanced and flying, till we came within
reach of cannon to our enemies' army, then the magnific and
magnanimous Gustavus the Invincible, leads up the brigades of horse
one after another to their ground, with their platoons of shot to
attend them: As also he led up the brigades of foot one after another
to their ground, during which time we were drawn up according to our
former plot, the enemy was thundering amongst us, with the noise, and
roaring whisling and flying of cannon-bullets; where you may imagine
the hurt was great; the sound of such music being scarce worth the
hearing, though martial I confess, yet, if you can have so much
patience, with far less danger, to read this duty to an end, you shall
find the music well paid; but with such coin, that the players would
not stay for a world to receive the last of it, being over-joyed in
their flying.

By twelve of the clock on Wednesday the seventh of September, in
despite of the fury of the enemies' cannon, and of his advantages
taken, they were drawn up in even front with the enemy, and then our
cannon begun to roare, great and small, paying the enemy with the like
coin, which thundering continued alike on both sides for two hours and
an half, during which time, our battles of horse and foot stood firm
like a wall, the cannon now and then making great breaches amongst us,
which was diligently looked unto, on all hands, by the diligence of
officers in filling up the void parts, and in setting aside of the
wounded towards Chirurgians, every officer standing firm, over-seeing
their commands in their own stations, succeeding one another as
occasion offered.

By half three, our cannon a little ceasing, the horsemen on both wings
charged furiously one another, our horsemen with a resolution, abiding
unloosing a pistol, till the enemy had discharged first, and then at a
near distance our musketeers meeting them with a salvo; then our
horsemen discharged their pistols, and then charged through them with
swords; and at their return the musketeers were ready again to give
the second salvo of musket amongst them; the enemy thus valiantly
resisted by our horsemen, and cruelly plagued by our platoons of
musketeers; you may imagine, how soon he would be discouraged after
charging twice in this manner, and repulsed.

Our horsemen of the right wing of Finns and Hagapells, led by the
valourous Field-marshal Horne, finding the enemies' horsemen out of
order, with resolution he charged the enemies' left wing, forcing them
to retire disorderly on their battles of foot, which caused disorder
among the foot, who were forced then to fall to the right hand; our
horsemen retiring, his Majesty seeing the enemy in disorder, played
with ordnance amongst them, during which time, the force of the
enemies' battles falls on the Duke of Saxony, charging with horse
first in the midst of the battles, and then the foot giving two salvos
of musket amongst them, they were put to the rout, horse and foot, and
the enemy following them cried Victoria, as if the day had been won,
triumphing before the victory; But our horsemen charging the remnant
of their horse and foot, where their General stood, they were made to
retire in disorder to the other hand towards Leipzig; our army of foot
standing firm, not having loosed one musket; the smoke being great, by
the rising of the dust, for a long time we were not able to see about
us; but being cleared up, we did see on the left hand of our reserve
two great battles of foot, which we imagined to have been Saxons, that
were forced to give ground; having heard the service, though not seen
it, we found they were enemies, being a great deal nearer than the
Saxons were: his Majesty having sent Baron Tyvell to know the
certainty, coming before our brigade, I certified him they were
enemies, and he returning towards his Majesty, was shot dead; his
Majesty coming by, gave direction to Colonel Hepburne, to cause the
brigades on his right and left wing to wheel, and then to charge the
enemy, the orders given, his Majesty retired, promising to bring
succours unto us.

The enemies' battle standing firm, looking on us at a near distance,
and seeing the other brigades and ours wheeling about, making front
unto them, they were prepared with a firm resolution to receive us
with a salvo of cannon and muskets; but our small ordnance being twice
discharged amongst them, and before we stirred, we charged them with a
salvo of muskets, which was repaid, and incontinent our brigade
advancing unto them with push of pike, putting one of their battles in
disorder, fell on the execution, so that they were put to the rout.

I having commanded the right wing of our musketeers, being my Lord of
Rhees and Lumsdell's, we advanced on the other body of the enemies',
which defended their cannon, and beating them from their cannon, we
were masters of their cannon, and consequently of the field, but the
smoke being great, the dust being raised, we were as in a dark cloud,
not seeing the half of our actions, much less discerning, either the
way of our enemies, or yet the rest of our brigades: whereupon, having
a drummer by me, I caused him beat the Scots march, till it cleared
up, which recollected our friends unto us, and dispersed our enemies
being overcome; so that the brigade coming together, such as were
alive missed their dead and hurt comrades.

Colonel Lumsdell was hurt at the first, and Lieutenant Colonel Musten
also, with divers other ensigns were hurt and killed, and sundry
colours were missing for that night, which were found the next day;
The enemy thus fled, our horsemen were pursuing hard, till it was
dark, and the blue brigade, and the commanded musketeers were sent by
his Majesty to help us, but before their coming, the victory and the
credit of the day, as being last engaged, was ascribed to our brigade,
being the reserve, were thanked by his Majesty for their service, in
public audience, and in view of the whole army, we were promised to be
rewarded.

The battle thus happily won, his Majesty did principally under God
ascribe the glory of the victory to the Swedes, and Finns' horsemen,
who were led by the valorous Field Marshal Gustavus Horne; For though
the Dutch horsemen did behave themselves valorously divers times that
day; yet it was not their fortune to have done the charge, which did
put the enemy to flight, and though there were brave brigades of
Swedes and Dutch in the field, yet it was the Scots brigades fortune
to have gotten the praise for  the foot service: and not without
cause, having behaved themselves well, being led and conducted by an
expert cavalier and fortunate, the valiant Hepburne, being followed by
Colonel Lumsdell, Lieutenant Colonel Musten, Major Monypeny, Major
Sinclaire, and Lieutenant Colonel John Monro, with divers others
cavaliers of valour, experience and of conduct, who thereafter were
suddenly advanced unto higher charges. The victory being ours, we
incamped overnight on the place of battle, the living merry and
rejoicing, though without drink at the night-wake of their dead
comrades and friends, lying then on the ground in the bed of honour,
being glad the Lord had prolonged their days for to discharge the last
honourable duty, in burying of their comrades.

Our bonfires were made of the enemies' ammunition wagons, and pikes
left, for want of good fellows to use them; and all this night our
brave comrades, the Saxons were making use of their heels in flying,
thinking all was lost, they made booty of our wagons and goods, too
good a recompense for cullions that had left their Duke, betrayed
their country and the good cause, when as strangers were hazarding
their lives for their freedoms.

Our loss this day with the Saxons, did not exceed three thousand men,
which for the most part were killed by the enemies' cannon: of
principal officers we lost a number, and chiefly our horsemen; as
Colonel Collenbagh, Colonel Halle and Addergest; and of the foot
colonels, the Baron Tivell, being all of them brave and valorous
gentlemen, we lost also four lieutenant colonels, together with a
number of rut-masters, captains, lieutenants and ensignes.

Of the Saxons were lost five Colonels, three Lieutenant Colonels, with
divers rut-masters and Captains, and of inferiors officers many.

To the enemy were lost on the field near eight thousand, besides
officers of note, such as the Field Marshal Fustenberg: the Duke of
Holstein, the Count of Shomeberg: old General Tilly hurt and almost
taken; a number of other officers of the field were killed, and taken
prisoners. They lost also thirty two pieces of cannon, with three
score wagons of ammunition, and their General, and Papingham were
chased towards Halle, and from thence were forced with a small convoy
to take their flight for refuge to Hameln on the Weser.

The sixteenth Observation.

First then we see here the goodness that follows on that laudable and
Christian custom, used by those, that do first begin the works of
their calling with their true humiliation to God by prayers, in
acknowledging their sins and unworthiness, and in renouncing trust or
confidence in anything but in God alone, knowing their own wisdom,
strength and valour to be of no moment, without the special aid and
assistance of the Almighty and powerful God; who alone can teach our
fingers to fight, giving victory with few as with many.

And therefore it was that this magnanimous and religious warrior, with
his whole army, publicly did call on the Lord, praying for his
assistance against his enemies, and for a happy event of the day,
before he begun to set his army to work against their enemies, the
enemies of God and the  true Catholic and Apostolic faith; which they
had endeavoured to subvert with the professors of the truth, to hold
up and maintain the man of sin and his erronious doctrine, by the
power of the house of Austria, and of the Catholic League. We see
then, this duty being religiously and piously discharged by his
Majesty and his army, the fruit was answerable to their desire: having
obtained victory over our enemies by the good command of his Majesty,
and the ready obedience, dexterity and valour of his Majesty's supreme
officers of the field; who in all charges did direct those under them
to the ready discharge of their duties, every one of the whole united
body of the army following the example of their head and leader, the
magnific and magnanimous King, for to abate and lay down the pride of
the house of Austria; and for to tear and strip naked that old proud
and ambitious General Tilly of his former glory and honour; for having
bragged and vainely gloried, he had conquered two kings before: here
now the Captain of Kings, and King of Captains doth victoriously
triumph, having robbed him of glory, and clipped the wings of the
Empire with his little royal army.

Likewise, next unto God, a second help unto this glorious victory, was
the great execution made by his Majesty's cannon; and though ever
before, Tilly did pride himself all his lifetime in the course of the
wars, in his dexterity of his great cannon; here from a master he was
turned again unto a prentice, being cunningly overshot with cannon, so
that his cannon, and three score wagons belonging thereto, were taken
from him by Gustavus the first, and most valiant Captain of the world,
with the help of the nation which was never conquered by any foreign
enemy, the invincible Scots; whose prayers to God were more effectual
through Christ, then theirs through the intercession of Saints.

The third cause of this glorious victory, was his Majesty's good
discipline holden over the army, horse and foot, not suffering them
without great and extraordinary punishment, to oppress the poor, which
made them cry for a blessing to his Majesty and his army.

The enemy on the contrary provoked the wrath of God against themselves
and their army, for their cruelty used in torturing the poor, and
forcing their moneys from them did further their punishment, and his
Majesty's glorious victory.

The fourth help to this victory, was the platoons of musketeers, his
Majesty had very wisely ordained to attend the horsemen, being a great
safety for them, and a great prejudice to the enemy, the musket ball
carrying and piercing farther then the pistolet: As also the great
celerity used in charging and discharging of our small cannon brought
the enemies' battle in disorder, to the furtherance of this victory:
As also the extraordinary care and diligence, that was used by his
Majesty, and his officers, in seeing and foreseing of the defects and
disorders amongst ourselves; which being suddenly remedied, was also a
help to this victory: And last of all, the invincible courage and
resolution both of officers and soldiers in standing firm,
Notwithstanding of the fury of their enemies; and which was more, they
were no ways dismayed or discouraged at the flight of the Saxons, but
thought it their greatest glory to be victorious without them;
standing resolutly till they saw the back of their enemies, the
undoubted tokens of their glorious victory.

his Majesty's army on this service as at all times, might be called
truly valorous, for those are called valorous Captains, and holden for
such; that when their comrades are flying, they notably with hands,
voice and wounds (if wounded) sustain the fight, doing at once the
duty of soldiers and of Captains, by those means, bringing back, and
restoring the suspected loss unto victory, for their credits. For as
ignorance doth easily precipitate men into danger, even so to a
generous heart nothing can seem difficult or fearful, being once
resolved to fall on, though towards the mouth of the cannon; but
before resolution flesh and blood have their own disturbances, even in
the most valorous: and valorous men, as they fear nothing after
resolution; so they disdain nothing entering upon danger.

Here also the resolution of our horsemen on this service was
praiseworthy, seeing they never loosed a pistol at the enemy, till
first they had discharged theirs: for the enemy being fierce and
furious; while as ours were stout and slow, the enemy was made weary
when ours were fresh, which made the enemy being weary, and charged
with a fresh succour, being once set on going, they followed hard
their victory, not giving them time to breathe, or recollect their
forces again, till they were utterly defeated; that the night and
darkness was their best safety. For I did observe here, that the duty
of valiant commanders is to know not only the nature of their enemies,
but also their spirit, and wherein they pride them most: we ought to
make our best use for to deceive and out-shoote them in those same
things wherein they delight and trust most unto. Likewise this day I
did observe, that as the inticement to great travail and pains is
glory and honour, even so courage and constant valour may be attained
unto by exercise in war, and frequenting of dangers, wherein soldiers,
companies or brigades are used with, and made once familiar with that
cruel and vehement, horrible and terrible fellow, death, having seen
many dead bodies before; and being inured to blood, such soldiers will
stand to it and desire to fight, when ignorant novices (as the Saxons
were) are afraid of death; who seeking their safety in flying, they
were miserably cut down by their enemies.

I did likewise observe this day, that it is not the multitude doth the
turn, but under God it is good command, good conduct, art, and skill
in handling the weapons of our warfare, and in taking the occasions in
time that beget victory.

Therefore he that would labour an army as Gustavus did, he will find
fruit, yea even the best that groweth under the Empire, good Rhenish
and Neckar wine, not only for himself, but for the meanest soldier,
and that unto excess, which hath made me sometimes complain more of
the plenty our soldiers had after this victory, through the abuse of
it, then ever I did before for any penury. He is therefore in my
opinion far deceived that thinks that it is the time or number of
years that makes a good soldier; no, no, it is rather the continual
meditation of exercise and practise; for soldiers should be in
running, not in running away, as horsemen ordinarily do. But on the
contrary, that with the greater force they may be able to invade their
enemies, as our brigade did here, who seeing the enemy in confusion
with their pikes charged ran fiercely upon them till they were beaten.
And surely I do think no man so ignorant, but knows that more come to
be good soldiers by exercise and frequency of danger and use, then by
nature: and he is not a man that will not sweat, nor courageous,  that
eschews danger, when he should fight, as our comrades did the painted
soldiers the Saxons, with their plumed officers; which feathers served
them I think in their flight, for tokens rather to cut them down by,
than for their safeties.

Courage should grow by frequency of danger, the only way, in my
opinion, to fear nothing, and then he may be called stout, before the
maker of a quarrel at home, who once drawing a sword, when he knows of
twenty parters, or redders, is there called stout; but when he comes
abroad to the wars, at first, the thundering of the cannon and musket
roaring in his ears makes him sick, before he come near danger, as I
have known some: but where virtue and honour doth grow, there labour,
exercise and danger is needful: Nam ardua & difficilis virtutis est
via, tamen, nil tam difficile est, quod non solertia vincat; And death
itself is never bitter, when it leaves an immortall, and glorious name
behind it; Vivit enim post funera virtus: & animus moderatis laboribus
adjuvatur, immoderatis autem abluitur.

To conclude then this observation, we see that as courage in wars is
much worth, for obtaining of victory: so is the wisdom of a General or
leader in wars, as Gustavus was, of so much worth, even in the
obtaining of this victory, that the spirit of him alone, and skill in
direction, was better than thousands of armed men. The enemy being in
this battle near twelve thousand men, at least, stronger than we; yet
Gustavus alone on our side was better, and of more worth to us, then
that multitude to our enemies.

We see then here, that no greater joy or pleasure can come to mortal
man, than to overcome his enemy by arms: and we see also, that the
event of battle doth not consist in number of fighters, but, under
God, in the order and courage used in battle.

Here also we see, that a good cause and a good quarrel is ever to be
had, if thou wouldst have victory over thine enemies; and who would
wish a better quarrel than we fought for, this day being for the
relief of our distressed friends, and for the liberty and promotion of
Christ's Gospel; or who would not hazard, in such a quarrel,
especially against such enemies, that had banished the daughter of our
dread Sovereign, and her royal issue, from her kingdom and dignities?

O would to GOD I had once such a leader again to fight such another
day; in this old quarrel! And though I died standing, I should be
persuaded, I died well; and I wish, that as we have received the light
of truth happily, that fought in that quarrel: even so we may happen
to restore that light again pleasantly; that as we did overcome that
day our carnal enemies; even so we may overcome in our last fight our
spiritual enemies; that after death we may be crowned with immortal
Glory.



The seventeenth Duty discharged of our March from the place of Battle
towards Leipzig

Having merrily passed the night on the place of battle, with variety
of pleasant discourses of our several observations of the day; having
hunted a fox, that was both old and crafty; though he had escaped with
his life, he had a torn skin, and a bruised body; and being long
chased, in end he got a hole to hide him in: for sure he did think,
there was no long safety for him, if oft he did but meet with such
cunning hunters; that had laid all passes for him, to keep him in: for
though, at this time, he had stripped away his tail, yet his train
(for the most part) were either taken or killed.

Other discourses we had of plenty, and of want, being some of us
extremely hungry, others pined with extraordinary thirst, having no
water near unto us, nor vessels to bring it from afar, our servants
being left far behind us, who were plundered by those cowards that had
fled from us, who also furnished a great part of our night's
discourse, having wondered at their carriage, that had such external
shows, with so few inward gifts of the mind.

The night thus passed, the day peeping, every one, that missed a
loving friend, or a comrade, went near to the ground, on which they
sundered, making diligent search to find them, either dead or alive;
sundries of both were found, the dead were put under ground, being
honourably buried like soldiers, that had given their lives for the
weal of the public, the wounded were convoyed unto dorps, where
chirurgians were appointed to attend their cure.

By nine of the clock, the army was drawn up in battle, where the
difference was great, betwixt our show then, and the sight of the day
before; his Majesty having overviewed the army, he took the most part
of the horsemen with him, and commanded to march towards Leipzig with 
the rest of the army, to be rested there till further orders; and his
Majesty with the horsemen advanced after the enemy; prosecuting the
victory, in taking order with those they had left behind, for making
their retreat sure, whereof there were left at Leipzig three thousand
men, whom his Majesty in his by-going gave orders to pursue, and
advanced to a castle called Moosburg, where there were a great many of
the enemy, who rendered themselves, and took service.

Our March continuing to Leipzig, at our coming there, we found a well
provided leaguer for our hungry stomachs, of all sort of good
victuals, where about the leaguer, there were feeding, kine, sheep,
calves, geese, hens: they left also corn in abundance, and flour in
readiness; which was the more acceptable, being found at hand, without
travelling for it; and to avoid strife and disorder, before we entered
the leaguer, it was divided proportionally amongst the regiments, as
we would part quarters, where no man was suffered to take anything out
of another's quarter, but it behoved him to be content with his lot,
whether good or bad; so that being quartered, they were happy to their
meat, having come, as they say, to a peeled egg; where we lay two
nights refreshing ourselves, till our baggage was come after us from
Bad Dueben: during which time, the Saxons were coming together, their
fear being passed at Leipzig, where Field Marshal Harnam was
appointed, with the Duke's forces, to take in both the town and
castle, which immediately were given over on accord.

The seventeenth Observation.

Here we found the proverb verified, that they never had an evil day,
who got a merry night after: and the long expectation of this our
happiness made our joy the more welcome; for we helped with great
labour, toil, and travail to have brought this day's work to a good
end: we rejoiced that the labour and danger being vanished, the good
of it remained with us: and though our commons were but short, our
mirth was never the less; for we ought not to care how laborious or
painful our actions are, if the fruit be honest and good; for though
the pains be first tedious, yet betime they will yield content. What
matter is it then of our toil, and travail; or what care should we
take of trouble or danger, so our joys may be enlarged? Job was not so
miserable in his affliction, as he was happy in his patience. Which
should teach all men of our profession to bear their disturbances and
troubles patiently; that in end they may come to their wished for
credit and honour. For he is not worthy the sweet, that cannot suffer
the souer; neither is he worthy to be made participant of such mirth,
as we enjoyed this night, that ran away in time of danger.

Here also we see, that it is the duty of the longest livers, to see to
the honour and credit of their dead friends, in taking care of their
burials, as the last duty: as also, to show their compassion to their
hurt comrades alive, who perhaps received their wounds in rescuing of
others, whose skins were kept sound, though theirs torn.

Here also we see, that death is fatal unto all, both to feeble and
courageous, but a glorious death is only proper unto the valiant; who
oftest doth eschew death, when the fearful perisheth in an instant;
and therefore it is that the valiant man doth choose rather to die
honourably, than to live in ignominy, as the feeble doth; but these
died here valiantly; the brightness of their actions, done in their
life time, remains firm in the minds of men unto all ages; And to
their posterities in writing, never suffering their memories to rot
with the time; whose burials, though mean, on this place of battle,
yet they are commemorations of their virtuous lives to posterity;
whose killing was no punishment (say the world what they list) but
rather the beginning of their glory: And therefore, how ever a man
dies, he dies well that dies in Christ, ending his days with honour.

At this day's service I was rich in friends, that helped to the
obtaining of this victory with credit; but soon after we found the
fruits of mortality, death having seized more on our kindred, than on
any other family of our nation, that were employed in this war; and
the unthankfulness of those we served hath been such, that those who
suffered most, were least rewarded; as we may justly say, having lost
our master and King, who did see our actions, and had rewarded them,
had he lived. And though I will not vaunt, neither of my friends, nor
of our travails, none can blame me to say, as the puppy said, we dogs
killed the hare, since we were with the rest at Leipzig, the center of
Germany, which was, and is, and shall be sedes belli, till the cause
be won, and those we fought for be restored; and then I would be
content to lay up my sword, and live a retired life, serving God and
the public at home, as we did abroad.



The eighteenth Duty discharged of the in-taking of Halle and of the
castle, and of our March from Leipzig to Halle.

HIS Majesty having left Field Marshal Harnam with the Duke's forces,
to accord with Leipzig and the castle, the eleventh of September, we
continued our march towards Halle; and coming at the appointed
rendezvous, we halted in the fields, where we were to quarter
overnight; his Majesty accompanied with a great and honourable train
of cavaliers, lighted from his horse on the head of our brigade; the
officers whereof coming together about his Majesty in a ring, his
Majesty made a speech in commendation of the brigade, thanking them
for their good service, and exhorting them for the continuance
thereof, promising, as he was a royal King, he would not forget to
reward them; and turning him towards the supreme officers, they in all
humility did kiss his Majesty's hand, in confirmation of their loyalty
in time to come, the whole inferior officers and soldiers cried aloud,
they hoped to do his Majesty better service then ever they had done.

His Majesty taking horse again with his royal train, he directed
General Bannier to go and distribute the three thousand foot prisoners
that were willing to take service, under the Dutch regiments:
Whereupon, I approached unto his Majesty, entreating his Majesty to
consider the great loss our regiment had sustained on all the former
occasions of service, that seeing we were become weak like to other
regiments; Therefore his Majesty might be graciously pleased to give
order to General Bannier, that I might have all the Britons and Irish
that were amongst the prisoners, to strengthen our regiment, which his
Majesty granting, directed a cavalier with me unto the General,
commanding I should have them: I was overjoyed, thinking to get a
recruit of old soldiers; and the cavalier having declared his
Majesty's will unto the General, the General said, with all his heart
I should have them, and when I had made trial to find out the number;
there were but three Irish amongst them all, and being disappointed of
a strong Recruit, I did over-see those, to follow their comrades; and
being returned, his Majesty asked me how I sped; I told his Majesty,
Britons were so far addicted to his Majesty and the cause, that few of
them served the Emperor, whereupon I entreated his Majesty for some
Dutch; but his Majesty refusing, promised to put me and the regiment
alone upon an occasion, where I should get, not only the prisoners,
but good booty also.

The next morning continuing our march towards Halle, the most part of
my folks were commanded for the in-taking of the castle of Halle, the
party being commanded by the Colonel of the artillery, Captain William
Stewart, Clare his brother, then Captain under our regiment, was
commanded with the commanded men, the castle being taken by accord, we
did get fifty old soldiers that took service under our regiment.

His Majesty on the Sabbath day in the morning went to Church, to give
thanks to God for his by-past victories, this church being the
Bishop's cathedral seat, I did hear there sung the sweetest melodious
music that could be heard, where I did also see the most beautifull
women Dutchland could afford.

The next day the Duke of Saxony, with a princely train, came unto
Halle, to congratulate his Majesty's victory, and was invited to sup
with his Majesty, where they made merry, and the next day held counsel
how to maintain the wars, and how they should prosecute their victory,
where it was concluded, that his Majesty with his army should advance
towards Erfurt, and, then over Thuringer Wald unto Franconia; and that
the Duke's army should march unto Silesia, and towards the Crantzis,
or frontiers of Bohemia. After this conclusion, his Majesty sent post
unto Prussia to call the Chancellor of Sweden from thence, to be at
Halle as legate for his Majesty, to disburden him of the politic
affairs, having burden enough of the military employment, and of the
receiving and dispatching of foreign ambassadors; and till the
Chancellor's coming he did leave Colonel Winckle with a strong
garrison in Halle, having wisely foreseen both the way, how to
prosecute his victory, as also to maintain his conquest.

The eighteenth Observation.

This great army of General Tilly's being defeated, did seperate
themselves in great troops and bands, especially the foot; who ought
ever to stand well, and fight with courage boldly in field, and not to
suffer themselves to be rent; though the horsemen should run away, and
being they cannot run so fast for their safeties; my counsel then
shall be ever to them, to fight well for victory, and though they
should lose all hope of victory, I would not have them to disbandon or
scatter; but rather to stand together, till at last they might get
honourable quarters for themselves, rather then shamefully to be cut
off in flying away.

Here we see, that the foot soldiers suffer ever the greatest loss in
extremity, and they have ever least gains, though most credit: but we
see his Majesty with clemency doth follow the example of the ancient
Romans, who, of all victories, thought that victory best, which least
was stained with blood, having given quarters and service to three
thousand Imperial soldiers, without drawing one drop of blood.

Likewise we see here the continuance of his Majesty's industry and
diligence, aswell in prosecuting his victory, as he was valiant in
obtaining of it, in the one as in the other vindicating his own
honour, and the honour of his noble friends, showing, after the fury
was past, his clemency and meekeness towards his enemies; yet who ever
was more valiant than he, being ever in all his onsets a leader? And
as we see his Majesty's valour and diligence, in prosecuting his
victory: so we see also his care, in supplying the weakness of his
army, as a wise General should do, in not letting his enemies see the
weakness of his army, which ought never to be known to those, who
would rejoice at the same.

Likewise here I did observe a great thankfulness in a King, in
acknowledging openly in view of an army, the good service done by his
servants: wherein I did especially see his love to our nation beyond
all others, that did  serve him, to make other nations emulous of
their glory, in following of their virtues; and though his Majesty
used them here, rather like unto friends than to servants, it should
not make them the more saucy, but rather the more humble, as both
officers and soldiers did verify, in promising the continuance of
their faithful obedience, and of better service, as the Lord would
enable them, on the next occasions.

Likewise we did see here, how few of our nation are induced to serve
those Catholic potentates: and for my part, I find the reason good:
for if we have any enemies in Europe, it must be those, that would not
only overthrow our estates at home (if they could) but also would
force us (if it lay in their powers) to make shipwreck of our
consciences, by leading us unto idolatry.

Moreover we see here, that his Majesty and the Duke of Saxony having
once been companions of danger together, they were then entertaining
one another's familiarity, in renewing of their friendship, confirmed
again with the German custom, in making their League the firmer, by
drinking brothership together, where I having entered the Halle, and
being seen by his Majesty, I was presently kindly embraced by holding
his arm over my shoulder: wishing I could bear as much drink, as old
General Major Ruthven, that I might help his Majesty to make his
guests merry, and holding me fast by the hand, calling to the Duke of
Saxony, declared unto him, what service our nation had done his father
and him, and the best last, at Leipzig: commending in particular to
the Duke, Colonel Hepburne, and Lumsdell, and having called Colonel
Hepburne unto him, he did reiterate the former discourse, and much
more, in commendation of the Scots.

In the continuance of this war in Germany (as the sequel of the story
will prove) from the Baltic coast unto the Alps and Tyrol; where
Colonel Hepburne was sent out as Colonel, to command a party, I was
sent with him, as his second, being ever much obliged unto him, not
only for his love on those occasions, but also for his good counsel,
he being long before me in the Swedens service. And as we were oft
comrades of danger together; so being long acquainted, we were
comrades in love: first at college, next in our travels in France, at
Paris and Poictiers, Anno 1615, till we met again in Prussia at Elbe
in August 1630. Nothing therefore inmy opinion, more worthy to be kept
next unto faith, than this kind of friendship, grown up with
education, confirmed by familiarity, in frequenting the dangers of
war; and who is more worthy to be chosen for a friend, then one who
hath shown himself both valiant and constant against his enemies, as
the worthy Hepburne hath done, who is generally so well known in
armies, that he needs no testimony of a friend, having credit and
reputation enough amongst his enemies.

To conclude then this observation as I begun it, I cannot but commend
his Majesty's wisdom and foresight, in bringing the Rex-chancellor
Oxensterne on the Dutch bottom, to be second to his Majesty, and to 
free him of a part of his buthens, by placing him at Halle (as legate)
being Centrum Germaniae.



The ninteenth Duty discharged of our March from Halle towards Erfurt
in Thuringia.

HIS Majesty having left Colonel Winckle at Halle as governor, with a
strong garrison to command the town, he ordained and left the Duke of
Anhalt as Stadt-holder, not only over the town, but also over the
whole Stift of Magdeburg: having taken leave of the Duke of Saxony,
after many protestations and promises of mutual friendship; our march
did continue towards Erfurt; and before our up-breaking, the castle of
Leipzig was given over by accord unto the Duke of Saxony: and the
Duke's army was also marching towards Silesia and Bohemia.

The seventeenth of September, our first night's quarter was taken at a
dorp, two miles from Halle; where those of Erfurt being so displeased
at our coming, as unwilling to entertain such Guests (they being all
Catholics, Jesuits and Monks) being mightily afraid, they did send
their commissioners before them, to treat with his Majesty, but his
Majesty did give them their answers, by Duke William of Weimar, that
they should quit the Catholic faction, and give their oath of fidelity
to his Majesty of Sweden, and that they should take in his garrisons
within their town, and render up to his Majesty the castle of
Cyriaksburg, with the colleges to come in his Majesty's will; who
should suffer them to be untroubled in their religion, paying their
contribution to the wars, like the other burghers and country.

The commissioners thinking their conditions to be hard, they took
leave of his Majesty, promising to refer the business to the town and
clergy: and they being departed, the Duke of Weimar with a regiment of
horse was directed after them; having charge to ride as hard as they
could, and entering the ports with a few horse at the first, commanded
the guard to lay down their arms, which hardly they could refuse, the
rest being so near; they entered the town and marched peaceably unto
the market place, which caused an extraordinary fear amongst the
burghers, and yet a greater terror amongst the clergy.

The Council being called to come on the market place, they were
commanded to render the town keys unto the Duke; who getting the keys,
the town was taken without blood.

The twenty two of September, his Majesty having quartered the greatest
part of the army without the town, he entered the town with eight
thousand men foot and horse, which were all quartered within the town,
and cloisters; having all free entertainment, in abundance; some of
the clergy removed themselves, those who pleased to stay, were not
troubled but in their means, and his Majesty promised unto the town
and council the free enjoyment of their former liberties.

His Majesty having rested the army some few days, Duke William of
Weimar was made Stadt-holder, who had absolute command over three
thousand horse and foot, getting also full power to take in the
contribution, and to give out patents, for levying of horse and foot
regiments for his Majesty's service.

My cousin, the Baron of Fowles, with his regiment of foot, being left
there in garrison, took afterwards patent of the Duke of Weimar for 
levying a regiment of horse, which he after brought to pass.

His Majesty giving direction for repairing the fortifications of the
town, there were orders given to the army to be in readiness, for to
march over Thueringer Wald unto Franconia, and the regiment had orders
to provide their soldiers sufficiently of pikes and muskets, being
desired to send unto Erfurt for such as they stood in need of.

The nineteenth Observation.

HIs Majesty as he was valourous and diligent in conquering; so he was
careful to maintain his conquest: the one being as necessary as the
other. Likewise we see his Majesty's wisdom, in appointing the Duke of
Anhalt (in respect of his power in those quarters) to be Stat-holder
at Halle, and over the Stift of Magdeburg, till the Chancellor of
Sweden's coming, where we see, that his Majesty, for his own aims, did
make no difference betwixt Protestants and Lutherans, but made a like
use of them both. For though the Duke of Anhalt was a Protestant, he
being powerful in those quarters, to do his Majesty service (being
father-in-law to Duke William of Weimar) this command was imposed upon
him.

Here also at Erfurt, being the first part in Dutchland belonging unto
the Catholic League, as appertaining to the Bishopric of Mainz,
notwithstanding, we see his Majesty clemency towards the Papists, in
using no violence against them, save only, Jure belli, as those who
were conquered by the sword; his Majesty did exact of them
contribution to the wars, and their fidelity in giving their Oaths to
be true unto his Majesty, in doing no harm unto his person or army; by
entertaining correspondence with his enemies, and on those terms, his
Majesty was pleased, to let them remain untroubled in their
consciences, and those that were scrupulous to give this oath, were
suffered to depart in peace, and those who were contented to give it,
could not say, they were injured.

Here then we see, that Princes' charters are no others over their
conquered lands, than their sword, and the oath of fidelity.

It is reported of Peter Count of Savoy that he coming to give his oath
of fidelity to the Emperor Otto the fourth, he came presenting himself
before the Emperor, the one half of his body clad over with cloth of
gold, and his left side clad over with glittering Armour; the one, to
testify the honour and respect he carryed to the Emperor; the other,
how ready he was to fight against his enemies, or those that durst
speak evil of his Majesty: and being asked for his charters, which he
had of lands given him in time of wars, he drew his sword, saying;
here they are, signifying thereby, that brave warriors, kings or
princes had no better right than their swords.

Here also we see, that nothing is more powerful, to bring our enemies
to an accord, than a strong army, while as they want strength to
oppose them; for the conquest will render and give such conditions to
the conqueror, as he pleaseth to further, good or bad.

We see also here as formerly, his Majesty in respect of the Duke of
Wimar his power in those quarters (which in effect is great) appointed
him Stadt-holder, and supreme commissioner in his Majesty's absence,
in governing  the country, and in strengthening the army, by levying
of forces, of horse and foot, being a fit man for such employment,
that part of the country being the most populous part in Germany, and
cheapest to entertain them, through the fertility of ground in those
parts, rendering increase beyond any part of lower Germany.



The twentieth Duty discharged of our March towards Wuerzburg in
Franconia.

The twenty-six of September, his Majesty divided the army in two deals
or parts, considering the difficulty he had to march over Thueringer
Wald with a strong army. And therefore being minded to march unto
Franconia, to visit the Bishops of Bamberg and Wuerzburg, he took the
one half of the army with himself, crossing over the Wald towards Bad
Koenigshofen and Schweinfurt; and directed Lieutenant General Bawtish,
and Sir John Hepburne, with the other half of the army, to march over
the Wald unto Franconia, upon Schmalkalden and Neustadt, the
rendezvous appointed for the army to meet at was Wuerzburg on the
Main, being the Bishop his chief residence, where there was a great
city and a strong citadel or castle, wherein lay a strong garrison,
and the most part of the riches of the country, being esteemed by them
as impregnable, in respect of the situation, being seated on a high
hill unaccessible, save only from the town, so that it was hard to do
it any hurt by cannon, being so strong by nature, and fortified with
divers out-works, on the accessible side that lay to the city.

The army thus divided, and marching alike to one centre or rendezvous,
his Majesty was provided to take in the strengths that lay in his way,
and Bawtizen and Hepburne had orders to bring under contribution such
cities, as they marched on, as they did.

His Majesty took in his way Bad Koenigshofen by accord, being strong,
and having beset it with a garrison, he marched from thence to
Schweinfurt, and took it in also, and having beset it with a garrison,
the burghers being made to give their oath of fidelity; Duke Ernest of
Weimar was appointed Stat-holder over Franconia.

In this time we marched over the Wald to Schmalkalden, and from thence
to Neustadt, Mellrichstadt, Gemuenden, and Karlstadt on the Main. The
first night we quartered on the side of the Wald next unto Franconia,
in a city called Schmalkalden, where we were well quartered; and the
next morning we marched to Meiningen, from thence to Mellrichstadt,
and then to Neustadt on the Salt, from thence to Hammelburg, from
thence to Gemuenden, and from Gemuenden to Karlstadt; and these six
cities we took in by accord; and having gotten a composition of moneys
of them, they being sworn to give their obedience unto his Majesty,
having quartered in them as we passed, they were free, paying the
moneys they had promised, and the monthly contribution. In this march,
though the General Lieutenant commanded in chief, and made the accord
most to his own advantage; having got of these towns above fifty
thousand Dollars, whereof he made neither account to his Majesty, nor
yet was he  any ways beneficiall to the Colonels, who did the service;
but put all in his own purse; neither yet did he acknowledge Sir John
Hepburne with the least token of his bounty, whose merit, at this
time, was not inferior to his own.

His Majesty having taken in Schweinfurt, and beset it, he continued
his march to Wuerzburg, and coming before the town, he summoned them
to render, whereupon they did send Father Ogleby, Abbot of the Scots
Cloister at Wuerzburg, to capitulate with his Majesty, in the behalf
of the burghers, who got granted unto them the like accord, as was
made with Erfurt, in all degrees; the accord subscribed, his Majesty
entered the town the same day that our forces arrived at Karlstadt,
being within two miles of them that night.

The city given over, the castle refusing to hear of any treaty, they
begun from the castle-works to plague his Majesty's army with cannon;
wherever they could lie or stand, within or without the city, on
either side of the Main, they were cruelly tormented by the enemies'
cannon; so that at last it went on in earnest on both sides, for his
Majesty having had intelligence, that General Tilly with a strong army
of fifty thousand men, being joined with the Duke of Lorraine, were
coming for the relief of the castle; his Majesty resolved, that taking
of time was best, and that it behoved him on the sudden to have it, or
not at all.

This castle being a strong strength, sequestered on a height from the
town; and the soldiers as they retired from the town, they did break
off one arch of the bridge, to hinder his Majesty's passage over the
bridge unto the castle; being the only way he could get to it; and the
castle works did so command the bridge, that a single man could not
pass over without great danger of life, being the whole bridge did lie
open just under the castle; where there was one long plank laid over
the broken arch, being distant in height from the water, near eight
fathom, so that it seemed a hazard or torment to any man, to pass over
alongst the plank; where some valourous officers and soldiers would
rather adventure to go before the mouth of the cannon, than to cross
over the plank, though there were no danger of the enemies' cannon or
musket, which still played furiously on that pass of the bridge, to
hinder his Majesty's soldiers in setting over; where at first, two
valourous gentlemen of our nation, being brethren, were killed on the
bridge (viz.) Sir James Ramsey his Major, called Bothwell and his
brother.

Nevertheless, before our coming from Karlstadt, being within two
miles; his Majesty had engaged the rest of our countrymen that were
with him, on this piece of service, being the most desperate, and of
the greatest importance, that was ever done in Dutchland during the
continuance of the wars; And therefore Sir James Ramsey and Sir John
Hamilton were made choice of, with their regiments by his Majesty, who
knew both their worth and valour, being persuaded, if they refused it,
none would undertake the service after them; the passage being so
dangerous, and of such hazard, that without great difficulty, there
was no probability to gain much credit there; and his Majesty
resolved, except those cavaliers with their followers, would make way
to others, the wished event could not be hoped for at that time,
seeing the enemy was within three days march to relieve it; and to the
end, they might show good example to others, they were commanded, with
their fellows, being all musketeers, to cross the bridge, and to beat
the  enemy from the water side, and then to force a passage for the
rest of the army towards the castle; the orders were as hard, as the
passage was difficult, yet cavaliers of courage, being daring men, and
once resolved, nothing could seem difficult unto them, to gain honour
and credit to themselves and country; especially being made choice of
by a King, out of his army, to give testimony publicly, in view of the
whole army, of their valour and resolution exemplary, forcing their
enemies to give ground for them and theirs, having had not one foot of
ground on that side of the water, till they should gain it at their
landing: for I was none of the actors, nor yet of the spectators, till
I had viewed it the next day, being informed particularly by my
comrades of the manner of their on-falling.

The bridge lay over the Main, with six arches in length, being a very
fair and spacious bridge (over which sixty men could well march in
front) lying open unto the castle batteries and works; the middle arch
whereof being broke, a plank was set over, where with difficulty
strong-headed soldiers might cross one after another, under mercy of
cannon and musket; and while as they could but file over, the enemy
could receive them with full bodies of pikes and muskets, which was a
great disadvantage; and the distance, betwixt the water and the plank,
would terrify any to venture over, for fear of drowning, though he
were in no fear of an enemy; so that many, who went with resolution to
pass over, returned again, choosing rather to cross alongst the water,
in small boats; Notwithstanding, the enemy would empty salvos of
muskets on them before their landing; Nevertheless, Sir James Ramsey
and Sir John Hamilton, in obedience to his Majesty's commands, with a
few soldiers adventured to cross the river with small boats; their
soldiers giving fire before their landing, and in their landing,
against their enemies: and being happily once landed, and beginning to
skirmish, their soldiers they left behind them, who before durst not
adventure to cross alongst the plank, seeing their officers and
comrades engaged with the enemy, to help them, they ran over the plank
one after another so fast as they could run; till at last they passed
all and made a strong head against the enemy; till, by the valourous
conduct of their leaders, and their following, they forced the enemy
to give ground, retiring unto their works.

Their leaders, desirous to gain further honour and reputation, pursued
the enemy so hard, till they had beaten them out of a torn, they had
fled unto. At which time, Sir James Ramsey was shot lame in the left
arm, and then his comrade Sir John Hamilton succeeding him both in
command and courage; notwithstanding of the enemies' strength and
great fury used against them, having disputed with long service for
the ground; at last it was made good by Sir John and his followers;
till such time his Majesty had set over after them the most part of
the army, so that they were blocked up on all quarters, and forced to
remain within their works; till that against night, the service being
ceased, we with the rest of the army were come from Karlstadt, and
quartered that night without the town on the other side of the Main.

His Majesty before day, gave orders to the Swedes, and some Dutch
regiments, to storm the enemies' works, who having kept slight watch,
were unawares surprised by some Swedes, that had entered with ladders
over the wall, so that a panic fear having possessed them, they
retired in disorder  from their post; and the Swedes and Dutch
followed so hard, that they had not time to draw up their draw-bridge,
neither yet to let down the portcullis of their inward ports; being so
amazed, our people flocking in after them, cut them down as they were
found, giving no quarters at all, so that they that entered first made
the best booty, though least service. Here fortune favoured his
Majesty miraculously at this time, beyond men's expectation, as
formerly; having got here a great deal of riches; as also many cannon,
and great store of ammunition; and of all sort of victuals abundance.
The fury past, his Majesty set a governor on the castle, and a
garrison, which was strong, and he gave orders presently to begin to
repair the works, seeing General Tilly, with his army, were drawing
near; and his Majesty having got intelligence, that they were
quartered within two miles off Wuerzburg, according to his accustomed
manner, his Majesty with a party of horse and dragoniers fell upon
their nearest quarters in the night, and defeated four regiments of
their horse, and retired the next night unto Wuerzburg, attending when
the enemy would seek for his revenge.

The twentieth Observation.

His Majesty at this time, as formerly, used great expedition in
marching unto Franconia, knowing it was one of the circles of the
whole Empire, that was of most importance for the enemy; being a
straight and a strong country, by reason of the strengths within it:
And therefore it was, that he divided his army in crossing the Wald,
at divers places; that his artillery might pass the sooner through.
For he knew, who ever was master of Wuerzburg, he commanded the whole
River of the Main, and consequently, whole Franconia, which
fortunately happened, according to his Majesty's deliberation.

Here also we see the evil that comes of greediness, in making general
commanders to be hated by those that follow them; for Bawtizen having
got a great sum of money of these towns, by the help and service of
the foot, it became him, according to right and discretion, to have
shared with the colonels, who commanded the brigades and regiments;
but seeing his want of discretion in not acknowledging them, they
being once joined again to his Majesty's army, would never consent to
be commanded by him a foot-step afterwards, for aught his Majesty
could do, having dealt so niggardly with cavaliers of their worth, so
that his Majesty was forced to direct him to command elsewhere.

This greediness is the most pestiferous root, that ever grew in a
general commander; for on this march, soldiers were usually commanded
to lie in the fields, and not suffered to quarter in the towns, which
they had taken, for fear to hinder the payment of the moneys imposed
on them; so that public employment is ill bestowed upon a greedy
person; and this greediness in a man of war, to gather riches, may
lose him all his fortunes; and avarice hath been the loss of many
armies, and of many kingdoms also; for no vice is more pestiferous in
the extraordinary use, than this, to bring a man to be disdained of
others, especially of those would follow him.

Here also we see, that of old, our nation was much esteemed of abroad,
especially the clergy, who in all kingdoms, as in Germany, had their
cloisters, as here, and at Erfurt; and he was a Scots man, that
brought the Christian religion first into Franconia, but was evil
rewarded, being there afterwards murdered.

It was the custom observed ordinarily by his Majesty of Sweden, to
make use of our countrymen on service, wherein he desired they should
show themselves examplary to others, as at this time, he made choice
of Sir James Ramsey and Sir John Hamilton, to be the first should
adventure, of the whole army, to force the enemy to give way to his
Majesty to set his army over the Main; where, on that bridge Major
Bodwell and his brother being killed, were buried in Wuerzburg Church,
leaving the trophy of their valour amongst strangers, in honour of the
nation, that was ever glorious abroad.

Sir John Hamilton disdaining the orders his Majesty did give, for
storming the castle, having employed the Swedes and Dutch on the
storm, neglecting him and the Scots, who had made the way to the rest,
in the extremity of the danger, the cavalier, I say, therefore
disdaining the service, seeing his countrymen neglected, he desired of
his Majesty his honourable pass, which his Majesty delayed, promising
to give content another time, which he utterly refused, but took his
pass, seeing he thought the nation was wronged; for which in my
opinion he merits praise: for if many such cavaliers thus served
strangers, that would not care for them nor their service, when once
they begin to neglect them, others that were but cavaliers of fortune
of the nation, would be the better respected and used. Which should
teach all cavaliers that serve truly abroad to take their time with
credit of those they serve, seeing they do not respect cavaliers, but
when they have most use of them,

Here then we see that no strength, be it never so strong, is able to
hold out, when as God doth not watch the fort, the watch-man watches
in vain, and we see by the submission of Franconia after this victory,
that the victorious ensigns are ever followed: for where Fortune doth
favour, there the commons do follow, and their study also with their
favour follows the victorious.

Here also we see General Tilly, though beaten at Leipzig, in less then
five weeks time, he draws together again a strong army, with fifty
thousand men, and lies down within three miles of his Majesty's army,
but his Majesty having wisely beset the passes on the Main, before his
coming, winter drawing near, and the country being a strait country by
nature, for woods, hills and water; As also, forage and provision for
horses being taken out of his way, his horsemen in that country were
made unprofitable for him to stay there, for lack of entertainment,
which was defective for his foot also, so that it was impossible for
him to stay long; so seeing his Majesty had resolved in that country,
and for that season to make a defensive war, having divided his army,
both horse and foot within towns and strengths, he suffered Tilly to
ruin his young novices with marches in cold weather, who being for the
most part French and Italians, could not endure the cold air of that
country being hilly: his Majesty having beset all the garrisons on the
Main stream, he suffered Tilly, as he did the year before, in
Pomerania and Magdeburg and the Marks, to traverse with his army in
the cold, while as he lay still with his soldiers within the warm
stove; and when he found the storm over-past, he was ready to neglect
no time.



The twenty one Duty discharged at Ochsenfurt on the the Main in
Franconia.

His Majesty having intelligence, that General Tilly had intention to
have fallen on Ochsenfurt, to patronise the pass over the Main, where
his Majesty had sent but one hundred and fifty musketeers, whom he
judged to be too weak for defending of the town, and considering with
himself, the enemy might likewise pursue Wuerzburg, having made but a
faint at Ochsenfurt; and perhaps his intention might be to pursue both
alike, his Majesty under night coming alone on horseback from the
castle, towards my quarter, being then in the remotest part of the
whole town, I being at supper, his Majesty's foot-man told me, the
King was below, and desired I should come unto him; being come to his
Majesty, he commanded me in all haste to bring our brigade in arms,
and to draw them up on that part against his return; and to command
Sir John Hepburne in his name to meet him there, which immediately
being obeyed accordingly, his Majesty being returned commanded
Hepburne to lead off the musketeers of the whole brigade, being then
eight hundred, and to follow his Majesty whether so ever he went, who
commanded me to bring up the rear, leaving our colours and pike-men
behind us there, till further orders: we marched on in the night half
a mile without the town, before we knew whether we were going, or what
the exploit could be that we were going on, having left both our
horses and servants behind us: at last, his Majesty acquainting
Colonel Hepburne with his design, he marched towards Ochsenfurt, being
convoyed with four score horses alongst the side of the Main, and we
followed with our foot, marching in seven hours those four miles, and
before two of the clock in the morning, we arrived there, without halt
or drawing of breath by the way. At our coming we were let in alongst
the bridge, unto the market place, where our soldiers, after this
wearisome march, were commanded to stay by their arms all night in
readiness, and houses were appointed for the officers to remain in all
night.

The next morning by daylight his Majesty did send for Colonel Hepburne
and me, and tells he was going to visit the walls without, and he
commanded to send two hundred musketeers of our regiment towards the
port before him, which being done, his Majesty accompanied with some
cavaliers walked out: and the night before, at his Majesty's coming to
town he had directed fifty horse to watch half a mile without the
town, betwixt him and the enemy. At his Majesty's out-going, we hear
the enemies' dragoniers, with some horsemen making service against the
watch, who were forced to retire: whereupon his Majesty commanded me
to send forth fifty musketeers with a Lieutenant to skirmish with the
enemy, till the horsemen might retire; the musketeers being advanced,
they skirmished with the enemy in view of his Majesty, holding up the
enemy till the horsemen were by: but the enemy being too far strong,
made our musketeers lose ground in retiring; and his Majesty
suspecting the enemy was backed with stronger forces, his Majesty
commanded me, to command a hundred musketeers more, with a sufficient
officer to march incontinent, for relief of their comerades; and
commanded me to go withal, and to place them in the most advantagious
ground, which I did, and incontinently the relief begun the service
afresh, forcing the enemy to retire back over the top of the hill;
which his Majesty perceiving was wondrous glad, saying, the Scots
skirmish well, who had made the enemy quit their ground, which they
possessed and kept: the other side of the hill being all plain, his
Majesty commanded out a troop of horse, for to recognize the enemies'
design, and calling Colonel Hepburn unto him he said, he would leave
us there, and fearing the enemy might have a design upon Wuerzburg, he
would returne thither, being of greatest moment, and so he gave orders
to Hebburne to defend the town so long as he could, and then, in case
of necessity, to retire over the bridge, and to break it off behind
him. His Majesty being gone,Colonel Hepburne begun to put all things
in good order, preparing for the enemies' coming, casting down houses
and walks, which might serve without the town for the enemies'
advantage, as also, cutting down trees and hedges, which might serve
to shelter the enemy; as also making scaffolds about the walls, for
musketeers to make service from, ordaining the several posies to be
repaired and defended, in case of the enemies' pursuit; ordering also
the watches, and by watches to observe their precise hours, making
also provision betimes for store of ammunition, and giving diligent
and capable men charge over it, and appointing guards for it, with
several other directions befitting an able commander to give out at
such times; being looking for a mighty enemy to pursue a skurvy
irregular hole; where no cavalier could gain credit without overmuch
hazard; yet such a master would be so served.

All things thus provided, the couriers went night and day betwixt his
Majesty and the governor, for mutual intelligence, till the third
night before day, the enemies' trumpets and drums made such a noise,as
though heaven and earth were going together, continuing as if the
enemy were marching to the walls for a general storm: our horse guards
being beaten in under the walls, were refused of entry, and the out-
guards of foot also; and then every man within walls did repair to
their posts,expecting a general storm, and the petarding of the ports.
The colonel having visited the whole guards, and made the round of the
whole towne, seeing all things were in good order, and the day drawing
near, we found the enemy was retiring from us, having begun his march
at midnight towards Nuremberg, and the upper Pfalz. The day clearing, 
our horsemen having come from the other side of the Main, being led
and commanded by Duke Bernard of Weimar, whereof four hundred were
commanded towards the enemies' quarters, to take order with those were
left behind, who did get but slight quarters.

The enemies army being marched, his Majesty was advertised, who sent
orders incontinent to Sir John Hepburne to break up in the night, with
five hundred musketeers, and to march by the enemy, in the night
towards Windsheim, which (by appearance) was too hazardous. The enemy
being too far before, and in his way also, which made his Majesty to
countermand his former orders against his custom; and then the colonel
being commanded to beset the garrison, he was recalled with the party
to return to Wuerzburg. After Tilly's departure, his Majesty caused
publish an edict over all Franconia, that both clergy and lays, none
excepted, should come and swear their fidelity to his Majesty,
whereupon the full liberty of their profession in religion should be
granted unto them untroubled. As also they should have his Majesty's
safeguards for the conservation of their worldly estates, and in this
edict were contained a great part of his Majesty's former victories
obtained against his enemies, with the causes and motives, which moved
him to undertake war against the Emperor, together with the success
followed his Majesty in this war, in having freed Pomeranian
Mecklenburg, the three Marks of Brandenburg, the Stift Bremen, the
Stift Magdeburg, Saxony and Thuringia, already of the enemy; as also
Franconia after the in-taking of Wuerzburg in forcing Tilly with his
army, that did come for their reliefs, for scarcity to retire unto the
upper Pfalz, from whence shortly he hoped to make him retire to
Bavaria, towards the Danube stream, as he had made him to retire
before from Leipzig to the Weser stream; and at last, he hoped he
should bring out of the Emperor and their Catholic League, against all
their wills, a good general peace, unto all the Evangelists and those
of the Reformed Religion in Germany, and he hoped to pay them home
againe jure talionis, in using their landes in Bavaria as they had
done his friends' lands in Mecklenburg and Pomerania.

About this time, Magdeburg was blocked up by General Banier aud the
Brigunes forces, commanded and led by the Marquess of Hamilton, at
which time also his Majesty's ambassador of Great Britain, Sir Henry
Vaine, arrived at Wuerzburg; where his honour, with his noble train,
had the good attendance and respect due given onto him by the whole
officers, who were there of both nations, Scots and English, whom my
Lord Ambassador courteously and kindly did entertain, with such
respect as became his honour to give unto cavaliers and those who
followed his honour, did also keep familiarity alike with both
nations.

At this time also was Lieutenant Colonel Huball sent with a convoy of
horse, and a thousand dragoniers towards Hanau, who took it in by
surprise, with very little loss, when some hurt officers that were
come from Leipzig were taken prisoners, being under cure there. The
town being taken, Huball being but before Lieutenant Colonel to the
Blue Regiment, having brought a part of the country under
contribution, he gave out patents, for levying of horse and foot, in
his own name, having had a sure muster-place, and the help of
Frankfurt besides: immediately he did get commission of His Majesty,
for levying three thousand horse and foot, to be in two regiments
under his command; he was thus suddenly made up by one fortunate
exploit, without any great service, or hurt to himself, or those he
did command. At this same time, or thereabouts was Prague in Bohemia
given over, by accord unto Arnheim, General to the Saxons' Army.

The twenty one Observation.

Here his Majesty was put to the trial of his judgement and dexterity
in command: after the inraking of Wuerzburg, his army for the most
part being sent from him, under command of Gustavus Horne towards
Bamberg, as also having weakened his army, by besetting the garrisons
on the Main, not keeping above eight thousand foot and horse by
himself at Wuerzburg, while as General Tilly, Altringer, Feucker, and
the Duke of Lorraine had joined their forces together, making up fifty
thousand men, of intention to force a pass over the Main, to come at
his Majesty; his Majesty being sure, Tilly would not harm the country
being Papists, he resolved by cunctation, and delays to weary him with
a defensive war, keeping the main strength of his army, within
Wuerzburg, being well provided of all furniture for horse and man; he
begun to strengthen the town with the spade and the shovel, in making
of redoubts and skonces without it, in manner of a Winter leaguer: he
also caused scaffold the walls round about within the town; and
fearing his coming on Ochsenfurt, he did the like, discharging all
duties himself, from one place to another, as became a wise General,
that did foresee the designs of his enemy, by a timely prevention,
according to the accidents, circumstances, and situation of places,
seeing his enemies strong, and himself weak, he took the first
advantage.

This charge of a general to an army is a place of such weight and
importance, that few ought to long to intrude themselves in this kind
of general command, being subject to infinite chances, and altogether
divers, almost every hour set before him. Truly though this King had a
rare judgement, wit and dexterity, with great experience in his
command: Nevertheless, to speak truth, all the time I did follow his
Majesty on occasions, being near three years, I did never see his
Majesty so much troubled in mind and resolution, as at this time in
Ochsenfurt, not knowing well himself what to resolve, the enemy being
behind him and before him; able to pursue Wuerzburg, and Ochsenfurt
alike; and to my mind if he had, he might have carried both at that
time; for our army was not only scattered and dispersed, but also we
were weak, and, which was worse, we were all of us discontented; being
too much toiled with marching, working and watching, without any pay
or gains for honest men.

At this time, his Majesty stood in need of assistance and good
counsel, having enemies on all hands, and a strong enemy; the country
also unsure, being unfriends and Papists, and he being wise, resolved
without giving battle, his best was, to press to overcome them with
the season, with hunger and cold, with marches and delays, keeping
himself within walls, he knew well twelve soldiers with a good officer
to direct them, were better, being willing to attend, than a hundred
naked and hungry soldiers without, whereby his enemies' army were
undone, without hurt or detriment of his own, being well commanded,
and well foreseen and provided of all necessaries, having given them
besides, as reward of their former services, a little money, knowing
well how hungry men could be contented with little, in time of need:
for he resolved, if the enemy pursued him hard within Wuerzburg, he
could not suffer himself to be beleaguered with a strong army, in a
strait place; and to go to the fields with a discontented weak army
(which it behoved him to do) was not good. The consideration of this
forced him to give some moneys in hand, to content them, and hand-
writ, and assignations for more moneys to be paid unto them out of
Nuremberg, within six months afterwards.

As also his Majesty knew well the enemies' army near hand, hearing
there was money given out by his Majesty, that it was the only way to
weaken and dissolve the enemies' army, in making their soldiers run
away, and to take service under his Majesty, which in effect
accordingly fell out: for it being near Winter, and their army marched
away, their straggling soldiers did strengthen our garrisons, having
taken service under us; having but heard of the bruit of money, that
was given out amongst us. Where we see, how necessary it was, at this
time, in such a dangerous extremity, for this little army to have been
commanded by a wise General, that steered his course aright in midst
of the greatest tempest, like to a skilful mariner, where an arrogant
fellow, without skill, that had commanded, had made shipwreck of all.

As his Majesty was wise and moderate in his command; so those who
obeyed were faithful and entire to their superior. Here inferiors whom
Fortune favoureth, though weakest, were subject in all things to him,
who was Fortune's minion, and Mars his equal, Gustavus the Invincible;
that by his wisdom, and foresight, forced old Tilly to retire to
Nuremberg, having gained nothing but loss, which retreat was the
presage of his future ruin, at the Lech, where it enters into the
Danube.

Here also we are instructed, as well by his Majesty's politic
government, as by his military; He being alike expert in both,
discharging the duty of a king, and a general, tam arte, quam marte:
for the enemy was no sooner gone, but incontinent his Majesty caused
serve his public edicts, for bringing in the countrymen, to give their
oaths of fidelity; moving them thereto partly by compulsion, and
partly by promises of duty and of liberty to their consciences, two
strong arguments to move those to obedience, who had seen their
friends forced to turn backes upon them, from whom, under God, they
did expect relief to come.

Moreover we see here, that those who are honoured by God, are also
worthy of honour from their equals: other kings, princes, and
confederates sending their ambassadors unto them, to congratulate
their good fortunes and success; as also to treat with them in matters
belonging to their mutual states and standing: at this time also,
there were commissioners sent from Ulm, Strasburg, Nuremberg, and
Frankfurt, treating with his Majesty for themselves apart, as free
from the body of the Empire: And such feathers his Majesty was glad to
get out of the Emperor's wings, knowing the more he wanted of such
feathers, the worse he could fly: and some of them were light,
changing as the wind. To conclude then, whom fortune favours, the
world laughs on, as may be seen here, by the example of Lieutenant
Colonel Howbalt, after the in-taking of Hanau by mere fortune being
surprised; which was the occasion, this cavalier was so suddenly made
up, in getting command over horse and foot, from liettenant colonel;
who, four years before, was sergeant under the Blue Regiment. Yet
notwithstanding the good he had received under his Majesty and his
Crown, he afterwards quit them and their service; in their greatest
extremity, which was unthankfully done of him, being more unkindly,
then friendly.

The twenty second Duty discharged of our March from Wuerzburg to
Frankfurt on the Main.

His Majesty having beset Wuerzburg castle with a strong Swedens
garrison, under command of Colonel Axellille, preparation being made
for the march, the Colonel of the artillery, Leonard Richardson a 
Swede, was directed down the Main, with the great cannon, and three
hundred commanded musketeers of Scots, of Sir James Ramsey his
regiment commanded by Alexander Hanan, being a discreet cavalier, of
good command and conduct, and valorous also: they had abundance of
cannon, fireworks, ammunition, and all other furniture belonging to
artillery, with them by water, having got orders to take in all
strengths on the Main, which lay in their way, where they and he who
commanded them, made good booty, having taken in several castles, and
Miltenburg also, and from thence continued their course down the water
towards Ashaffenburg, a city and a castle on the Main belonging to the
Bishop of Mainz, where they had orders to remain till his Majesty's
coming with the army.

This march continued for five days, where we had nightly good quarters
by the way, being in fear of no enemy we kept the whole march, the
Main on our right hand, & our horsemen upon the left, having had the
field-marshal with his army lying at Bamberg, betwixt us and the
enemy, so that this march, though in winter, was not so troublesome
unto us, as their travelling is to them, who journey in foreign
countries, for to see strange faces, where they must needs lay out 
moneys for their entertainment, some of us on this march were well
entertained, and did get money besides to spend at Frankfurt.

Likewise when it behoved travellers to hire guides, and sometimes to
hire convoys for their safeties, we had Gustavus a king under God, our
leader, and a powerful army to convoy us, and at night, the sweet, and
sociable society of our countrymen and strangers, the one to season
the other, which made our march pleasant, alongst the pleasant and
fruitful River of the Main, that runs through fair Franconia into the
Rhine at Mainz.

Having come with the army, the length of Hanau, leaving Aschaffenburg
behind us, we marched to Steinhem, which presently we took in by
accord, where the most part of the soldiers did take service, which
being done, his Majesty did send unto the Lords of Frankfurt, desiring
them for the well of the professors of the evangel, to take in a
garrison, with a protestation, if they refused to do it willingly, it
behoved him otherwise to deal with them, which was not his desire.

They having taken the proposition, for two days, in advisement, his
Majesty the sixteenth of November, did let quarter the army before
their ports in Offenbach, Ober and Nieder Rode; the next day they
consented, his Majesty's army should march through, leaving six
hundred men in garrison in Sachsenhausen, the Lords giving their oath
to secure the garrison of Sachsenhausen of all dangers, and on the
seventeenth of November his Majesty  with the whole army in comely
order marched alongst the bridge, from Sachsenhausen through the town
of Frankfurt towards Hoechst, where there lay two miles off the town a
garrison of the enemies. In this march through Frankfurt, such order
was kept without any disorder, as if it were the solemn procession of
a King and his nobles in parliament, every one admiring of his
Majesty's good order and discipline kept over his army.

The nineteenth of November, Hoechst was taken in by his Majesty with
accord, where the soldiers for the most part took service. The next
day the army lying still in dorps, his Majesty returned to Frankfurt,
and met with the Landgrave of Hessen, the Landgrave of Darmstadt and
with the Earls of the Wetterau, where it was agreed amongst them, for
the defence of the land, to join in one confederacy, where the castle
of Ruesselsheim was given unto his Majesty by the Landgrave of
Darmstat, whereon two hundred Scots of Colonel Lodowick Lesly his
regiment were set, under command of Captain Macdowgall.

The next day being the two and twentieth of November, his Majesty
returned to Hoechst again, and having put forth the Papists, placing
his own preachers, on Sunday his Majesty thanked God, that he had
gotten in Frankfurt without blood or stroke of sword. His Majesty
caused to set over a ship-bridge at Hoechst, and sent ships before
Mainz, to block it by water, till his Majesty with the army crossed
the Main, and marched by Darmstat in the Bergstrasse, of intention to
have gone for Heidelberg, but retiring down near the Rhine, having
quartered the army, his Majesty with a party did visit the skonce of
Oppenheim, and thereafter resolved to take it in.

The twenty second Observation.

This march being profitable as it was pleasant to the eye, we see that
soldiers have not always so hard a life, as the common opinion is; for
sometimes as they have abundance, so they have variety of pleasure in
marching softly, without fear or danger, through fertile soils and
pleasant countries, their marches being more like to a Kingly
progress, than to wars, being in a fat land, as this was, abounding in
all things, except peace: they had plenty of corn, wine, fruit, gold,
silver, jewels, and of all sort of riches could be thought of, on this
river of the Main, where the towns and pleasant flects lie by the
water, not distant, in many places, half an English mile from one
another; being one of the pleasantest parts, and wholesomest for air
that I did see in all Germany, having a great traffic by water from
thence unto the west sea, by the Rhine running northward unto Holland.
This town of Frankfurt is so pleasant for air, situation, buildings,
traffic, commerce withal nations, by water and by land, that it is and
may be thought the garden of Germany, and consequently of Europe;
seeing no continent in Europe is comparable unto Germany, for
fertility, riches, corn, wine, traffic by land, pleasant cities, fair
buildings, rare orchards, woods, and planting, civility, as well in
the country as in the cities; their dorps and flects walled about; the
boors inhabitants having their wines in cellars set in great, rife or
plentiful as water, to entertain their friends, in a bountiful manner,
especially alongst this pleasant iver of the Main.

Here at Frankfurt is the mart, called the Frankfurter Messe, whether
the merchants resort from all parts of Europe for the mutual
interchange of money and wares: Hither also are brought twice in the
year from all parts of Europe, the travels and books written by the
learned of all sciences, and of all controversies of religion, to be
transported again from thence, for the use of other Kingdoms.

The inhabitants of Frankfurt, we see here are content to take in his
Majesty's garrison in Sachsenhausen, without compulsion or losing of
blood: and this kind of conquest is the best conquest, when we conquer
more by love than by force; where they, by their timely yielding,
preserved their town, their buildings, their orchards, their houses of
pleasure undestroyed, when others through their pride stood out, till
they were punished by the ruin of their towns, the losing of their
moveables, as their gold, their silver, their rich cupboords, their 
jewels, their ornaments, their orchards, their gardens, in regard of
their pride in time of their plenty.

But this city of Frankfurt was made wise, by the ruin of other cities,
whose intemperate troubles made them moderate. Thus concord is the
mother of all happiness in the common-weal; for she debars enemies,
augments wealth, makes the cities sure without a guard, and oft-times
we see that those who contemn peace, seeking glory, they lose both
peace and glory.

Therefore the Lords of Frankfurt did well, in preferring good
conditions of peace before an uncertain war, especially against such a
heroic king as Gustavus was, then the patriot & protector of their
faith and religion, and consequently of their freedom, and their
country's freedom, and for their rewards, to my knowledge, they were
enriched three years together (by the hand of the army) with the
substance of the four upper circles of Germany; which in th'end they
rewarded with unthankfulness, and doubtless will be punished for it
sometime.

Here also we have the power of example; for the town of Frankfurt
having taken his Majesty of Sweden for their Protector, following
their examples, the two Landgraves Hessen and Darmstadt, with the
Earls of the Wetterau desire also to be in the confederacy, and were
most gladly accepted of. Ulm, Nuremberg and Strasburg ended also their
confederacy with his Majesty after the example of Frankfurt, promising
supply of men, money and victuals for the army, ammunition and horses
for the artillery, with abundance of arms for horse and foot, with
powder, ball, match, wagons, spades, shovels, pikes, mattocks, axes
and all other things fitting for the advancement of the wars. Here was
a great conquest without stroke of sword, showing unto us the number
of friends we get, when fortune smiles on us: but how soon this -
heroic person is but once gone, and that fortune beginneth to frown,
then these variable friends quit their confederacy again, following
the strongest, for which one day the sword of their enemies will come
amongst them, with hunger and pestilence. At this time the Queen's
Majesty of Sweden was come to Stettin, and from thence on her journey
towards Frankfurt. Here also the King's Majesty of Bohemia was come to
visit his Majesty of Sweden, and was royally received by his Majesty,
as likewise by the Lords of Frankfurt, and was wonderfully well liked 
of by the whole communalty of the cities and countries, wherever his
Majesty did come.

Here also the Marquess of Hamilton did come unto his Majesty again,
being followed like a Prince, and well respected by both the Kings.
The ambassadors of Britain and of France were there also, and the Rex-
chancellor of Sweden being come with the Queen's Majesty and Sir
Patrick Ruthvene come from Prussia, were all made welcome to this
Court then at Frankfurt, which was not inferior to the Emperor's own
Court, in respect of great confluence of people, that came from all
parts to congratulate the Lion of the North his victories, and to
admire his fortunes, being so increased in two years time, that all
things succeeded happily unto his Majesty according to his own hearts
desire.



The twenty third Duty discharged of the in-taking of the skonce at
Oppenheim, and his Majesty's crossing the Rhine.

His Majesty having viewed and well recognosced the skonce on the
Rhine, over against Oppenheim, the river being interjected betwixt it
and the town, his Majesty did lead Colonel Hepburne's brigade, and
Colonel Winckle's being the blue; with some cannon, great and small
before it, where his Majesty did stay till the batteries were made,
and the approaches begun, then leaving the command on Colonel
Hepburne, with tempestuous cold weather, with hard frosts and snow, we
lay down on the fields, having no shelter, but some bushes by the side
of the Rhine.

The skonce was really fortified with fosses, that were broad, deep,
and full of water, with a draw-bridge over the moat, and the skonce
was well beset with a thousand men, and well provided of victuals,
fire and ammunition, having free passage at their pleasure without
danger, from the town unto the skonce, and back again: The castle and
the hill on the other side of the Rhine, being mounted high, their
cannon from their batteries did cleanse and scour the fields about the
skonce, being a razed champaign, and plain without any shelter of
their batteries; on the other side they plagued us still with cannon,
especially in the night time, while it behoved us to have fire, which
was their mark, so that sundry were lost, and one night sitting at
supper, a bullet of thirty two pound weight, shot right out betwixt
Colonel Hepburne's shoulder and mine, going through the colonel's
coach; the next shot killed a sergeant of mine, by the fire, drinking
a pipe of tobacco. This night the enemy made an out-fall, to try his
valour, thinking to beat us from our cannon, but he was bravely
repulsed by push of pike, slightly esteeming of their muskets, and
scorning to use ours, with sharp points of pikes conveyed them home to
their graff.

The next day in the morning, knowing his Majesty had crossed the
Rhine, they did capitulate with Colonel Hepburne, who did give them,
being Italians, more honourable quarters than in truth their carriage
did deserve, having got licence to march out, bag and baggage, with
full arms, with a convoy to the next garrison, they being marched, his
Majesty having crossed the Rhine in the night, where the Spaniard made
some resistance, but in vain, his Majesty having got over, the next
morning he marched towards Oppenheim in the Pfalz, on the one side of
the town, and we setting over also, we pursued the town and the castle
on the other side, but Sir James Ramsey his musketeers being led by
their major, finding a privy passage about the castle, they stormed
over the walls, coming betwixt the outward skonce and the castle, and
finding the draw-bridge down, on a sudden they entered the castle, and
put all to the sword: the rest of the enemy finding the castle to be
in, they run all to storm the skonce, on which were nine companies of
Italians, with their colours; their officers finding the castle
surprised behind them, and the storm going on before them, they threw
down their arms calling for quarters, which was granted: but their
colours taken from them, they willing to take service were all
disposed by his Majesty to Sir John Hepburne, who was not only a
Colonel unto them, but a kind Patron, putting them in good quarters
till they were armed and clad again. But their unthankfulness was
such, that they stayed not, but disbandoned all, in Bavaria; for
having once got the warm air of the Summer, they were all gone before
Winter.

The twenty-third Observation.

Here then we see, that it is the duty of all wise generals, of
intention to beleaguer city, fort, or strength, first to recognosce,
and having once recognosced, then to proceed, as they find most
advantagious for the beleaguerer, and disadvantagious for the
assailed: the pursuer must know, what number of men are requisite for
the pursuit, as well offensive as defensive.

In this point of recognoscing his Majesty's judgement was wonderful,
as in all other practical duties fitting a great commander, and as his
Majesty's judgement was great and good, so he was of that mind,
nothing in this kind could be well done, which he did not himself,
neither could his Majesty abide, at such times, as he went to
recognosce, any other to accompany him in the danger, other reasons
doubtless his Majesty had, which were only privy unto himself. This
point how necessary it is, for a great commander to be judicious of,
no soldier will doubt.

Here also we see, his Majesty made no difference of season, or
weather, in prosecuting his enemy, whenever he found any advantage.
And therefore it was his Majesty's wise resolution, to cross the
Rhine, while General Tilly's army, in the Winter time, was farthest
from him, and making but a feint here before Oppenheim, his aim and
design was to cross the Rhine at another part by shipping, that while
the enemy was busied in defence of the skonce, his Majesty might cross
at another part: for the army once crossed, the skonce was lost, for
want of supply; and his Majesty once over, the whole Pfalz and Mainz
were in fear.

Nothing is more powerful to resist resolution, than resolution: for it
is said of the Oake, being hard timber, for to cleave it asunder,
there must be wedges made of itself, that hardness may overcome
hardness. My advice then to all brave fellows watching in trenches, or
guarding cannon, while as the enemy would try their valour by out-
falling, in assailing them, at such times, let the defender do as was
done here, leaving the use of the musket, as being more unready, let
them make use of their pikes, meeting their enemies in the teeth, with
a strong firm body of pikes, (after the old Scots fashion, used by our
predecessors, that fought pell-mell; with two-hand swords, till one of
the parties did quit the field) for though they suffer loss, sure they
must win credit, that repulse their enemy, rather than disgracefully
suffer their cannon to be nailed, or their brains knocked out in
trenches, while as they take them to the uncertainty of the musket.
Therefore let resolution be ever present, repulsing force with force;
for if thou wouldst be esteemed amongst the number of brave fellows,
thou must resolve to show thyself resolute, courageous, and valiant,
going before others in good example, choosing rather to die with
credit standing, serving the public, than ignominiously to live in
shame, disgracing both thyself and country. Who would not then at such
times choose virtue before vice; glory, honour, and immortal fame,
before an ignominious, shameful, and detestable life? Let then my dear
comrades of the British nation, wherever they serve, embrace this my
exhortation, and lay it up in the secret corners of their heart and
mind, that they may be ever mindefull of their credits, preferring
credit to life, for the honour of the invincible nation, doing ever,
as was done here by their country men, in one night thrice, at three
several partes, whereof twice in sight of their King and master.

His Majesty crossing the Rhine, did take with him the Scots, which
were there, of Sir James Ramsey's regiment, of old Spense his
regiment, and of my Lord Rhees; being landed, the Spanish horsemen
having furiously charged, the Scots, with a little advantage of a
hedge, stood by his Majesty against the Spanish horsemen, and with a
strong body of pikes, and salvos of musket, resisted valiantly the
horsemen, till the rest were landed, to relieve them. As also the next
day, the musketeers of Ramsey's regiment, that on all occasions were
wont to show their valour, were the first stormed the walls, at
Oppenheim; as they were the first, with their comrades, that
accompanied his Majesty, at his landing in the Pfalz, testifying how
willing they were to oppose danger, in sight of their King and master,
revenging themselves on the Spaniard (a cruel enemy to the daughter of
our King, and sister to our dread sovereign, the Queen of Bohemia)
whom before they had removed, by force of arms, from the sweet land of
the Pfalz, where at this time, they were fighting, to invest again his
Majesty of Bohemia her husband, and his royal issue, being under the
conduct of the Lion of the North, the invincible King of Sweden, their
leader; who was careless (as he said himself that night) to incur the
feud, or the enmity and anger, both of the House of Austria, and King
of Spain, to do service to his dear sister, the Queen of Bohemia. Who
would not then, my dear comrades, companions, not of want, but of
valour and courage, at such a time, being the time we all of us longed
to see, who would not (I say) press to discharge the duty of valourous
soldiers and captains, in sight of their master and king, having
crossed the Rhine, fighting for the queen of soldiers, being led by
the king of captains, and captain of kings; who would not then, as
true valorous Scots, with heart and hand sustain the fight,
discharging at once the duty of soldiers, and valourous captains, by
that means so far as in them lay, restoring the Pfalz, contemning
death, striving to get victory over their enemies, and freedom of
conscience to their distressed brethren long kept in bondage, and
under tyranny of their enemies, the space of ten years, till the
coming of this magnanimous king, and great captain; who in six months
time after, did free the Pfalz of all Spanish forces, setting them at
liberty; having brought the keys of all goals with him, and opened the
doors, not only of all prisons, but also of all houses and hurches in
the Pfalz, that had been closed ten years before, through the
banishment of the owners, bringing them back to their houses again,
and having removed the idolatrous worship of Papists out of their
Churches, suffered them again to serve God peaceably in their former
true, undoubted and only pure profession of the faith of Christ's
gospel.



The twenty-fourth Duty discharged of our March to Mainz, and of the
in-taking of it.

His Majesty having lain here at Oppenheim some three days, till the
rest of the army were come over at Oppenheim, and at Stockstadt, the
army being come over, the Spaniards were afraid to stay in any place,
that was not wondrous strong; and their fear being so great, they quit
Stagne setting it on fire; as also the Lotterings garrison did quit
Worms, having first abused the town with plundering, and other
intolerable damage and hurt, they retired all unto Frankenthal, being
strong by fortification, they made it strong of men, having retired
above eight thousand Spaniards within it, who being blocked up, had
never the resolution or courage once to have fallen forth on the
Swedens forces, but kept themselves close within walls.

His Majesty taking his march towards Mainz, which before was blocked
up, on the other side of the Rhine next to Frankfurt, with ships, and
with the Landgrave of Hesse's forces, his Majesty about the midst of
December, in cruel tempestuous weather for frost and snow, coming
before it on a Sunday in the afternoon, and having himself rode about
the town, on the Pfalz side, and recognosced both works and walls, the
army standing in battle, his Majesty having first commanded the
horsemen, some to quarters, and some on duty: The foot brigades were
commanded towards their several posts, where Colonel Hepburne's
brigade (according to use) was directed to the most dangerous post,
next the enemy; and the rest to theirs. The night coming on, we begun
our approaches, and prepared for making ready of our battles, where,
according to custom, men were ordained to make cannon baskets, some to
provide materials, some to watch, some to work, some to guard the
artillery, and some to guard the work-men, and some to guard the
colours before the brigade: the day approaching, having made ready the
batteries in the night; as also having wrought in the approaching by
day: the service on both sides beginneth with cannon and musket, so
that our cannon off the water, and from the other side, did shoot
blanck within the town, which made great terror  amongst the
inhabitants, the bishop being removed towards Koblenz, he did leave
two thousand Spaniards within the town, who were in doubt of the
burghers' fidelity, neither yet did they expect any relief, and the
town being wide of circumference, more than they were able to beset,
they begun betimes to think on accord; yet, they resolved, to make it
the more honourable, their best was to prolong time.

Colonel Axallilly, a Swede, being come to visit his Majesty, having
had no employment in the beleaguering, being at supper with Colonel
Hepburne and me, on our post, by our guard-fire, being merrily
discoursing, that if a misfortune should happen unto him there, what
should be thought of it, having had no charge, he having foretold a
mishap unto himself, the next day after dinner hard by me, the leg was
shot from him with a cannon bullet, who after that was carried by my
folks unto his lodging, and being cured, served after with a treen or
wooden leg.

At this siege our brigade did sustain more hurt than the rest of the
army, being most employed on all commands, both in respect of their
valour, and of the good conduct and fortune followed them, and their
leaders.

The third day, the skonce without the town being hard pressed, and we
having on our quarter approached to the walls, and the town, from the
water, and from the Landgrave side, having sustained great loss by
their cannon. The enemy finding there was no hope of relief, he
entered in a Treaty, and gave up the town on accord; being suffered to
march out without arms, they were conveyed to Koblenz: they being
gone, quarters were made for the whole foot within the town, where
three days before Christmass we were quartered, and remained there,
being lodged in the extremity of the cold with the Hofstadt, to the
fifth of March 1632.

The twenty-fourth Observation.

His Majesty of Sweden having crossed the Rhine, the prisoners that
were long banished, being ten years out of the Pfalz, were then
encouraged by their liberty attained unto, through the valour and
wisdom of his Majesty of Sweden, who did bring the keys of the prison,
and of their houses, and the pass once opened, they begun to return
home, and the strangers removed, they rejoiced at their home coming,
in the entertaining of their friends, that fought, for them, and they
did perceive the terror and fear of their enemies, that drew all unto
Frankenthal, as unto the strongest corner of their feeble hearts,
where it was evident to see, their removing from all was drawing near.
Frankenthal being blocked up, and victuals debarred from them, it was
impossible for them to subsist long.

I did observe here, at the in-taking of Mainz, that toil, travail,
danger and resolution were our best means, in getting this town in
three days time; our cannon having from the Hessen side so spoiled the
burghers on the streets, and within their houses, finding their own
hurt, being stronger than the garrison, forced the garrison to accord,
by that means preventing their own ruin, and the loss of their goods,
if the town had been taken by storm of hand. And therefore, for
sparing of their city, they promised his Majesty, for keeping good
order, threescore thousand dollars.

Likewise I did observe, by Axallilly's loss of his leg, that many
times hurt comes to men in that kind, as a presage of worldly luck, in
getting, as they say, something to the sore foot; for he, before this,
being but mean in estate and employment, was afterwards made rich by
governments. Divers others I could instance under our army, were
advanced to riches, after receiving of mean hurts, and on mean
occasions of service, as this was, being but a looker on. But for me,
let me have health, and glad poverty with credit, for riches I desire
not, if that I may have more of credit than others; and that shall be
my prayer, to keep my mind in an invincible place, that external
things move me not: neither would I suffer fortune to be able with her
threatenings to pierce me, having tried sharper that could not dare.
Let us then be content with our lot, and though the means we should
live on, be detained from us, yet let us wrong nobody by oppression,
in conquering by unlawful means, and doubtless the Lord will conserve
our healths, and sustain our bodies with sufficiency, and so being
honest, we need never be ashamed to be thought poor in men's esteem,
being rich in Christ.

Here also I did observe, that oftentimes those, that durst not lift up
their heads in time of danger, do often better speed and thrive in
worldly things, than those that merit the best: as was seen on those
brigades entered first into Mainz, that did get both prisoners and
spoil with the best quarters, when others, that deserved better, were
worse quartered in empty houses, while as other colonels and soldiers,
of far less deserving, were making up of estates for their posterity,
in better quarters, within the Pfalz and Franconia.

But on the contrary; valourous men their labours and travails ought to
be rewarded, with honour and profit, by those they did truly serve.
For if great undertakings in this kind, before towns, in extremity of
danger, were nobly recompensed with great rewards; that would
encourage men again to refuse nothing to be undertaken, that was
honourable: and on the contrary; nothing discontents worthy men more,
than to be rewarded like cowards; and those that stood out the danger,
like those that durst not lift head when the storm blew; and when the
hope of reward is the comfort of men's labours, than all toil seemes
to be easy: and it is a hard thing, when the diligent and industrious
is disappointed of his hire, and when he is rewarded with injury, who
did merit well; this of all evills, is most unsufferable, when he must
suffer loss that expected help: for on the contrary, it were more
just, that notable virtues should be notably rewarded, with badges of
honour, to make all others tread in the glorious path of virtue, and
well-doing.



The twenty-fifth Duty discharged of my March with a party to the
Moselle.

While we lay at Mainz, his Majesty having heard that the Spaniard had
set over a strong army at Hochspeyer, of intention to fall on the
Rhinegrave his regiment of horse, lying in the hinder Pfalz, betwixt
Bacharach and the Moselle, who having no foot forces with him, his
Majesty made choice of me, to be sent unto him with a party of five
hundred commanded musketeers, for to assist him in maintaining the
garrisons in those parts, from the incursion of the Spaniard, and his
Majesty hearing of the Queen's coming towards Frankfurt, leaving
orders with Duke Barnard of Weimar (then governor of Mainz, and
commander over the army in his Majesty's absence) to direct me away
with the party to the Rhinegrave, his Majesty being gone, I was sent
for by the Duke to receive my orders, which were, I should receive
five hundred commanded musketeers, with sufficient victuals and
ammunition, and then to ship them at Mainz, and to go down the Rhine
towards Bacharach, and there to send to the Rhinegrave for further
orders, but before my departing, I took orders in writ from the Duke,
how to carry myself in obeying of the Rhinegrave his commands, and
immediately I went and received the party, being in readiness on the
market-place, with proviant and ammunition for the voyage, and being
shipped we went down the Rhine towards Bingen on the Nahe, that runs
by Bad Kreuznach through the Pfalz into the Rhine at Bingen, where Sir
James Ramseys regiment did lie in garrison, out of which there went
with me of that regiment a captain with a hundred musketeers; being
shipped, we continued our course towards Bacharach, where being
landed, I desired from the governor (being a captain under the Red
regiment) quarters for my soldiers, till I got orders whether to
march, but the captain being discourteous, closed the ports, using us
unfriendly, whereupon I desired to be let in to speak with him, which
being granted for me alone, I entered, and having spoke with the
captain, was refused of quarters, and of proviant for my soldiers,
whereupon I retired forth, & the ports being closed again, I made our
soldiers make good fires of the driest wood without the town, whereof
there was no scarcity; and being dark, the town lying alongst the
River, we getting intelligence there was a water-gate, where there
stood a sentry, I took a small boat and two officers with me, and
entering the sallying port, the sentry suspecting no enemy, we took
him off, swearing if he cried, we would kill him, and bringing him to
our guard, left him to their keeping, and immediately I went in at the
sallying port, accompanied with my officers and some musketeers, and
having set a guard at the port, we went to the captain's quarter, and
took in his lodging, where we made good cheer, jeering the Captain,
till he was contented to send forth abundance of victuals for the
whole party; & to make good quarters for our whole officers within the
town, where they did get both meat & money; and beside, I made all the
dorps that were without the town belonging to it, to pay a
contribution of money to me & my officers, for keeping good order,
which we did to repay the captain's unthankfulness.

The next day leaving the party to make good cheer, I went to the
Rhinegrave to receive his commands, who directed me to march to a dorp
within two miles of Coblenz, and to quarter there till further orders;
I retired to the party, and forcing the Captain to send fifty
musketeers with me; we followed our orders, and quartered within two
miles of Coblenz.

The Rhinegrave having gotten intelligence where some of the Spaniards
did lie in quarters, with his regiment falling into their quarters, he
did defeat two regiments of them, that were come over the Moselle
before the army.

The next day, he advertised me, he was to advance with his regiment
towards Hochspeyer, near the Moselle, to attend the enemies' coming,
and if he were distressed, he would advertise me, whereby I might
timely beset the strengths.

The Spaniard having set over his army at Hochspeyer, being ten
thousand strong, getting intelligence of the Rhinegrave's quarter,
they marched on it, where he lay in open dorps, in a manner trusting
and reposing too much unto himself and his strength, mis-regarding his
enemies, being a cavalier who was both courageous and resolute, who
had also resolute and valourous officers and soldiers under him, a
sudden alarm had no power to fright him or his, being his watch was
commanded by Rut-master Hume of Carrelside, who was a cavalier of
courage and of good experience, finding by intelligence the enemy was
approaching on his guard, he advertised his Colonel timely to draw out
on horse-back, and to expect his enemy in the field, who did take no
notice of the first advertisement, till the Rut-master rode to him,
and advertised him to draw to the fields, he commanded him again to
retire unto his watch, he knew his own time, the Rut-master scarce
returned, when he with his watch were charged by three troops, which
charge he received, and charged them again, and then retired on the
Colonels quarter, being so hard followed, that by the Colonel was on
horse-back, he was invironed by three regiments of the enemies whom he
bravely charged home, with four troops of his, and making them to
retire, he did caracolle about from the enemy, having suffered loss on
the charge. The young Grave of Nassau, then a Rut-master, being hurt
and taken, and divers more inferiors being retired, he commanded Rut-
master Hume with the other four troops, to make a stand before the
enemy; to hold them off till such time he were retired.

The Rut-master seeing the enemies strong, coming up in full squadrons
one after another, he drew up very wisely his four troops in the entry
of a wood, making a large and broad front, whereby the enemy might
judge, he was stronger than he was; as also, that they might think he
had musketeers behind him in ambuscade for a reserve or hinterhalt,
which made the enemy give them the longer time, and the better
opportunity to his colonel to retire with ease. The Rut-master finding
the enemy to fall off a little, he retired his troops at an easy trot,
till he overtook the Colonel, who thought before their coming they had
been all cut off.

Immediately the Rhinegrave sent to me to beset the garrisons (as I
did) and then he sent post unto his Majesty, acquainting his Majesty
how all had passed, and of the enemies' strength; which his Majesty
having known, he drew his army together at Mainz, with a resolution to
fight with the Spaniard, before he were suffered to relieve
Frankenthal, but the enemy hearing of his Majesty's preparation, they
retired over the Moselle again, and they being retired, I was recalled 
with the party unto Mainz, where having left a Captain and a hundred
musketeers with the Rhinegrave to be disposed on, having got orders to
that effect from his Majesty, which afterwards were all cut off by the
enemy; the rest of the party dismised, I retired to my commands.

The twenty five Observation.

The duty of an officer leading a party is almost alike to the duty of
a general leading an army, in fight, in march, in quartering, in
command; and those he commands ought to give the like obedience unto
him, though strangers, as if absolutely they were of his own regiment;
and his care for them should be as for himself. He ought also at the
undertaking of the command or charge over them, to foresee to be
sufficiently provided of all things necessary for such service, as he
is commanded on, of ammunition, spades, shovels, materials for his
cannon and petards, with his guides to convey him from one place to
another, till he come to the end of his intended march, doing all
things by wise and deliberate steadfastness, in command without
wavering, not altering his orders, as he must answer to his general,
to whom he is to give account: and his best is, to have his orders in
writing, that in case of variance betwixt commanders, writing may bear
him thorough, when orders by mouth will be denied: neither ought he in
his command to be timorous or rash, but rather resolute and remiss, as
occasion offers, and on occasions apart, when his command must be
relative to another's direction, that is but subordinate to a general,
he must deliberate wisely what to do, and he must foresee the best and
worst of things; but having once deliberated, let him be as resolute
in the execution as he can.

Likewise here we see in the Rhinegrave a rare example, both of
remissness and courage in one person. For first being made forescene
of the enemies' coming, he showed his remisness, having refused to
give eare to the several advertisments till in th'end he was pursued
unawares, and then he did testify his inward courage and resolution in
charging the enemy, being three regiments, with four troops putting
them to a retreat.

Nevertheless, we see him alike beholden to the Rut-master for his
advertisement, as for his safe retreat, having first and last suffered
the dint of the enemies' arms on him, and holding it off his
commander. A brave example to be imitated and followed of all
cavaliers, that would gain honour and reputation.



The twenty sixth Duty discharged of the accidents occurred in our wars
during our lying in Mainz.

This following discourse, being no direct part of the discharge of
duty intended of the regiment: nevertheless for lack of emploiment in
my calling, at that time being idle in garrison, I remarkd, so far as
I could by report, the actions of others, as they occurred then, being
out of action myself; yet I can affirm, what I relate will be found
true; if not, let me be no more blamed than those that gave the
intelligence.

His Majesty having gone to meet the Queen being come from Leipzig to
Hanau, the twenty second of January 1632, his Majesty conveyed the
Queen to Frankfurt, where all the cannons went off, after their
entries. At this time also, the Rex-chancellour Oxensterne came from
Prussia, conveyed by our countryman Sir Patrick Ruthven, then eldest
Colonel of Scots under his Majesty, being then governor of Mariburg,
and Colonel of a Dutch regiment lay there, with whom did come from
Prussia Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Hamilton, who was Lieutenant Colonel
then to Sir George Cuningham his regiment of Scots that lay in
Prussia. Captain Montgomery came also with them, who soon after was
made Lieutenant Colonel to a free Squadron of foot, and after that was
killed in combat on horseback by the General Quarter-master Bullion,
at first Captain under me. At this time also came with him Quarter-
master Sandelence, who afterwards was Captain Major and Lieutenant
Colonel, having ascended by degrees, according to worth and deserving.

The Chancellor being come, his Majesty and he sat ordinarily all day
in counsel, treating on weighty matters; At which time, the Colognes'
ambassador was treating apart with his Majesty for neutrality,
affirming he had given no assistance to the last League, neither yet
was he of the League; As also he affirmed that at the last Westphalia
convention he refused assistance to the rest of the League: his
Majesty replied to the Colognes' ambassador, how hardly and
unchristianly they had dealt with the Evangelists Stends, worse than
if they had been Jews or Turks, in taking their Churches from them,
and in banishing themselves. Nevertheless there were some Articles
proposed unto them concerning the Neutrality (viz.) First of all,
molesting the Evangelists, under whatsoever pretence, to be abolished
and put away. Secondly the free liberty of the Religion to be granted
and suffered, and that the Students of the Religion should be taken as
well in the Colleges as the Papists Thirdly, in all cities, the
Evangelists to be as free to traffic as the Papists. Fourthly, they
should give no assistance unto the King's Majesty's enemies, nor no
contribution, nor bills to answer moneys on exchange. Fifthly, to give
free passage through their land aswell to his Majesty's army, as to
his enemies, not to hinder them of it, both alike. Sixthly, that his
Majesty of Sweden's servants should have the passes open, when they
pleased to pass and repass. Seventhly, that his Majesty's Agents might
lie at Cologne to see the neutrality were justly observed. Eigthly,
that his Majesty of Sweden his friends and confederates, should have
free traffic in their towns and Territories.

The Colognes' ambassador returned from Frankfurt with these sleight
points to be granted by their Bishop. The Swedens were come so near
Cologne that the superiors were reprehended for it by the clergy out
of the pulpits; for giving such liberty to heretics to come again so
near unto their jurisdictions.

By this time the Landgrave of Hessen with his army, being near ten
thousand strong of horse and foot, for our assistance did lie on the
other side of the Rhine over against us, and from thence they fell
strong on the Spaniards which were in Rheingau, making them also quit
those parts, and the inhabitants for fear, forsaking their houses, his
Majesty promised them his gracious protection to stay and remain in
their houses, they paying their weekly contribution, which they paid 
before to the Bishop of Mainz.

Being here also at Mainz, the French ambassador I did see get
audience. The reason of his coming being to show his Majesty of
Sweden, that the King's Majesty of France was offended, his Majesty of
Sweden had crossed the Rhine against his paction, and confederacy made
with the King of France, and therefore desired he should retire again
with his army. His Majesty answered he did but prosecute his enemy,
and if his Majesty of France was offended, he could not help it, and
those that would make him retire over the Rhine again, it behoved them
to do it with the sword in their hand, for otherwise he was not minded
to leave it but to a stronger; & if his Majesty of France should anger
him much, he knew the way to Paris, and he had hungry soldiers would
drink wine, and eat with as good a will in France as in Germany.
Therefore he hoped his Majesty would be better advised in sending the
next ambassage in milder terms. This interchange of message went
betwixt them, till at last, they were settled on secondary conditions
of a new league offensive and defensive.

At this time the Field-marshal Gustavus Horne took in Mergentheim on
the Saale stream, Heilbronn, on the Neckar, Winpveniphem, and Neckar
Olin.

Likewise Koenigstein in the Wetterau, was taken in by accord after
Mainz, as also  the Spaniard left Wetzlar, and Gelnhausen, leaving
them both unto the Sweden, without shot of musket or cannon.

His Majesty at this time, caused publish an edict, where all merchants
of whatsoever religion, or nation they were of, should be free to pass
and repass with their goods to the Frankfurter Messe, and that none of
his Majesty's army of whatsoever condition they were, either of horse
or foot, should trouble them, under pain of death, where the concealer
of the wrong being got notice of should be punished to death, as the
actor.

Likewise the twelfth of January, Babenhausen was taken in by accord,
by his Majesty's order and direction, and in the end of December,
Mannheim was taken in by Duke Barnard of Weimar, having surprised
their guards, where about two hundred and fifty were cut off, of the
strangers, and quarters and service given to the Dutch; where a
captain and his ensign were taken prisoners, and let loose again, for
the payment of their ransom, and being come to Heidelberg they were
executed by the governor's direction there, for over-seeing their
duties, and these of the league, lying at Heidelberg were mightily
troubled with the nearness of the Swedens neighbour-hood, having
gotten Mannheim, their passage unto the Rhine was altogether cut off
from them. Likewise the Spaniard did quit Germersheim, and retiring to
Frankenthal they had no more in the Pfalz but that and Heidelberg, his
Majesty wonderfully having gotten in Bad Kreuznach, and the castle.

Where the valorous courage of my Lord Craven, a noble and worthily
renowned English lord, was, to his great commendation, taken notice of
by both the Kings. For he, out of affection and desire to advance the
cause, following his Majesty of Bohemia of worthy memory, at the
storming of the works at Bad Kreuznach (in sight of his Majesty of
Sweden) leading up his company of volunteers, to the good example of
others, gave outward testimony of his inward courage; in so much that
his Majesty of Sweden and all the beholders openly extolled his
Lordship's noble & praise-worthy carriage; for having endeavoured so
far as lay in him, on this exploit, to make his memory out-live
himself. As afterward his Lordship did show his prowess & heroic
spirit at the in-taking of Donauwoerth. Where he did merit so much,
that I having reason to have said more, could say no less. His worth
being known, his affection to the cause, & his respects to his Majesty
of Bohemia whom he followed, merits a well deserving reward from his
Majesty's royal issue.

Before Bad Kreuznach Lieutenant Colonel Talbot was killed: and the
worthy Captain Dowglas was shot in the arm.

Colonel Alexander Ramsey was placed governor of Bad Kreuznach by his
Majesty of Sweden, as a beginning of reward for his old service &
attendance, who loved nothing better than nobly and kindly to
entertain his friends and strangers, being the common receptacle and
refuge of all his countrymen, that liked to honour him with their
company: As also he was most willing to entertain and respect
strangers of the best quality, and most of all he was peremptory in
maintaining his country's credit, obliging all cavaliers to his power:
but most unwilling to be beholden to others, carrying still a noble
mind.

At this time, his Majesty being in Mainz, Bingen, Bacharach on the
Rhine, and Scholl, were taken in by scalade, with a surprise by the
Scots of Sir James Ramsey's regiment, where those within were thrice
stronger than those pursued them, but being once entered the town, the
inhabitants assisting the Scots, they put all to the sword, except the
officers that were taken prisoners  by Major Hanan, a gentleman of
much worth, valour, and discretion in command, whose loss was much
lamented, he, having died soon after of a consumption, was much
regrated of all his acquaintance, and of myself in particular, being
my old comrade.

At this time also the town of Hochspeyer came under his Majesty's
protection and devotion, and levied three companies for his Majesty's
service; Landau also and Wiessenburg did become good Swedens.
Landstall was taken in also by storm, through the help of the country
boors; shortly after was Ellwangen, Oberwesel, Boppard, and
Loewenstein taken in by accord. Also the castle of Ehrenfels, and the
toll-house over against Bingen was taken in by the Landgrave of
Hessen's folk.

By this time was Doemitz in Mecklenburg given over by accord, unto
General Major Lowhowsen; as also Wismar on the Baltic Coast was taken
in by accord the tenth of January 1632. And the garrison marched out
three thousand strong, being commanded by Colonel Grame, who having
buried some cannon, robbed the ships, and took away against accord a
number of arms. Likewise on his march unto Silesia, he killed a
Swedens Lieutenant; but being followed, the Swedens (at the command of
General Tott) General Major Lowhowsen having overtaken them, five
hundred were killed, and two thousand taken prisoners that took
service; and Colonel Grame was sent prisoner to Greifswald, to remain
there till further trial.

By this time also, General Tott his army marched over the Elbe towards
Lueneburg, being near fourteen thousand strong of foot and horse,
under whom were several Scots regiments come from Scotland the harvest
before (viz.) Sir James Lumsdell's regiment, to whom Robert Stewart
was Lieutenant Colonel. The master of Forbesse his regiment, to whom
Sir Arthur Forbesse was Lieutenant Colonel; Sir Frederick Hamilton's
regiment, to whom Alexander Cunningham was Lieutenant Colonel; Colonel
Astin's English regiment, to whem Vavezer was Lieutenant Colonel;
Colonel Monro of Obstell his regiment, to whom John Monro was
Lieutenant Colonel; and a Squadron of English, commanded by Lieutenant
Colonel Mon-Gorge, being the remainder of Sir Thomas Conways regiment;
and Colonel Robert Lesly, his old regiment of Scots. General Tott his
army being over the Elbe; Colonel Ryneaker, and Curmago did gather all
the Imperialists, and those of the League out of all other garrisons,
towards Stade, and Buxtehude, to defend themselves; where leaving them
to some other pen to write of, I return to the Rhine.His Majesty being
making preparation towards the Danube, to visit the Bayer-Fuerst, and
Tilly: where I mind to follow out my march, our idle time being almost
spent.

His Majesty did write unto the States of Holland, to draw sooner unto
the fields, than their custom was, to hinder the Spaniards from
sending forces unto Dutchland, which letters moved the States to give
out edicts, that all regiments and companies should be complete, under
pain of cashiering, to draw to the fields against the first of March.
By this time, his Majesty of France having a strong army together on
the borders of Dutchland, the Catholic League did what they could, to
put his Majesty of France by the ears with the King of Sweden,
alledging his Majesty of Sweden's intention was fully to root out the
Catholic Religion; and that he had already banished a number of them
from their cloisters, which was an untruth; for his Majesty of Sweden
banished none, but those who through fear did banish themselves. But
on the contrary, his Majesty in all places he had taken in, suffered
them the free liberty and use of their religion untroubled, without
troubling of any man's conscience in matters of religion. But his
Majesty of France, being better informed, refused any assistance to
the Catholic League, against his Majesty of Sweden; but wished rather
the Catholic League to remain neutral; and that he would interpose
with his Majesty of Sweden for obtaining the neutrality; whereupon
instantly they begun to treat of the neutrality; and Monsieur
Seharnasse was sent ambassador to his Majesty of Sweden to that
effect, and his Majesty proposed, and set down the points he desired
of them, if he should yield unto the neutrality.

First, they should give his Majesty and his army free passage through
their lands, especially over the Danube.

Secondly, they should take all their forces from the Imperialists, and
be bound hereafter to give them no more help.

Thirdly, they should restore the Palatinate unto the former estate,
and all others they had taken beside.

Fourthly, they should contribute to the maintaining of the Swedens
army.

The French ambassador having promised within fourteen days to get the
foresaid Articles confirmed, his Majesty granted a fortnights
stillstand, providing the ambassador would make Papenham retire his
forces out of Westphalia, and Stift Magdeburg; As also that those
forces the Duke of Bavaria and the League had in Bohemia, should also
retire; and that such parts as his Majesty's army had beleaguered or
blockered, they should go on notwithstanding of the stillstand, till
they came to an accord, or forced to quit them. The time of this
treaty, the Catholic League found many doubts.

First, that it was hard for them being so much obliged to the house of
Austria, to forsake them in their greatest need.

Secondly, the Catholic religion, in that case, did lack a strong
Protector; whose like they could not soon find again.

Thirdly, the King of France had his own pretentions in this treaty, to
wit, to weaken the house of Austria; which his Majesty of France could
easily do, by separating the League from the house of Austria. It was
easy then unto him to transferr the Empire unto another family: and
the League embracing the neutrality, the Crown of France had won their
point against the house of Austria; and if the neutrality were not
granted or accepted by the League, the King's Majesty of France would
not quit the Swedens faction; but rather favourize all their
enterprises; whereby, in times coming, he should have the less cause
to fear the house of Austria; but in the end, the seeking of this
neutrality was but for mere policy, to hinder his Majesty of Sweden's
progress, till such time, as that General Tilly could make a strong
head again, and to win time of his Majesty to prepare themselves for
war.

This treaty turning to nought without any fruit; neither were the
Spaniards still this time, but having drawn to strong head, they came
over the Moselle again unto the Pfalz, and were beaten back with great
loss, and the whole Pfalz made free of them.

In which conflict master Horne in presence of the Rex-chancellor
Oxensterne, before the face of the whole army, with his own troop, and
two other troops of horse, charged a strong body of the Spanish
horsmen, & took nine cornets from them, having hunted and chased them,
to their great shame, and to the perpetual credits of the pursuers,
especially of the leader, whose actions are worthy to be recorded to
posterity.

After this victory obtained over the Spaniard, his Majesty of Sweden
did propose certain propositions and articles unto the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Catholic Stends that were confederate with him.
First, to break the Imperial edict that was published over the Empire.
Secondly, both the Evangelists' religion to be let free and untroubled
by the Papists. Thirdly, Bohemia, Noerdlingen and Silesia to be
restored in the old manner, and the banished freely to return to their
lands and country. Fourthly, to set his Majesty of Bohemia free again
in the Pfalz. Fifthly, the Dukedom of Bavaria to be transferred on him
again. Sixthly, the town of Augsburg to be put in the former estate
again, and the exercise of the Evangelists' religion to be free again
unto it as before. Seventhly, all Jesuits to be put away and banished
out of the Empire, as the pest of the Common-weal. Eighthly, all
Evangelists' cloisters to be restored again, as well as the Catholic
cloisters. Ninthly, all cloisters in Wartenburgland, to be restored
again. Tenthly, to choose his Majesty of Sweden, as King of the
Romans.

About the end of January Papinham gathered the whole garrisons
together that were in Brunswick lands, and Westphalia, and relieved
Magdeburg; forcing Banier to retire on Calbe; alleging he had a
mandate of his Majesty of Sweden not to fight; Papenham, who having
relieved the town, and gotten intelligence the Duke of Lueneburg with
a strong army, was to come on him from Wolfenbuettel, he having left
Magdeburg, and taken out the garrison having nailed the cannon, and
destroyed all he could, in casting it into the Elbe, which he could
not take with him on wagons; having spoiled their best cannon, leaving
the bare walls to the Swedens; which they immediately beset again with
three companies: Papenham marched towards Wolfenbuettel to meet the
Duke of Luneburg.

Likewise Palsgrave Wolfegan William, did also by his brother's
intercession, Palsgrave Augustus, hold on with his Majesty of Sweden
for a neutrality, but in vain. The fourteen days of stillstand being
out, they fell to work again, every one for himself.

Bamberg also taken by Gustavus Horne Field Marshal, and shortly after
was Tilly come thither with a strong army from Noerdlingen, unlooked
for, set on Gustavus Horne's forces, the town being almost made fast
by the Swedens, Tilly with his army falls on: and the Field Marshal
having put his cannon away by water on the Main, retired in haste with
loss upon Hassfurt, after a long skirmish had with the Imperialists,
and having gotten intelligence of four regiments of Tilly's, that had
passed by Hallstadt, he did break up with the cavalry, and in their
quarter in Obere Beide, being but half a mile from Bamberg, falls on
them two hours before day, and defeats two regiments, to wit, Planck,
Hartish and Meradish the younger's regiment by fire and sword, where
he got but two cornets, the rest being burnt in the fire, with their
goods: The Crabbats were forced to swim the Main, the rest betook
themselves for refuge unto the dragoniers' quarters that lay at
Staffelbach, and retiring to the church-yard, the Field Marshal having
no musketeers with him, pressed to fire them out, but in vain, so that
he retired again with his officers on Hassfurt and Schweinfurt. These
news coming unto his Majesty, he prepared for a march unto Franconia,
bringing the rest of his Majesty's forces together, that were with the
Field Marshal; and he did send unto Thuringia, to the Duke of Weimar,
and to General Banier to bring their forces together, to meet betwixt
Nuremberg and Donauwoerth, to search out General Tilly, and about the
midst of March 1632, we broke up from Mainz, having left the Rex-
chancellor Oxensterne, and Duke Bernard of Weimar, with eight thousand
men in the Pfalz, to attend the Spaniards' further intentions on the
Rhine.

The twenty-sixth Observation.

The Catholic League, seeing the Spaniard terrified in the Pfalz, and
almost beaten away, they begun being members of that head, to quake
and tremble for fear of the Swedens neighbourhood, and therefore the
Bishops of Mainz, Trier, Cologne, Wuerzburg and of Bamberg presently
resolved, out of their policy, to treat for a neutrality, pressing, so
far as lay in them, to bring the King of France and his Majesty of
Sweden to pull at each others beards; alleging the Swedens intentions
were only to subvert the Catholic Religion, and the professors of
Popery, as hehad already (as they alleged) persecuted and banished the
churchmen out of Ehrfurt, Wuerzburg, Frankfurt, Hoechst, and out of
all other parts where they were: whereupon his Majesty of France
notwithstanding of his confederacy with the King of Sweden was
commoved at his crossing the Rhine, fearing he might bring the
Catholic League on his side, and then turn his arms against France,
which suspicions wrought an ambassage from his Majesty of France,
towards his Majesty of Sweden, for treaty of neutrality betwixt the
King of Sweden and the Catholic League, which in th'end turned to
nothing. Where we see, that all potentates and great kings, do keep no
confederacy nor league, but only so far as they are helpful for their
own aims and designs; preferring their benefit before the keeping of
their covenants; where we see, that kings' hand-writings or seals, in
pactions making, tie them no more than as nothing, when they find them
prejudicial to their own greatness, and cannot be made to keep their
covenants, but with stronger power. Then we see here, his Majesty of
Sweden was nothing moved with the King of France his threatening
(except he would retire over the Rhine again) seeing he knew his own
ability at that time, that being once over the Rhine, he could march
unto France. The consideration whereof made them agree better on
secondary conditions, having passed from the first covenant; so that
we see there is no dealing with kings but on equal terms, and then are
they most reasonable; but the example of kings, in this point of their
covenants, is not to be imitated by any other inferiors; for in
respect of them, though not in respect of God, they are privileged
persons; who cannot be punished for their faults but by God alone. And
therefore, amongst inferiors, nothing is to be kept more strict next
unto faith unviolated, then men's word and promise, especially
promises betwixt old friends. But alas! no friendship is permanent,
seeing many things come betwixt, turning it unto hatred and hostility;
for where love doth not grow, the friendship is not durable.

Likewise here we see, his Majesty of France made haste to interpose
his request for the weal of the Catholic League, showing himself
discontented with their usage, to make them the more ready to think on
him, before they should any ways lean in their necessity to the King
of Sweden. As also we see the policy of the League, though in their
necessity they seemed to make use of the King of France his
friendship, yet they would not cast off the house of Austria, and King
of Spain their old friends, for the hope they had in their new friend
the King of France, lest their new friend might disappoint them of
their expectations, as he did in th'end, missing his own aims.

We see also here the French's policy, in making haste to intercede for
the Leagueists, lest the danger might come on himself; for the King of
France hearing the King of Sweden had crossed the Rhine, he did not
stay to bring his army together, till the League should call for his
help, lest it should be too late, but incontinent brought his army to
the Moselle, and then sent his ambassador to Mainz to his Majesty of
Sweden to treat, having his army at hand, which was the only sure way
then to get the better conditions, knowing the King of Sweden had
already too many irons in the fire.

Those we see are the best friends, that in necessity keep their
paction, as the Catholic League did at all times unto the Emperor, who
otherwise had been no Emperor, neither yet had he been Emperor, had
the Evangelists kept together and hazarded their means and blood, in
defence of the public cause, as the Catholics did in their greatest
necessity, once every year setting up ever new armies, as one was
beaten unto them: their wisdom and constancy were so great, that
presently the next Spring, through their power and diligence, they had
ever another new army afoot, which in th'end made their enemies the
Evangelists weary, sparing their means, they suffered in a manner the
cause and the public to be near lost; being since beaten by their own
arms and means, seeing they neglected time, while as they might employ
their means to the final overthrow of their enemies: and yet to my
knowledge, in Germany, if they would conjoine their strengths together
constantly against the Papists, they are powerful enough to free all
Germany of Popery, banishing them over the Alps, from whence they
came. And I persuade myself, none that knows Germany, but in his
conscience he must confess this to be truth. But when our fellows in
friendship fail us, as the Evangelists one after another, for a scurvy
loss, quit the Crown of Sweden, the great Duke of Saxony having left
them first, breaking his oath and promise, in prejudice of the public
peace, excluding the Protestants impiously for his own aims, he did
prejudice the Gospel, his country, and confederates, and by his evil
example: for plain necessity, while a storm should blow over the towns
of the upper Circles of the Empire, as Strasbourg, Ulm, Nuremberg &
Frankfurt did accept of an unsettled peace, contrary to their minds,
in prejudice of the public, losing themselves and the public, for the
loss of one day, being without their head, which first brought them
together.

Here then we see the great difference of friendship in prosperity and
in adversity: for his Majesty of Sweden being at Frankfurt, as a
victorious King, he had then, in his prosperity, the conflux of
friendship, some seeking his protection, others his friendship and
confederacy, others for fear of the dint of his arms, seeking to be
neutral, who before were enemies; other kings and potentates,
republics and cities sending their ambassadors congratulating his
success; yea, and which was more and rare to be seen, his Majesty of
Bohemia in person came unto him, to offer him assistance royal, in
levying of an army for himself, and was refused, as unwilling other
armies should be in Dutchland, to be participant of his glory, but his
own. Where we see Fortune's favourite laughed on by the world, but how
soon again Fortune begun to frown on his successour, who having got
but one buffet, all men would kill him, his friends (nomine tenue) as
well as his enemies. Where we see clearly that there is no friend in
adversity, except it be a friend in Christ, who will never forsake or
leave us. This then is the friendship we should make to league and
confederate with, our brethren in Christ, with whom we have unity in
Faith, if that we would have our friendship durable and constant:
others will change as the wind blows plenty or penury upon us; being
but temporary friends (as many of the Dutch are) but our brethren in
Christ will never totally leave us, no not in our greatest wants and
extremity of fortune. Which should make us choose such, and to live
and die with such, fighting for them and their liberties, who will
never leave us, though death sever us, but after death, they will
prove constant friends to our successors (as the Germans did not to
the Chancellor of Sweden) if they succeed unto us in the true and
undoubted Faith. And to verify this, I can bear witness, that though
the enemy did keep our brethren in Christ, that were in the Pfalz,
under ten years bondage; Nevertheless that bondage, nor the tyranny
used unto them by their enemies, made them never forget their fidelity
and love to their King and Prince; neither yet could their tyranny
make them forsake or renounce their faith in Christ, but as they
continued true to God, so were they faithful in their love to their
King and master; not only to his Majesty, but also showed their love
and kindness unto us, being his Majesty's friends, whom they knew to
be one in faith with themselves. And therefore they were ever ready
and willing to undergo alike danger with us against our common
enemies; as doth witness their assistance given to the Scots of Sir
James Ramsey's regiment, having conjunctis viribus beaten their
enemies on divers occasions.

The King's Majesty of Sweden, though before this time none of the
greatest Kings, yet in this war, having begun with a little army of
ten thousand strong, in three years time he grew so great; that he was
careless of the threatening of the great King of France, having
entertained then in readiness four armies at once, his own which he
led himself, under which I was still; The Field Marshal Gustavus
Horne's army, General Tott's army on the Weser, and the Marquess of
Hamilton's army, with whom Banier was joined on the Elbe. These four
army's his Majesty commanded alike, and at one time, having the
Emperor, the King of Spain, the Catholic League, and the Duke of
Bavaria his enemies. And though the Duke of Saxony had an army apart,
yet his Majesty would not suffer the King of Bohemia, the Duke of
Lueneburg the Landgrave of Hesse, nor the Dukes of Weimar to lead
armyies in Dutchland, but as subalterns to his command. And I think he
had reason: for if his Majesty of Bohemia had had an army in the
fields, it behoved the Swedens to have been subaltern to the Dutch and
Scots, who were then strong in the fields, in commanding strangers, as
they did their own countrymen. Notwithstanding of all these forces led
and commanded by his Majesty of Sweden, we see that the Empire is like
a depth without a bottom, that cannot be sounded. For though they lost
several battles, their power was so great, that incontinent they made
up armies again, one after another, for the space of twenty years
together; so that, with difficulty, they made the body of the Empire
to stand, though the wings were very near clipped by his Majesty of
Sweden; who, in three years time, subdued the most part of the Empire,
and with his own little army, in one Winter, freed the Pfalz of the
Spanish forces (except Heidelberg alone) on which occasions those of
our nation that followed his Majesty, showed both their valour and
their love, especially those of my Lord Spence his regiment, seconded
well by those of my Lord Rhees' regiment, and Sir James Ramsey's
worthy regiment, were well seconded by Colonel Lodowick Leslyes
regiment, which formerly were Sir John Hamiltons. These four regiments
of foot having followed his Majesty's own person in all occasions,
were worthy their deeds should be Registred to all posterity. Other
six regiments of Scots, under General Tott, and two of English, being
younger in the service than the former four, were also shorter of
continuance; whose actions I cannot relate, but by information.
Therefore I will be sparing, lest I should derogate from their worth,
or oversee myself.

At this time also there were a great many worthy cavaliers of our
nation under his Majesty, who, for their long experience and valour,
had attained to the honour, not only to be trusted before others with
governments, but also were honoured in commanding of strangers, both
Dutch and Swedens, whereof some were employed in Dutchland, some in
Sweden, some in Liffeland, and some in Prussia; all alike serving
their master to his mind, where he liked best to make use of them for
the weal and advancement of his service.

Sir Patrick Ruthven, General Major and governor of Ulm, Colonel over
Dutch to foot and to horse; Sir Alexander Lesly, General Major and
governor over the whole cities, alongst the Baltic Coast; Sir David
Drummond, General Major and governor of Stettin, over a regiment of
Swedens; Sir John Hepburne, Colonel over the Scots brigade; General
Major King, Colonel to horse and foot of Dutch; Colonel Carre, Colonel
to foot of Scots; Sir John Ruthven, General Major, Colonel of Dutch;
Colonel Robert Monro of Fowles, Colonel to foot and to horse over
Dutch; The Earl of Crawford, Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel
Baily, Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel Ramsey, governor of Bad
Kreuznach, and commander of Dutch; Colonel Alexander Hamilton, Colonel
of Scots; Sir James Ramsey, Colonel of foot over Scots; Sir William
Ballentine, Colonel over English; Colonel Dowglas, Colonel of Dutch
horsemen; Colonel Hume, Colonel of Dutch horsemen; Colonel Alexander
Lesly the younger, Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel John Lesly,
Colonel to foot over Scots; Colonel William Gunne, Colonel to foot
over Dutch; Colonel Kinninmond, Colonel of Swedens; Colonel Hugh
Hamilton, Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel Finnes Forbesse, and his
brother, both Colonels to foot over strangers; Colonel John Forbesse,
Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel Alexander Forbesse, called the
bald, Colonel to foot over Dutch; which all, with the former twelve
regiments, were employed severally, upon the Dutch bottom, during his
Majesty's time; and since, to the great credit of their nation; as
likewise other cavaliers of them were employed in Sweden; such as
Colonel Scot, Colonel Seaton, and Colonel Thomson, others also, were
employed in his Majesty's service in Prussia; as Sir George Fleetwood,
Colonel to foot over English; Francis Ruthven, Colonel to foot over
Scots, and William Kunningham, Colonel to foot over Scots, Alexander
Gordon, Colonel to foot over Dutch; which officers, with their
regiments, after conclusion of the peace made with the Kings Majesty
of Poland, were also brought into Dutchland, against the Saxon, and
the Emperor. Thus far, en passant, I was bold to infer, to satisfy the
curious reader, and his Highness, to whom we all vowed faith and
obedience, being formerly led by such a general, as the Lion of the
North, the invincible King of Sweden, who did instruct us all, to do
his Highness' service, in all respects, to the sacrificing of our
lives, until his Highness be avenged of his enemies, and most
honourably restored to his country, credit, honours, and former loss.
For we know Germany so well, that without guides, we can enter their
cities where we know them weakest; having helped to subdue many of
them before; as shall be evident, before our expedition come to an
end. Where we would wish such a leader as his Highness, or one of the
race, come of the Jewel of Europe, his royal mother, for whom and her
royal issue, we are obliged and resolved yet to fight, till her throne
be established in despite of her enemies.

Here also we see God will not suffer those Christians unpunished, that
violate their promise, as was seen on Colonel Grame, whose fault is
too common amongst their faction, that hold for a maxim, they are not
bound to keep promise or accord unto us; as was seen on Colonel Monro
of Fowles his regiment marching out of Stoben; the conditions of their
accord being broken unto them, the soldiers were forced to serve, and
the officers were made prisoners. If my fortune were once again to
command the guards in Memmingen in Bavaria (the Duke's chief
residence) though I would not break my word, I would hazard to break
my sword, to be avenged on those who keep no promise or oath, being
enemies to God and to his truth, as they did witness by their cruelty
used at Bamberg; where the Field Marshal being set on unawares, was
forced to retire, having sent away his cannon before him, choosing the
least of two inconveniences, having thought better to endanger a few
men in skirmish, than by standing to hazard the loss of all, and of
his cannon. Where we see that it is hard for a brave commander to make
a good retreat without cannon, where on the contrary having a little
time, with some advantage of ground, it is easy retiring from the
fiercest enemy, who may lose himself and his army with pressing too
far forwards against cannon.

Likewise there is nothing more able for to make a party of horsmen
fortunate, than a reasonable supply of musketeers ever to attend them,
for they are ever best together: Moreover, we have here a laudable
custom of a brave commander, as his Majesty was, being as careful in
maintaining his conquest, as he was fortunate in conquering: for
before his Majesty would march from the Rhine towards the Danube, he
first established the Rex-chancellor of Sweden at Mainz, leaving unto
his care the direction of the army left in the Palatinate to attend
the Spaniard, which army was to be led by Palsgrave Christian
Brickafield, being at least eight thousand strong.



The twenty seventh Duty discharged of our March from Mainz unto
Franconia and to Shawbach.

His Majesty having got intelligence of the ruffle, General Tilly had
given at Bamberg to Field Marshal Horne, and hearing the Field Marshal
was retired on Schweinfurt, incontinent his Majesty's army was brought
together at Mainz, and leaving the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne in the
Pfalz at Mainz, as director, and to attend on the Spanish forces, till
the Pfalz were cleared of the enemy.

The sixth of March, his Majesty did break up from Frankfurt, where in
the fields before Aschaffenburg, the army made a show in presence of
his Majesty of Bohemia, Marquess of Hamilton, and divers others, men
of quality, and having passed the bridge, we quartered overnight in
the fields on the back side of the hill, and the next day continued
our march towards Lohr, and having sent before to make provision for
the army in all parts, where he resolved to quarter, through Franconia
being free of our enemies. The next night we quartered at Ehrenfeld,
and our brigade passing by Gemuenden we marched on Karlstadt, where we
quartered overnight: the next day continuing our march, we joined at
night with the army at Dettelbach, where before our upbreaking the
next morning, a fire being entered in the suburbs, as his Majesty was
marching out of quarter, those of Spence's regiment were blamed for
this accident, though innocent: Nevertheless his Majesty's rage
continued the whole day, and we being separated, his Majesty marched
on Kitzingen, on the Main to join with the Field Marshal; and we were
commanded to march on Ochsenfurt on the Main, and from thence to
Windsheim, where we again were to join with the army, having ever our
cannon and ammunition wagons along with us.

On Sunday in the afternoon, his Majesty again over-viewed the army,
being set in order of battle, the Field Marshalls forces, and some new
forces having joined with us, being pleasant to behold, where in time
of the show, his Majesty of Bohemia did come and salute our brigade,
being resaluted with all due respect of the whole body of the brigade,
where his Majesty was pleased to show us, how glad he was of the good
report and commendation, his Majesty of Sweden had given of our good
service, the continuance whereof he heartily wished.

Our army this day was above twenty thousand men, horse and foot,
besides those did belong to the artillery, being all in good order,
General Tilly having understood of his Majesty's coming, and of the
strength of his army, he thought, as best for the safety of his army,
not to stay our coming, and besetting Bamberg and Forchheim with new
levied men, taking the old soldiers with him, he marched towards
Newmarke in the upper Palatinate, having taken all the best things he
could find within the Bishopric of Bamberg with him on wagons: And
having sent his General Quartermaster before him towards Lohhoff, he
was met by some of the Swedens party, and being killed, all his
letters were brought unto his Majesty, and before his Majesty broke up
with the army, he caused to publish an edict over all Franconia, that
all sort of people which had before been fugitives for fear of
religion, they were all free to return unto their houses again, not
being molested or troubled in the peaceable labouring of the ground.

Likewise on this march, a strong party of our army, led by Colonel
Sparereutter, rencountering with the enemies' party by Schaebisch
Hall, after a long skirmish the Imperialists were made to retire with
loss towards the castle of Danberg, where Lieutenant Colonel Buckoy,
that had the command of the Imperialists, was sore wounded, a rut-
master of the Crabbats and a lieutenant was killed; and above twenty
six soldiers, besides a hundred and thirty were taken prisoners. The
news came to his Majesty on our march, which we continued from
Windsheim on Wolmersdorf; and from thence, the next day being the
twentieth of March to Fuerth, a pass on the river of Pegnitz, a mile
from Nuremberg; where the army lay but one night, so long as his
Majesty did visit Nuremberg; and the next day our march continued
towards a little town called Schwabach, where his Majesty rested the
army two days, till that the Duke of Weimar's forces, with General
Banier coming from Thuringia, were come within one days march of us;
his Majesty's intentions being towards Donauwoerth on the Danube;
where my Cousin Fowles with both his regiments joined with us. His
Majesty of Sweden accompanied with the King of Bohemia and Palsgrave
Augustus, and divers Princes more, before their coming to Nuremberg,
they were met by the lords of the town, with a great convoy on
horseback, and were most nobly welcomed, where the whole inhabitants
were overjoyed at the sight of his Majesty of Sweden, but chiefly
their affections most abundantly did extend towards his Majesty of
Bohemia, which is impossible for any tongue to express. But well I
know, my eyes did see their eyes shedding tears of joy, being
overjoyed with the sight of two kings at once, as they thought, sent
by the King of Kings for their reliefs; and to make their welcome the
more respected, the whole city, burghers and soldiers were in their
brightest arms; and being conveyed unto the city, they were
sumptuously banqueted; and in testimony of their love, they gifted
unto his Majesty of Sweden four half cartowes, with all furniture
belonging to them, together with two silver globes, one celestial, the
other terrestial: there were also presented unto him drinking
credences many, with some antiquities that were rare, and with all
testifying their affection in way of compliment, they assure his
Majesty that not only with words but with their whole estate, they
were ready to serve the common cause, to, die and live with his
Majesty, in the defence of the public. His Majesty thus taking leave
of Nuremberg, promises to continue their friend, and shows them he was
to go with his army towards the Danube stream, to see how to get a
pass over the Danube for to visit the Duke of Bavaria, and he hoped he
would make Tilly with his army to retire thence. But Tilly finding his
Majesty's army growing still stronger and stronger, he retired back
unto the upper Palatinate, and from thence, he crossed the Danube to
join with the Duke of Bavaria, to hinder our coming unto Bavaria;
being then, of his own forces, near eighteen thousand men, foot and
horse: But many of them were new levied folks; and the Duke of Bavaria
had also a strong army together; but for the most part, they were such
as could not endure the noise or whisling of the cannon bullets.

By this time, Grave Henry William Fonselins, being shot in the leg
before Bamberg, was departed at Schweinfurt of a burning fever,
contracted through the pain of the shot; whose death his Majesty of
Sweden did much lament.

The twenty-seventh Observation.

The fifth of March, 1632, his Majesty having left sure footing in the
Pfalz, with a bridge over the Rhine, and the Main, where it enters
into the Rhine; where also was begun, as the trophy of his victory,
the foundation of a city and strength called Gustavusburg. Then in the
beginning of the Spring, we sprung forth from the Rhine, towards the
Danube stream, being on this march royally accompanyed by his Majesty
of Bohemia, whom his Majesty esteemed of, as of himself, in all
quartering ordaining his quarters before his own; continuing the
march, through Franconia in surety, having the year before freed that
whole circle from the enemy, so that the ihabitants had given their
oath of fealty unto his Majesty.

This march was pleasant, through a plentiful country at this time,
being a progress befitting two kings, with a royal army, and forces
from other parts joining with us; as we drew near our enemies; we made
all sure behind us, both for our retreats in case of need, as also for
the safety of those were to come after us; and thirdly, for the
furnishing our army in ammunition and victuals, to be brought unto us
in case of want.

His Majesty here being of intention to get a pass over the Danube
(having before made the town of Ulm sure) for his retreat; for the
more abundance, his Majesty resolved to have the pass of Donauwoerth,
being the right pass betwixt Nuremberg and Augsburg.

Before Tilly's army could join with the Duke of Bavaria, his Majesty
resolved it was not best to give them time, but with celerity
concluded to march towards them, knowing it was but folly and madness,
to stay till they were joined; and the Duke of Bavaria being assured
of his Majesty coming to visit his country, he closed the passes the
best he could; both Donauwoerth, Rain, and Ratisbon. And as he did
beset well the frontier garrisons, before his Majesty's coming, he
also very circumspectly betimes took all victuals out of his Majesty's
way, towards Ingolstadt, as a wise commander ought to do, where he
made his magazine, being the only part, he was assured of for his
retreat; and such a part, as he knew well, we were not able to get
without treason; and then being assured he had time to provide an army
to oppose his Majesty, himself not being taken unawares.

It is the duty of all good commanders, at their down lying and
uprising from quarters, to be very careful to prevent fire; seeing
thereby the whole army may be endangered by the loss of men, 
ammunition, arms and artillery; and since such loss is irrecoverable,
our care should be the greater to avoid the hurt. And therefore order
should be given to all guards, to  make diligent rounds over the
quarters, to prevent the like accidents, and to give orders to the
gavileger and his servants, to oversee all fires, and to see them
quenched, at all upbreakings, and dislodging: otherwise, the enemy
being near, great inconvenience might happen, and if any enemy, at
such times, trusting to our disorder, should offer to invade us,
finding the contrary, it were easy to beat them back; as also, it were
a fit time to try their valour, they being more than half afraid. But
I will advise all you, that desire to gain credit, to seek out your 
enemy, rather than to stay his coming unto you, and by this means,
haply you may set up your trophies in his own country, to speak to
posterity, as doth Gustavusburg betwixt the Main and the Rhine.



The twenty-eight Duty discharged of our March to Donauwoerth, for the
In-taking of it.

The twenty-fourth of March, his Majesty with the army continued the
march, from Schwabach towards Donauwoerth upon Oettingen & Pleinfeld,
and went before the castle of Mansfeld on the hill, being the
strongest of any one in Dutchland, and finding he could get nothing
done, young Papenham being commandant there, was advertised by his
Majesty, if that he would not give over the castle, his fathers
earldom thereabouts should be ruined (which he, though unwilling,
behoved to suffer) but the cavalier regardless of his Majesty's
threats, did keep out the castle, so that his Majesty, for that time,
was forced to leave it.

His Majesty leaving a strong garrison in the town next to it, he
continued his march towards Donauwoerth, and quartered the army on the
Hill above the town: by this time his Majesty of Poland died, as also
then Duke Barnard of Weimar had put a thousand Finns on the other side
of the Rhine, in Bissen, and beset Hochspeyer, at which time the
Spaniard again did set over the Moselle, of intention to relieve
Frankenthal, but was sent back with shame over the Moselle by the
Duke's army then left in the Pfalz: at which time the Chancellor
Oxensterne being there in person, and Palsgrave Christian Birkafield,
his excellence the Rex-chancellor caused the Dutch regiments marching
towards the enemy, to beat the Scots march, thinking thereby to
affright the enemy; but it fell out contrary; the Dutch that marched
in the van with the Scots march, being charged by the enemy, made a
base retreat, till they were holden up again by the valour of the
Scots, that were there (viz.) Sir John Ruthven, and his regiment,
having had all his officers of valiant Scots, as Lieutenant Colonel
John Lesly, Major Lyell, Captain David King, and divers others,
resolute cavaliers, that stood to it, with the assistance of Colonel
Lodowick Lesly, and his regiment and officers: being all old beaten
soldiers, formerly called Sir John Hamilton's regiment; by their
valour, resisting the enemy, and encouraging their comrades, who were
flying; the victory, that before was doubtful, is restored again to
the Swedens; so that Palsgrave Christian did swear, in audience of the
whole army, to his excellency the Rex-chancellor, that had it not been
for the valour of the Scots brigade, they had all been lost and
defeated by the Spaniard.

Here also was evidently seen, as was formerly mentioned, the valour of
Rut-master Hume, in view of his Excellency, in defeating the Spanish
horsemen, being far inferior in number unto them, where the Dutch
Cavalry, led by him, repaired the over-sight of their Infantry, that
had the Vanguard. To return to the beleaguering of Donauwoerth,
wherein did lie Herzog Randolph, Maximilian of Saxon Loewenburg, with
fifteen hundred soldiers, and five hundred boors of foot, wherein were
also five hundred horsemen, who finding his Majesty was come to visit
him, resolved to defend the town so long as he could, and to that
effect, begun with cannon and musket to play amongst us, who seeing
his Majesty had caused to plant some cannon before the port, to play
alongst the bridge, he sallied out bravely, and did beat the Swedens
that guarded the cannon, from their cannon, which they nailed, and a
Scots Captain called Semple, that commanded the Swedens, was blamed,
for the Swedens fault, that did leave him alone; who unwisely, fearing
to be taken prisoner, came off after his fellows, and we having beaten
back the enemy; the captain was put in arrest, till he were heard
before a council of wars.

Incontinent after that, his Majesty planted batteries on the hill, for
to play with cannon on a long stone-house, that lay on the other side
of the River; wherein were a number of foot and horse, come from
Bavaria, to strengthen the garrison, but their entry was hindered by
our timely coming; on which our cannon played so hard, till the house
was creviced, so that they were forced to quit it, with the loss of
many men, and they being gone, our cannon then played hard on the
town-ports and walls, doing the enemy great hurt.

The night drawing on, his Majesty commanded Colonel Hepburne, with his
brigade, to march to a bridge a mile above Donauwoerth, and to cross
over for to beset the other side of the town, whereon his Majesty
thought the enemy would press to escape: before mid-night the Colonel
arriving there, did place our musketeers in strong platoons, by
hundreds, in the most advantagious parts, for offending the enemy; our
pikes and colours were drawn up in three strong bodies, or squadrons,
and were commanded to stand by their arms, to be in readiness, in case
of alarm: And having placed our sentries, perdues, and others, by
break of day the enemy fell forth eight hundred strong of musketeers
on our Quarter; the service begun by our musketeers, we came up with
full squadrons of pikes amongst them, and entered on the execution,
till we made them throw down their arms, and cry for quarters; some
for safety retired back to the town, and were followed in by us, and
cut off within the town; while others made way for his Majesty's
forces to enter from the other side; so that the enemy were pitifully
cut down the most part of them in the fury. The town also was spoiled
and quite plundered: but some of the soldiers, with the Jesuits and
monks, that had escaped alongst the bridge, being sent after were
overtaken, and the most part cut off: the rest above three hundred
were brought back prisoners: within the garrison were found dead above
five hundred, and some were drowned in the stream, and a thousand that
had got their lives, were forced to take service under the regiments;
but being Papists of Bavaria, as soon as they smelt the smell of their
fathers' houses, in less than ten days they were all gone.

The in-taking of this pass on such a sudden, wrought a terrible fear
amongst all the Papists in Bavaria; in like manner, his Majesty did
send Palsgrave Augustus, with some forces to Hoechstat, a pass on the
Danube, which he immediately took in, and by this time was General
Tilly with his army come on the Lech towards Rain on the River: and
having beset it strong, he beset also all other parts betwixt that and
Augsburg, and the Duke himself caused to take their arms from all the
professors of the reformed Religion in Augsburg, and having beset it
with two thousand soldiers, he retired himself to Ingolstadt.

His Majesty after the in-taking of Donauwoerth, commanded General
Bannier, with a party of four thousand strong, of horse, foot, and
artillery, towards Neuburg on the Danube; but it was beset before
their coming, and they retiring again to Donauwoerth, where our whole
army being joined, we marched towards the river of the Lech, of
intention to force a pass unto Bavaria, being then thirty two thousand
strong, of horse and foot.

The twenty-eight Observation.

General Tilly knowing his Majesty was so near with a strong army to be
revenged on him, for the ruffle he had given to Gustavus Horne at
Bambricke: he never rested his army, but continually kept them on
foot, attending still our coming; and we, to verify the desire we had
to be revenged on him, did neglect no time, till at last, we found him
out, where we intended to try Fortune again, which never smiles always
on one, but is ever variable, keeping no constant course, being whiles
here, now there; and commonly we see, that those who have been most
fortunate in their time (as this old General was) they have an
insatiable desire of victory, and prosperous fortune, till near their
end, that they are overcome themselves.

Here we see his Majesty's diligence alike, in following of his enemy,
as he fled before him; as in his pursuit at Donauwoerth, being the
pass, we were holden up at, which his Majesty with diligence did get
in his power, being so hard pursued, that the enemy got no time to
relieve it, though the cavalier that defended it, showed himself
resolute in defending of it, as in out-falling on our guards, which
were Swedens, who having neglected their duty, were blame-worthy, as
their Captain that commanded them, who ought to have preferred death
before life, ere he had quite his post; seeing his standing could have
moved others to help him, though the Swedens left him. But his Majesty
having got the victory over the town, by the valour of the Captains
countrymen, their intercession then procured his pardon, though not
his admission to his former command.

Likewise here we see that stone houses are vain defenses against
cannon: where the walls once pierced, those within are in worse case
then if they stood on plain fields. Therefore at such times, it is
better to adventure forth unto the fields out of reach, then to be
smothered within walls, as were many within this house both of horse
and foot.

Here also as in the continuance of the story, we see the valour of
Hepburne and of his brigade praiseworthy, being first and last
instruments of the enemies' overthrow in gross or by parties, being
commanded men: where often we were well seconded by Ramsey's men,
seeing those were ever commanded on desperate exploits, being still
appointed the fore-troops of the army, well led and conducted by Major
Sidsersse, who was a cavalier both diligent and valorous, being also
trusted on good occasions for his judgment in command.

As his Majesty was diligent in the taking of this pass, so he was
careful to repair it, by helping of the ruins, and in besetting it
again with a strong garrison, establishing good order and discipline,
having left Colonel Worbrane, an Osterreicher Freiherr, as governor,
being a man expert in making of cannon, and in devising of fireworks;
As also he understood well how best to fortify irregular works as
these were. And therefore his Majesty most wisely did concredit,
according to his gifts, the maintaining of this pass to his care and
diligence, which both he did show in fortifying the town, even so far
as art could be helpful to nature.



The twenty ninth Duty discharged of his Majesty's forcing the passage
over the Lech, and of the in-taking of Augsburg.

Donauwoerth being taken, and beset again with a Swedens garrison,
caused a great fear and astonishment to seaze upon all the Papists in
Bavaria, which made the Jesuits and monks fly unto Dilligen, Munich,
Neuburg, and Ingolstadt: where above twenty thousand of the clergy
were unwilling to fight with the Duke against his Majesty's forces,
and seeing Windlingen, the castle of Oberdorffe; and divers other
places taken in by his Majesty, those of Neuburg desired his Majesty's
safeguards, in respect the Swedens were making great booty over all,
wherever they came hanging the Papists by their purse, not sparing to
torment their shins, as they did in Pomerania and in the Marks of
Brandenburg to the Protestants, in exacting their moneys, which they
were made to repay again, Lege talionis.

General Tilly by this time had intrenched his army about the Rhine, by
the side of the Lech, to hinder his Majesty's passage unto Bavaria,
with a strong army, which lay on the other side of the river, right
against Tilly's army, where his Majesty did set over a bridge made
with boats and planks, having planted seventy two pieces of cannon,
great and small, on the borders of the river, which did play
continually into the midst of Tilly's army, who were drawn up in
battle, on the other side, to hinder his Majesty's passage, but our
messengers were so swift and diligent, that through importunity, they
obtained a grant of the passage, where many were made to lie dead by
our cannon; for those that were not hurt by the bullets, they were
lamed by branches and trees, cut by the cannon, being they stood in a
thick wood, which shooting continued a whole day, being on the fifth
of April 1632; a day ominous to General Tilly, who was shot in the
knee with a cannon bullet; a cruel blow for an old man of seventy two
years, who, being carried from thence to Ingolstadt, died within three
days, being cruelly tormented with the smart of his wound.

Tilly being gone, the army discouraged for their great loss sustained;
The Duke remarking his Majesty would force the passage, he thought
best in time to retire, taking his flight confusedly upon Ingolstadt
and Neuburg: after that Altringer, then a Colonel, was shot in the
head, and above a thousand did lie dead on the place they stood on.

His Majesty having crossed over with the army, he incontinent
commanded certain troops to follow the fugitives, getting orders to
cut them off as they were found.

This victory happily attained unto by his Majesty, incontinent the
town of Rain, being the first frontier garrison in Bavaria, rendered
up, and his Majesty having beset Rain with a garrison, he marched with
the army alongst the Lech side on Augsburg; where by the way a
commissary from Neuburg came to his Majesty, making their excuse for
receiving of Tilly's forces, and withal they declared, that the enemy
had quit their town again; and therefore they interposed with his
Majesty for neutrality, which being refused unto them, a garrison was
sent to keep them in awe, to bring their lands in contribution, and to
repair the bridge which was broken by the Duke's command.

His Majesty having continued his march towards Augsburg, the eighth of
April we lay down before it, and immediately we set over a bridge over
the Lech, during which time the commandant spared not his ammunition,
but continually cannonaded amongst us; but our batteries being once
ready, they received their interchange, and his Majesty offered the
garrison free passage, and to retire in safety with his folks, whether
he pleased, otherwise there should no quarter be granted unto them, if
they pressed to hold out longer, whereupon the governor resolved to
accept of his Majesty's offer, and having made his accord, on the
tenth of April he marched out, and was conveyed towards Ingolstadt.

Incontinent thereafter, his Majesty did beset the town with a strong
garrison, and the next day before his Majesty entered the town, all
Papists were ordained to assemble and meet at Lechhausen, where they
were set off the town council, that were known to be Papists, and
Protestants were placed; So that the fourteenth of April his Majesty
entered the town, going first unto the church called St. Anne's
Church, and there in presence of his Majesty of Bohemia, Palsgrave
Augustus, and Duke William of Weimar, Duke Hannes of Holstein,
Markgrave Christopher Fontarlach and Baden, and other potentates and
ambassadors, did hear a sermon, and praised God for the victory
obtained against their enemies; The text being taken out of the
twelfth Psalm and fifth verse. For the oppression of the needy, and
for the sighs of the poor, I will now up saith the LORD, and will set
at liberty him, whom the wicked had snared.

After sermon his Majesty went to the market place, where some Swedens
regiments were brought, and where the burghers were also enjoined to 
come to present their service unto his Majesty, and a table being set
openly and covered, a present was sent to his Majesty from the new set
Protestant Council, of corn, fish and wine, and the next day being the
fifteenth of April, his Majesty with the whole army, was ready to
march unto Bavaria.

The twenty ninth Observation.

GENERAL Tilly being near unto his end, behoved to make a march unto 
Bamberg, to show the Swedens by his retreat the right pass unto
Bavaria, with his own death. Wherin we have a notable example of an
old expert general, who being seventy two years of age, was ready to
die in defence of his religion and country, and in defence of those
whom he served, being then general for the Catholic League: which end
of his should encourage all brave cavaliers, following the laudable
profession of arms, to follow his example in life and death, as
valorous soldiers: where we see, that though death be fatal unto all,
yet such a death, as happened unto this old general, is only proper
unto the valiant, who though often contemned death and eschewed death,
during the warfare, yet at last he is overtaken by God's Almighty hand
and power, though formerly in his life-time he had escaped, by the
same providence, many dangers. And sometimes we see in the very
entrance of wars, some suddenly taken away, to teach us always to
trust more unto God then unto the arm of man, which is but a vain
strength.

Likewise, though this worthy General did fight often, and obtained
many notable victories till this time, against kings, yet at last he
is overcome by a king, and a more skilful general then he was, and
though before the battle of Leipzig, he did give no higher title to
his Majesty then to a cavalier: Nevertheless his Majesty hearing of
his death, called him Honourable old Tilly, whose acts were so heroic
in his life time, that after his death, they were his everlasting
monuments, making his memory eternal, suffering his name never to rot
with the time. And my wish were, I might prove as valiant in advancing
Christ's kingdom (though I should die in the quarrel) as he was
forward in hindering of it; my death then should not be bitter unto my
friends, I leaving an immortal name behind me.

Also here we see the great force of artillery, either in forcing of
passes against our enemies, or in maintaining of passes with a little
advantage of ground, for seventy two pieces of ordnance, with such
continuance, were of mighty force to make passage to an army: for this
victory was obtained by the force of our cannon alone, which made the
enemy run away, before we could come at them to fight, and the
discouragment given unto them, by the loss of their leaders caused
their disorder, and consequently safety to us in our passage. Where we
see, that as victory is from God, so the help, judgment and dexterity
of good commanders is furthersome to the victory, as the lawful means
ordained by God.

Moreover we see here, how easy it is for a victorious army, that is
once master of the field, to take in frontier garrisons, while as they
are possessed instantly with a panic fear, especially being taken at
the stot or rebound, before they have time to digest their fear. But
had General Tilly drawn up  his army out of reach of his Majesty's
cannon, and resolved to suffer his Majesty to have set over his army,
the pass being so narrow, that scarce three men could march in front,
Tilly's advantage had been the greater to receive them as they came,
who might have cut them off by divisions, which had been more to his
credit: yet we see as the prophet says, Except the LORD watch, the
watch-man watcheth in vain. And we see, God would have these people
punished for their former cruelties; and therefore he took away their
judgment, and confounded their counsel, making them err, till they ran
to their own ruin.

As his Majesty's judgment in command was great, so his example was
good and commendable, in giving God thanks in his church, for his
victories and for the preservation of his life from danger; wherein
his Majesty chiefly showed the example of his piety and religious
exercise, for he knew well that religion and justice were the
fundaments of all good society, and being much inclined unto both, he
would win the people by his own example: since of all men it becomes
kings and princes worst to be irreligious and ungodly: for on earth we
have nothing more worthy than religion to be respected and honoured,
it being unto heaven our guide, on earth the fountain of our justice,
whereby we govern our affairs well or ill, expelling and putting away
unjustice or unrighteousness: for where there is most religion or
piety; there also is most happiness: and without her no crown can be
established; and as his Majesty was religious himself, so he
maintained good laws and good discipline, grounded on religion and
holiness of life, which made the happy events and fortunate end of his
warlike expeditions to follow. Blessed therefore shall they be, who
follow his Majesty's example in this, as in all other his warlike
enterprises; for I dare affirm on my conscience, never man served this
master truly (whom his Majesty our master did serve with his heart)
without a reward.



The thirtieth Duty discharged of our expedition toward Ingolstadt.

The sixteenth of April his Majesty did break up with the army from
Augsburg, taking his march towards Ingolstadt, of intention to start
the Duke of Bavaria from thence, having left so many of our army
behind us as took in Landsberg, Mindelheim, Fuessen, Schongau and
divers other parts in Schwabenland by accord, where General Major
Ruthven then governor of Ulm, had brought with his forces that were
also behind us, all the Papists' towns that were betwixt Ulm and
Lindau under his Majesty of Sweden's contribution, and most part of
Schwabenland also, for which service his Majesty gifted unto him,
under his hand and seal, the grafschaft or Earldomof Kirchberg, lying
next adjacent to the city of Ulm, which belonged to the Fuckers of
Augsburg, that were made earls by the Emperor, from merchants having
turned soldiers, to serve his Imperial Majesty: which grafschaft or
earldom could pay yearly, beside contribution to the wars, ten
thousand Rex-Dollars, being a good augmentation of pay for an old
servant, who had served long and valourously, without the least blot
of discredit, and retired bravely with means and credit to his
country, carrying the marks of his valour in his body, being above the
waist full of tokens of valour, credibly gotten in his master's
service; for as he was courageous before his enemy, he was also
fortunate in his conduct, in obtaining victory beyond his fellows; and
being often singled out, man to man, to make his courage the more
undoubted, he always gave testimony in this kind of his valour,
answerable to the external show and hansome frame of his body, being
in personage inferior to no man, for strength and comely stature.

His Majesty continuing his march towards Ingolstadt, coming within
sight of the town, he drew his army in battle, horse, foot, and
artillery, where we stood the whole night at arms. The next day
drawing nearer to the enemies' army being incamped before us, Ex
opposito, on the other side of the Danube, ready to second the town on
all occasions, which his Majesty considering, gave order to draw out
our leaguer, and to set men to work after we were quartered; where,
for our welcome, the enemy from the town did salute us furiously with
cannon; so that at first, the head was shot from the young Markgrave
of Baden, and his Majesty recognoscing, the leg was shot from his
horse; divers others were also here lamed by the cannon.

The night drawing on, his Majesty expecting a strong out-fall from the
town, their army being so near, our brigade, according to custom, was
commanded to march, and to stand the whole night in arms, on a razed
champaign, under mercy of cannon and musket, being ordained in case of
the enemies' out-fall, by fighting to hold them up, till our army
might be in readiness to relieve us; being in April, though the air
was cold, the service being hot, sundry were taken away in full ranks
with the cannon, being in no action ourselves, but standing ready to
maintain our ground, in case the enemy should pursue us, which to my
mind, was the longest night in the year, though in April; for at one
shot I lost twelve men of my own company, not knowing what became of
them, being all taken alike with the cannon; and he that was not this
night, in this stand afraid of a cannon bullet, might in my opinion,
the next night, be made gunpowder of without pain, and who would swear
he was not affrighted for a shot, I would not trust him again, though
he spake truth.

His Majesty, in the beginning of the night, commanded a thousand
Swedens, being musketeers, led by sufficient officers in his Majesty's
own presence, to fall on the skonce, before the bridge, which was
beset with fifteen hundred foot, and five hundred horse, lying open on
the side, that lay next the town, that if the enemy should storm and
enter, he might be clensed out again with cannon and musket, from the
town wall; notwithstanding whereof, the Swedens bravely advanced, even
to the graff, being ready to storm they were plagued with the musket,
and with fireworks, that leaving three hundred men killed about the
skonce, they were forced to retire; the enemy continuing a thunder-
clap of muskets for one half hour, till they were fully retired. His
Majesty finding nothing could be effectuate in this manner; retired
with the musketeers, leaving us and our brigade in the former stand,
to attend the enemies' out-coming, to make us acquainted with the
thundering of cannon; where no man, were he never so stout, could be
blamed to stoop, seeing the cannon in the night firing in a right line
before him, he that would not shift his body, to eschew the grazing of
a bullet, was not to be pitied, if killed through ostentation.

Here death, that cruel fellow, courted all alike, yet none was so
enamoured, as willingly to embrace him, though well I know, many brave
fellows were resolved to meet him, for to give him the foil before he
came near.

This night a soldier though not stout, might pass prentice in our
calling in one night, for resolution; where having stayed till it was
day, we retired to the leaguer, with great loss of men, that were
killed and hurt, where they that had escaped the malheur, were glad to
discourse at large of their night's watch.

His Majesty finding this town strong by nature, situation, and art,
lying on the Danube, really fortified with a bridge over the river,
fortified also before the entry, and the town being well provided of
all furniture, having a strong garrison, and in need an army to supply
it, which made his Majesty, for that time, rise from it, having gotten
intelligence, that the Duke of Bavaria's forces by sleight had taken
in Rheinsberg, where the most part of the army was sent thither to
beset the pass, who immediately after their entry, disarmed the
citizens, being all Protestants, having quartered above twenty
soldiers in every house, where also the Duke himself did march with
the rest of his army, knowing his Majesty was not able to gain credit
before Ingolstadt, he went away, suffering his Majesty to stay behind,
to try his fortune against the town, who also did break up, and
marching away, the enemy with a strong party of horsemen, and of
dragoniers, charged our rear-guard; General Banier being commanded to
make the retreat, where the enemy having charged, he behaved himself
well by good command, charging the enemy with small troops, forcing
them to retire, while as the body of the army was retiring, the
General commanding still fresh troops, one after another, to receive
the enemies' charge, till at last all were safely retired, and the
enemy retired also, not daring to show himself without the passes on
the field, being well beaten at an out-fall by the Swedens the day
before.

The retreat honourably made, his Majesty continued his march on
Moosburg, having lain that night on the hill at Gaisenfeld, having in
the afternoon before drawn the whole army in one front, horse, foot,
and cannon, for doing the funeral rites of the Markgrave of Baden,
whose corpse being appointed to be sent away with a convoy to be
buried; before their departure, the whole cannon was twice discharged,
and then the whole musketeers of the army from the right hand to the
left, did give two salvos of musket, and after them, the whole army of
horse did give two salvos of pistol. This day also, old Captain David
Ramsey was buried, having died of a consuming fever.

The next day our march continuing towards Moosburg, where we did lie
five days, his Majesty having sent Field Marshal Horne, with a strong
party of horse, foot, and cannon, towards Landshut; where Hepburne
with his brigade was also employed. The town not being strong, the
enemy, after a little skirmish made with horse in the fields, retired
over the water,  casting off the bridge behind them, they escaped,
having left a weak garrison of foot in the town and castle, to make an
accord, for keeping the town unplundered, which was suddenly agreed
on, so that before night, we were quartered in the town, the enemy
being retired, where divers of our brigade made booty worth their
pains.

The next day his Majesty hearing we had taken in the town, did break
up with the army towards Memmingen, leaving orders for for the Field
Marshal to join with the army at Freising, having got moneys for his
Majesty, both from Landshut, and the Bishopric of Freising, for
keeping them unplundered.

Hohfnwart, Pfaffenhofen, being two walled towns, with the Abbacy of
St. Morris, and the Abbacy of St. George, were also brought under
contribution; where the boors on the march cruelly used our soldiers
(that went aside to plunder) in cutting off their noses and ears,
hands and feet, pulling out their eyes, with sundry other cruelties
which they used, being justly repaid by the soldiers, in burning of
many dorps on the march, leaving also the boors dead, where they were
found.

A strong party of the Duke's soldiers, thinking to have surprised the
Swedens in their quarters, they fell themselves in the ditch that they
prepared for others, so that very few of them escaped with life out of
the Swedens hands.

By this time also Weissenburg not far from Nuremberg, was taken in by
the Duke's forces, having got some cannon from the castle of
Wuelzburg: Nevertheless, the Swedens garrison behaved themselves
valourously, in making an honourable accord, though those Papists
unworthily broke their promise, for those that would not willingly
serve, were cut down, and the town by condescending was also
plundered, their wives and children were abused, and the Burgomasters
and Preachers were taken prisoners unto Ingolstadt, and the ports of
the town they razed and burnt.



e

IN this expedition, as in all the former, his Majesty's wisdom and
diligence, is praise-worthy; for prosecuting his victories so orderly
on the hot scent, as the cunning hunter doth his prey, in giving one
sweat after another, till he kill or dern, in putting the fox in the
earth, and then hook him out, or starve him.

Likewise, his Majesty also very wisely advancing within his enemies'
country; first made the passes sure behind him, in case of retreat, or
of scarcity of ammunition or victuals, most prudently he left General
Ruthven at Ulm, as governor, being his magazine-place, and surest
retreat; being also made certain of the Duke of Wittenberg's
friendship, who in necessity was able to furnish him with a great
supply of men, moneys, victuals, and ammunition for his army; being
then one of the most powerful Princes within Germany. As also, his
Majesty having got Augsburg under subjection, he very wisely left a
part of his army to subdue the adjacent cities in Schwabenland, to
help his contribution, as Memmingen, Biberach, Brandenburg on the
River Elbe, as also Mittelheim, Kauffbeuren, and Kempten on the Lech,
and Elbe; and that by the industry and diligence of General Major
Ruthven, with the rest of the young cavaliers of the Scots nation,
that followed  him; such as Colonel Hugh Hamilton, Colonel John
Forbesse, Lieutenant Colonel Gunne, Lieutenant Colonel Montgomery,
Major Ruthven, Major Brumfield, and divers other Scots Captains, such
as Captain Dumbarre, that was killed by the boors near Ulm; who all
were obliged to General Ruthven, not only for their advancements, but
also for their means, which they made in short time, beyond their
fellows, who had served longer; by reason their lot was to have fallen
in a fat soil, that abounded in riches, and as their service to his
Majesty was faithful and loyal, so his Majesty was liberal and
bountiful, in advancing them to titles of honour; As also in bestowing
on them cadouks and casualties, to enrich them more than others, whose
fortunes were not to be so rewarded, though their deservings were no
less; so that being rich in credit, they care not for the want of
abundance of external things, being inwardly contented through their
virtue.

Here also we see, that as his Majesty was circumspect for his retreat,
even so he was fore-seeing for the safety of his army, in not
hazarding to engage it too far with disadvantage against the Duke's
army, and the strong city of Ingolstat; being the best strength for
one within the Empire. Nevertheless, having once recognosced the city,
he would not leave it, till he had shown his resolution, and left his
entrenchment, as the tokens of his worth, in hazarding to beleaguer
it, having an army to second them; and while as his Majesty's horse
was shot under him, he said, it did put him in mind, he was but mortal
and subject to mischances, as others; and therefore he knew no better
remedy, but to resign himself and all his to the providence of the
Almighty: and that he was persuaded, that though God should call him
out of the world, yet the Lord would not abandon his own cause, being
so just, but he was assured, God would stir up some other worthier
than he, to put a period to those wars, for the liberty of God's
service in Dutchland; and withal, he took God to witness, he had no
other intention in prosecuting those wars, but only to pull down the
tyranny of the house of Austria; and to obtain a solid and a settled
peace unto all men, that were interested in the quarrel.

Where, by this his speech, we see, that as he was a brave and a
valourous King; so he was wise at this time in preserving himself and
his army from losing them before such a strong city. As also we see,
that the conditions of mortal men have their changes common unto them,
that oft-times they are crossed by contrary fortunes, as formerly they
did prosper; and the Lord doth hide the causes of both from us, to
spur us ever to seek to his Majesty, in doing good; and those good of
themselves, as this just king was, who notwithstanding had need of 
God's direction in all his ways and enterprises: which should make us
all earnest in seeking the Lord, to direct us in all our ways; seeing
of ourselves we are not able to do anything that is good; neither
ought we to ascribe anything of our prosperous success or fortune unto
ourselves, being but the Lord's servants, and instruments he useth, as
weak means of his glory, and the welfare of his Church on earth. Our
daily delight should be then to learn wisdom out of the actions of
others; and like the bee that makes the honey, to converse amongst
good company, that we may savour at least of their goodness, following
the footsteps of this heroic and godly king, fructifying ever during
our life times, unto all sort of well-doing, till such time as we may
end with glory, living after death.

Moreover, here we see his Majesty, though on a march, not neglective
to discharge that last and honourable duty to the corpse of that noble
and worthy cavalier, the Markgrave of Durlach and Baden, by making the
whole army to give two salvos of cannon, musket, and pistol in comely
order, as the custom is at such times; where it is to be regretted,
how oft-times death doth prevent the expected goodness of many a brave
fellow, as this young cavalier was, the worthy son of a worthy father,
who carried divers times the title of a general.

Here also I would exhort by the way all worthy soldiers, who aim at
credit, never to give themselves to mouse or plunder aside from the
army, lest they be punished, in dying ignominiously by the hands of
cruel tyrants, as the ignorant Papist-boors, that have no more
knowledge of God, than to tell over their beads, being taught, as
their best devotion and knowledge of the mysteries of God tending to
salvation, to glory in their ignorance, which makes many of them to
commit any wickedness whatsoever, to win damnation to themselves;
being once commanded by a priest, that can make the poor ignorant
believe, that to do wickedly is the way to heaven. Who cannot then
see, how detestable this doctrine is, that gives people liberty to
commit all villany, and then to assure them of pardon for it?

The use then we should make of this, who profess another truth, is to
abhorr their examples of life, as we do their doctrine; seeing we
should know, that no crime before God is so abominable, as to glory in
sin; for where sin groweth, there groweth also the punishment: And he
that sins openly with an out-stretched neck, as these villains did in
Weissenburg, in sight of God and before the sun and the world, they
offended double, teaching others by their example to sin.

Happy therefore is the man, who delights not in sin, but happier is
he, that glories not in sin, yea happiest of all, that continues not
in sin, but repenteth of the evil done, and ceaseth to do so any more.



The thirty one Duty discharged of our Expedition unto Munich, and of
our abode there.

Being retired from Landshut, a pretty little town and castle in
Bavaria, lying on the Isar, we continued our march after his Majesty,
and marched towards Freising, where we joined with his Majesty, and
incamped overnight in the fields, where his Majesty had intelligence,
that Wallenstein with a strong army, was on his march towards the
upper Pfalz, which made his Majesty make the greater haste to visit
Munich, the Duke of Bavaria his chief town of residence, having made
the Bishop of Freising pay fifty thousand dollars, and promise
contribution beside, out of the whole bishopric, and continuing our
march the sixth of May, towards Munich; on our way, the commissioners
from Munich did come and salute his Majesty, offering all kind of
submission, for to spare from plundering of their city, and from
ruinating of their houses and policy. His Majesty lying overnight in
the fields, within half a mile of the city, his Majesty commanded
Colonel Hepburne with our brigade to march away and to make the
circuit of the town, & to lie over-night at the bridge that went over
the Isar, with his brigade to guard the bridge, that none should pass
or repass till his Majesty's coming to the town, which accordingly we
obyed, and guarded the bridge till the next morning: his Majesty
encamped the whole army without the town, marching in with our brigade
alone, where Colonel Hepburne's regiment had the watch on the market
place, and the guarding of the ports; his Majesty of Sweden and the
King of Bohemia being lodged on the castle, I was commanded with our
regiment, and my Lord Spence's regiment, led by Lieutenant Colonel
Musten, and ordained to lie in the great court of the palace, night
and day at our arms, to guard both the Kings' persons, and to set out
all guards about the Palace, where I was commanded with our whole
officers, not to stir off our watch, having allowance of table and
diet for us and our officers within his Majesty's house, to the end we
might the better look to our watch: and the command of all directions
under stairs was put upon me, being then commander of the guards;
where I had power over the whole offices belonging to the house, and
might have commanded to give out anything to pleasure cavaliers;
having stayed in this charge three weeks nobly entertained.

Here in Munich the Boarish-Boares alleged the dead were risen, since
before his Majesty's coming, by the Duke's command, the great cannon
were buried, side by side in the Magazin house; whereof his Majesty
being made acquainted, they were digged up out of the ground, and
carried away to Augsburg, above one hundred and forty pieces of cannon
great and small, whereof there were twelve apostles, and other cannon
which formerly were taken from the Elector Palatine, and the Duke of
Brunswick, with their names and arms on them, of which one was found,
wherein there were thirty thousand ducats of gold, being a present for
a King.

Likewise in this magazine house there were found clothes and arms
ready to clothe an army of ten thousand foot, which helped our army
much; many other rareties were gotten in this house worth much money,
which were transported away by both the Kings. As also all the Duke's
servants of his whole houshold were there, that bare offices about the
house, and the house itself was as well replenished and furnished, as
any king's palace needed to be, of all magnificent furniture, for bed,
board and hangings, which were sumptuous and costly.

Here also about this palace were pleasant gardens, fish-ponds, water-
works, and all things yielding pleasure in the most splendid grandeur,
that can be imagined, with a pleasant tennis-court for recreation,
where both the kings sometimes did recreate themselves.

Moreover this house was so magnificently situated, that for three
miles about it there was such pleasant hare hunting, that sometimes we
could see the hares flocking together in troops above twenty; As also
for the Prince's pleasure there could be brought together in prospect
of the palace, heards of deer, sometimes above five hundred at once,
and sometimes for pleasure, a thousand to be brought together.

His Majesty having remained here above a fortnight, and getting
intelligence of some turbulent uproars made by the Papist boors in
Schwabenland, his Majesty leaving General Banier to command over the
army at Munich; his Majesty with a strong party of horse, and two
brigades of foot, marched towards Memmingen in Schwabenland, and
having presently stilled the uproar, he retired upon Augsburg, and
from thence to Munich again, where his Majesty on a sudden taxed the
town in a hundred thousand rex-dollars, which the burghers and clergy
were willing to give his Majesty, to keep the city unplundered, for
which sum there were fifty of the special burghers and clergy given as
pledges unto his Majesty, till payment were made of the moneys against
a certain day; and to that effect, the pledges were sent with a convoy
unto Augsburg, to be kept there till the moneys were paid.

His Majesty then fearing that Wallenstein lately made generalissimus
to the Emperor's whole army, was coming with a strong army out of
Bohemia, and his Majesty thinking he was to fall with those forces
into the Duke of Saxony's country, and seeing the Duke of Bavaria had
his army ready at Rheinsberg, and the pass open, he might join with
Wallenstein when he pleased, and therefore his Majesty resolved
suddenly to break up with his army from Munich, giving orders all
should be in readiness against the twenty sixth of May, to march
towards Donauwoerth, and from thence in haste to Nuremberg.

The thirty-one Observation.

Wise generals must resolve in time to rule their affairs according to
the occurrences happening in the course of wars: for the Duke of
Bavaria finding himself, after Tilly's death and his loss sustained at
Rain on the Lech, not bastant to rencounter his Majesty's army in the
fields, he very wisely resolved to make a defensive war, betaking
himself with his army within his strengths and passes, collecting his
forces together at those two places of Ingolstadt and Rheinsberg,
which his Majesty perceiving, thought again, it was not time for him
to enter in beleaguering of such strengths being so strongly beset,
and so well provided, especially seeing his enemies were drawing
strong to the fields from all parts.

The Spaniard forcing his troops on the Rhine within the Palatinate,
General Major Ossa coming behind him with an army in Schwabenland, the
Duke of Bavaria lying strong with his army betwixt him and Nuremberg,
on the passes of Ingolstadt and Rheinsberg, Wallenstein also drawing
near to the Duke of Saxony, with a strong army to fall into his
country, betwixt his Majesty and home; and Papenheim then domineering
in the nether Saxon Kreises: in consideration whereof, his Majesty
very wisely resolved to hang the little towns, cloisters and abbacies
belonging to the Papists in Bavaria by the purse: taking of them on
the sudden all the moneys they were able to give him, and pledges for
the rest, promising unto them, unless they would duly pay their
promised contribution unto his commissaries, the next time he would
burne their dorps and houses, and put all to the sword; whereas then
he had used clemency, in hope they would give the like obedience unto
him as unto the Duke their master. For his Majesty did see, the enemy
forced him by a diversion; And therefore he used his time while he was
in Bavaria; that they might not forget he had been there: but rather
took tokens with him; as men, money, arms, rare monuments of
antiquity, and rich jewels, and which was worse (wherein his Majesty
had neither hand nor direction) many of their houses, dorps and
castles were burnt to the ground by evil and wicked instruments, that
repaid burning with burning, using the Papists at home, as they used
Protestants abroad, being near the Baltic coast, they never dreamed
that the Protestants would come so far up as to repay them under the
foot of the Alps. And had Gustavus lived, we had gone near to warm
them within Rome, for their by-past cruelties, where we see, that God
the righteous judge punisheth sin with sin, and man by his own
iniquity.

His Majesty leaving no garrison in Bavaria, to keep the country the
better in awe and obedience, he took hostages and pledges of special
men from them along with him, to make them the readier to pay the sums
they had promised; as also their contribution: and to make them the
loather to rise again in arms against his Majesty's garrisons, which
lay adjacent unto them.

The Duke of Bavaria's forces being retired within their strengths &
passes, finding themselves not bastant to offend his Majesty's army,
they fall out on the other side of the Danube, towards the upper
Pfalz, making their incursions there, and take in Weissenburg, where
they used both burghers and soldiers more unhumanly, then became
Christians to do.

In like manner we see here the diligence and celerity used by his
Majesty, according to the occasions that happened, in going so
suddenly towards Ossa, and in returning again at the post, with a
convoy of dragoniers towards Munich, to break up with his army, having
left Duke Barnard of Weimar with General Major Ruthven to attend on
Ossa his army, on the borders of Tyroll, towards Landau and the
BOdense, till business were pacified.

Here then we see, that his Majesty's diligence and experience in
warlike actions was so great, that his enemies never plotted that
enterprise, but how soon it came once to his knowledge, he presently
with celerity and quickness of judgment could find out the contrary
remedy, ever to make himself appear in effect the most fortunate
commander that ever we read of. For his great experience in warlike
actions did confirm his judgment and his courage; for he was not
affraid to do what he did learn and practise before; and like a wise
General, he did ever watch against all unlooked for strokes: for
nothing could come wrong unto him, because he was alike for all,
having had the whole compend of wit in his brains, he could well and
wisely govern the Common-wealth, to fight battles was his delight; in
the making of leaguers he excelled all other Generals (as Tilly did
know) engines to devise, to pass over rivers or fosses or walls, was
his master-piece (as Tilly's death can witness at the Lech) to plant
batteries or to change, therein he was profound; witness also his
crossing the Lech; if lines or approaches were to be altered, his
judgment then behoved to be used; in a word he was the master of
military discipline, being risen from a prentice, to the great
professor of arts, in this eminent and high calling of a soldier:
where it is requisite, that as a man is valorous and judicious, so he
ought to be constant in keeping his word and truth inviolable, as this
king did to all his confederates, and to his enemies also. And
therefore as a most precious jewel, his remarkable example of virtue
is to be followed by those, who would prove heroic and magnificent as
he was.

And therefore I was serious to pry so deep into his actions, as that
those, whom I wish to succeed him in his virtues, may follow his
practises used in the conquest of a great part of Germany: for his
spirit alone and skill in wars was better then thousands of armed men.
The like gifts I heartily wish to my noble patron his Highness, the
Prince Elector Palatine, whom I wish to succeed him, not only in his
virtues but in his conquest also.

Seeing then the greatest part of human happiness doth consist in
virtue, whoever then would be wise, let him fix his eyes and his mind
to judge other men's actions, thereby to correct his own, looking unto
all that was and is, to th'end that through their example he may learn
to better himself; for so long he shall flourish, as wisdom and
counsel are his guides, which both I wish we may follow.



The thirty-two Duty discharged of our March to Donauwoerth, and from
thence to Fuerth on the Pegnitz.

The first of June our army did break up from Munich in Bavaria,
towards Donauwoerth, having left an army behind us in Schwabenland of
eight thousand strong, led by Duke Barnard of Weimar, and General
Major Ruthven to attend on Ossa; having crossed the Lech again at
Rain, we continued our march towards our rendezvous at Donauwoerth,
where we were appointed to join with the rest of our army; and from
thence we continued our march upon Weissenburg, being the pass betwixt
Donauwoerth and Nuremberg, where on our march we had certainty, that
Duke Barnard had defeated a regiment of horse, and taken eight cornets
from Ossa, and that Hannibal Count of Hohenems was immediately sent
prisoner to Ulm; and Banier was left for a time at Augsburg, for to
settle the garrison, where the pledges were left in custody. His
Majesty very wisely before this march confirmed his confederacy with
the Duke of Wuerttemberg being of great force to advance his Majesty's
affairs and the cause, with men, meat and money, being the next
neighbour to Ulm.

His Majesty also at this time did give patents to Hugh Hamilton and to
John Forbesse, as colonels to levy two regiments of foot on the
borders of Switzerland, at which time his Majesty did write a
favourable letter unto the Protestnt Cantons in Switzerland, to give
no pass through their country unto the Spaniard from Italy, and that
for weighty reasons; chiefly calling them to memory, that the house of
Austria and Spain were ever great crossers of the liberties of their
commonwealth, and most of all, of the liberty of their consciences:
which letter was gratiously accepted by the Switzers, and the passage
after that was closed up.

Our march continuing to to Fuerth, on our way the Bishoprics of
Eichstaett and Dillingen were brought under his Majesty's
contribution, as also Pappenheim castle was taken in, being the second
marshal house belonging to the Empire, not distant above two miles
from Weissenburg, where before our coming to Weissenburg, the Duke of
Bavaria his forces were retired again, for their safeties unto
Ingolstadt, being led by Crats, so that without impediment, our march
continued to Fuerth on the Pegnitz, besides Nuremberg: where we
incamped again on the fields, the seventh of June, and remained there
till the Lords of Nuremberg invited his Majesty to their city, where
his Majesty was royally entertained, and bountifully offered what in
their powers lay, to be given unto his Majesty, either for his army or
his Majesty's contentment otherwise: and in this mean time, the Duke
of Bavaria his forces were joined with Wallenstein his army at Eger;
having used all the diligence he could in helping his foot forwards on
horse-back and wagons: and in their by-going the seventh of June, they
took in Sulzbach in the over Pfalz, having no garrison in it but
burghers, who defended themselves till they made an accord, which was
not kept unto them.

The thirty-two Observation.

Here we see again his Majesty's wonderful diligence, wherein doth ever
consist the best part of war; for hearing in Bavaria, that Wallenstein
was marched with a strong army out of Bohemia towards the over Pfalz;
and knowing the Duke of Bavaria had the pass of Rhinesberg free unto
the upper Pfalz, he was not able to hinder their conjunction, if
Wallenstein his design were on Nuremberg, as it was; his Majesty knew
then diligence was to be used for the relief of Nuremberg; and
therefore, though about, he hasted his march thither; for his Majesty
knew well, that the taking of time in wars was of much importance,
especially, knowing the enemies' design being on Nuremberg, which to
have, the enemy he knew, would not spare either money or travail; for
if they could cut off his Majesty from the help and assistance of this
town, it was the best way to defend Bavaria, Schwabenland, and
Austria.

Likewise, it was the only means to recover again the Bishopric of
Wuerzburg, and the Dukedom of Franconia, and by that means (if not
altogether) yet far they might, drive back again his Majesty of Sweden
and his forces, keeping him out of Bavaria; as also out of the
Emperor's hereditary lands. This was their cunning enterprise on
Nuremberg, and the reasons of it, which his Majesty of Sweden, that
heroic and magnanimous King took betimes unto his consideration;
having had a wakerife or vigilant eye over the safety and preservation
of this city; seeing it stood of so much importance unto his Majesty,
and unto the whole Evangelists' confederates, that the enemy should
not be master of it. And therefore to prevent the hurt thereof, his
Majesty used the greater haste out of Bavaria. For his Majesty knew
well, that the opportunity of time was like a swift eagle, which being
at one's foot may be taken, but when once he mounts in the air, he
laughs at those would catch him, not meaning to return unto them:
which moved his Majesty, not to suffer the eagle to mount so high,  as
to be laughed at, but imbracing opportunity, while he had it, he
prevented the enemies' design by taking of time, that augments our
experience in warfare; which experience gives us confidence in our
behaviours, in the greatest extremity, giving us resolution and
courage against our enemies; as also graces our behaviour towards our
friends and confederates.

Here then we see the enemies' designs prevented by the diligence,
labour, and danger of the most valiant, the Lion of the North, the
invincible King of Sweden; who was so diligent or wakerife, that his
delight was to try the conclusions of Fortune against his enemies;
forcing Fortune to make him her favourite, and sometimes her master,
as he was on this expedition, in coming betwixt the enemy and the city
of Nuremberg, as a good shepherd goeth betwixt the flock and the corn.

Moreover, here we see also the great wisdom of his Majesty, in making
his league and confederacy sure with the Duke of Wuerttemberg, before
he could perceive the enemies' strength that were coming against him,
taking a catch of time, which being over-seen, could never have been
had again; and therefore it was, that his Majesty used the greater
celerity in binding up that confederacy, having then his army under
the Duke of Wuerttemberg's nose, to force him to conditions, if he had
not willingly yielded: where we see, that the power of an army, led by
a King, much availeth to bring inferiors to conditions, not being able
again to resist a king's power with force. And as his Majesty was wise
in making his confederacy with the Duke, so he was diligent in fore-
seeing to write to the Republic of Switzerland, to get the passage
closed on his enemies behind him; As also we see here his Majesty's
care to supply his army, by giving patents to our countrymen, whose
fortunes were much to be lamented; for having brought their regiments
suddenly together, they were as suddenly scattered: for both the
colonels being taken prisoners, they were kept pitifully in bondage
for the space of three years, being neglected of their superiors, till
they were forced to ransom themselves, and Colonel John Forbesse
having afterwards taken service under the King of France, being of
short continuance, was much regrated, he being a young cavalier, free
and liberal, and of good hope.

To conclude then this observation, it was necessity, that vehement
fellow, did bring his Majesty and his army so soon out of Bavaria,
being the enemy pressed strong against our friends, he was diverted.
Where we see, that necessity in wars admits of no reason, more than in
other things; for seldom it suffers to make choice of times. And
therefore it is holden as the best teacher, that teacheth all most
diligently, even kings as well as mean men, and armies as well as
parties, and parties as private men: for it brings ever great celerity
and quickness with it, as it did on this our march, for the safety of
Nuremberg.



The thirty-three Duty discharged of our Expedition from Fuerth unto
the upper Palatinate.

The town of Nuremberg having accommodated and submitted themselves in
all things unto his Majesty's will, for the furtherance of the good
cause, they furnished victuals, arms, and ammunition, with artillery
for his Majesty's army; and then his Majesty did break up with his
army from Fuerth, and marched by Nuremberg towards the upper Pfalz, of
intention to get betwixt the enemy and Nuremberg, that wherever the
enemy could march, his Majesty might be provided to follow him, or to
prevent his designs.

The first night our army lay in the fields at Lauf, and the next day
our march continued beyond Hersbruck, where we incamped over-night,
till his Majesty's troops sent out to Sulzbach, were returned with
true conshaft or intelligence; which being got, we continued our march
towards Fortmanshauen, and taking it in by accord, the enemy retired
to Amberg.

The country being destroyed thereabout, having camped two nights in
the fields, Colonel Hepburne and I were commanded with two thousand
musketeers, to second the horsemen in case of need. But his Majesty
having got sudden intelligence of Wallenstein's marching towards him,
he retired betime to Hersbruck again, and we with the horsemen retired
also, having the Rear-guard, with much rainy weather, which spoiled
both our arms and clothes for a whole fortnight together, being
incamped at Hersbruck; where his Majesty hearing of the enemies'
approaching, having had then but a weak and a discontented army,
according to his acoustomed manner, he thought it was then fit time to
make a reckoning with the army, for their by-past lendings, and to
cast some thing in their teeth, being much discontented. To satisfy
our hunger a little, we did get of by-past lendings three paid us in
hand, and bills of exchange given us for one and twenty lendings more,
which should have been paid at Augsburg, of the Munich moneys; which
we accepted of for payment, but were never paid: and being thus a
little content, we retired on Nuremberg, making all the haste we could
to inclose ourselves in a close leaguer about Nuremberg, before the
enemies' coming.

During this time, Wallenstein being on his march to us ward, he did
take in Egra and Sulzbach, and approaching still with his army towards
Nuremberg, where his Majesty being come before him the sixteenth of
June, we resolved, being but weak, to expect his coming, and in the
mean time, his Majesty directed for forces from Thuringia, and
Schwabenland, and the Field-marshal Horne was sent away towards the
Palatinate, and from thence to Alsace; and his Majesty engaged to
defend Nuremberg, we wrought hard, till we were in surety; and by this
time, being the twenty-sixth of June, Wallenstein being joined with
the Duke of Bavaria his army, they marched towards Nuremberg, where
they met with Colonel Dowbattle his dragoniers, and with four troops
of spare rutters horsemen, which being defeated, Colonel Dowbattle was
taken prisoner, who being a valourous cavalier, of much worth, that
had behaved himself well on many occasions, as on this last. The
report  whereof moved Wallenstein, out of his clemency, to set him
free within three days, without ransom; and after that they
approaching to Nuremberg, divers hot skirmishes passed betwixt our
horsemen and theirs; where there was good service done of both
parties; for their credits, in making their first acquaintance, they
interchanged a number of bullets, welcoming one another unto
Nuremberg. And on the twenty-eight of June, they appointed their chief
magazine for their army, to be at Freistadt in the upper Pfalz: and on
the thirtieth of June, they came to Schwabach, being then fifty
thousand strong, of horse and foot, we not exceeding sixteen thousand;
and on the fourth of July, they lay down with their army betwixt the
river Pegnitz, and the river Rednitz; being betwixt our army and
Franconia, from whence our forces, supply, and victuals were to come;
and his Majesty for their welcome, the fifth of July did cut off three
troops of horse of theirs, having got their three cornets, as bonum
omen unto us.

The thirty-three Observation.

His Majesty having concluded for to stand to the defence of Nuremberg
against the strong and mighty imperial army, led by Wallenstein, and
the Duke of Bavaria; where we have first set before us the reasons of
his Majesty's conjunction and Confederacy with Nuremberg against their
common enemy.

First being both of one religion, their consciences tied them, not to
see one another's hurt or detriment.

Secondly, they saw and considered, that the good arising of the union
redounded alike to both their weals. Thirdly, the fear they had
conceived of their own weakness, by reason of the enemies' strength,
made them join the faster together. Fourthly, their hatred they bare
to the enemies of the Gospel, who fought nothing more then their
overthrow and ruin, made them look the better unto themselves.
Fifthly, his Majesty stood in need of the Nurembergers' assistance, of
men, meat and moneys; and they stood in need of his Majesty's
concurrence, to keep the overplus of their means, and the freedom of
their consciences to themselves, and their posterity, by keeping the
enemies' fury off them.

All these considered, they joined hand in hand, and with one courage
they resolved to be enemies to those that were come to be their
enemies, finding it was lawful for them, before God and the whole
world, to defend themselves: And therefore they prepared for it, where
at first the town of Nuremberg made up twenty-four strong companies of
foot, that carried in their colours the twenty-four letters of the
alphabet, which they ordained for a supply for his Majesty's army,
that their city might be the better watched, for they resolved, their
best remedy against fear was not to fear at all, since they had
Gustavus and his fortunes under God for their leader: And therefore
they were assured of deliverance from their enemies, with the loss of
a little money, and the spending of a little provision, which they had
long kept in store to sustain them in their necessities, having had
within their walls to sustain daily besides the army, eight hundred
thousand souls, being no small burden to a Land-town.

Here also we see his Majesty's foresight in giving a kind of content
unto his army, according to his custom at such times, the enemy
drawing  near unto him, to ty the soldiers and their officers to the
greater obedience unto his Majesty's commandments, to undergo
whatsoever he was to command them, and for to grieve the enemies by
the rumour of moneys, which then was given out to his Majesty's
soldiers; the enemies' army might be disbandoned, and moneys being so
rife amongst them, to forsake their own colours and run away unto his
Majesty's army.

It must needs have been an extraordinary great provision, that
sustained so many souls a day within the city, whereunto a great part 
of the country people, gentry and boors had run together for refuge,
being a great number of people besides the army, which was sustained
for three months together by the providence of God, the rector and
governor of the world, and the fountain of all goodness; this
omnipotent, omniscient, and invincible GOD governing all and over-
seeing all by his providence, at this time did so direct this people
in midst of their troubles, that they having recommended themselves,
and the event of their affairs to this great God, they concluded that
it was better to prevent, then to suffer under the tyranny of their
enemies; and therefore they fell to work in earnest, for their own
safeties and the safety of his Majesty's army, being under God
resolved to protect them.



The thirty-fourth Duty discharged at Nuremberg, and of the occurrences
there.

His Majesty having recognosced the city and situation thereof, finding
his forces weak in respect of the enemies, he resolved to take all the
advantage he could in setting down his leaguer, for the preservation
of his army, and the safety of the city, and therefore he caused to
draw the draught of the leaguer to go in a circular orb, round the
whole city, the water running through the midst of it; The leaguer
begun at the East, without the suburbs called in Dutch Mark, were
towards the South, to the part called Lichtenhof; where his Majesty's
quarter was, and from thence towards the West, to the town's new
works, crossing over the water; This leaguer being accomplished in ten
days, and in full defence, with strong skonces, redoubts, fosses,
batteries, and being well fortified round with stackets, without the
fosse; and at all sorting ports, being well foreseen with slaught-
booms and triangles; well fastened and close; his Majesty then upon
the North side of the city, made the retrenchment go likewise round
the city, being also well fortified with strong skonces and fosses,
from the East unto the West, beginning at the Mark flect, and going
round the Indenbuhl, even to St. John, and the water closed: Above the
water on the height, was made a great skonce, and another great skonce
was made in the corner at Gostenhof, with deep water graffs, having
works without it again, and half moons: also before Steenehoole, over
against Schwenau there was another skonce, fast and strong: Likewise
at the back of the dorp Steinbuhl, towards the leaguer, there was
another strong skonce made: likewise towards the wood at the South, on
the street called Rottenbacher street there was made an extraordinary
strong skonce, set about with four crossed stackets, of strong timber,
so that there was no means to storm it; the like was made on the
street called Althoffer street. These works, skonces and redoubts
being accomplished, a great number of cannon great and small, were
brought on the works; the batteries all ready, there could be reckoned
in the leaguer about this town, without the walls, of cannon on their
carriages, above three hundred, great and small.

Our leaguer thus fortified, the Imperial army led by the Duke of
Friedland Wallenstein joined with the Duke of Bavaria his forces,
consisting both of fifty thousand men, having the first of July taken
in Schwabach; the second day after they drew towards the dorp called
Stein over against Nuremberg, which doth lie about a Dutch mile from
the town; there they begun to pitch a leaguer, and from Stein towards
the flect called Zirndorf, the leaguer being well fortified, on the
seventh of July, the Duke [ W] of Friedlandmade his leaguer also
towards Zirndorf on the top of the hill called Altberg; wherein he
took, for an advantage, an old ruinous and waste castle, near which
there lay a hunting house in the wood, on the top of the hill over
against the flect-fort, which was called the old strength in Dutch,
This fort he caused strongly to palisade without the works, with
fosses and stackets without the fosse, other great and strong skonces;
he caused to make, and divers other strong skonces on the old hill,
the fosses and breast works were all fortified with great and strong
trees, and within the works, were several barrels or hogsheads filled
with sand and stones for throwing, placed on the batteries, and by
this strong and great leaguer Wallenstein did cut off from his
Majesty's army and the town of Nuremberg all kind of victuals or
provision, could come unto them by the Axile, thinking thereby to
block up his Majesty's army, forcing him to take another resolution,
and then he thought to compel the Kings Majesty to a peace, according
to his mind.

These two armies thus encamped and set down opposite one against
another, they begun all of them, as they went forth in the country
about, to steal, to rob, to plunder and to spoil the whole country,
for to supply with victuals and other furniture these two great new-
founded cities of short continuance, though it is certain, many of
them did get life-rent-leases of their new built houses.

Thus having set down the manner of both the armies' encamping, we lay
still one against another a long time, neither giving nor offering
offence one to another, except it were by mere accident in the
country, amongst straggling troops. Nevertheless though we looked on
each others, we had our watches night and day, before one another's
noses, without loosing of one pistol, or without one alarm in two
months time, as if in effect there were a stillstand of peace.

During this time we were thus looking one to another, the Spaniard
finding his Majesty with the main army far off, he resolved to take
his time in the Pfalz, and crossing the Mosel again towards Alzey; his
Excellence the Rex-chancellour Oxensterne having intelligence of their
coming, he did bring his horsemen over the Rhine and suffered the
Spaniard to draw near Mainz, and then marched unto them; in the mean
time the Spanish General Comissary Lucas Cagro did break up with
twelve companies of horse, giving orders to the rest to follow him, of
intention to fall unlooked for on the Rhinegrave's quarter; But he did
count without his host, the Rhinegrave's folk being betimes acquainted
of their coming, and to their help, having got a supply timely sent
unto them by his Excellence the Rex-chancellor, the enemy was so
welcomed by them, that he was put in confusion, and then chased so
hard, that there were a hundred and twenty killed unto him, many taken
prisoners, and seven standards of theirs were taken, as trophies of
the Rhinegrave's victory over them.

In revenge whereof shortly after, the Grave for Ridberg with a strong
party of horse and foot did fall upon that part of the Pfalz, called
Handsrucke betwixt the Moselle and the Nahe, and coming on Hochspeyer,
where the Swedens Colonel called Hornegt without any resistance gave
over Hochspeyer, notwithstanding of a succour was sent unto him from
Mainz that was at hand: whereupon the Colonel was afterwards brought
prisoner to Mainz, to be adjudged there for his evil carriage.

The Spaniard taking out of Hochspeyer cannon, ammunition and arms with
all that could be found, together with a great deal of money exacted
from the burghers, he had also an intention on Worms, but in vain, 
being strongly beset with the Swedens forces, so that the Spaniards at
this time, as many times before, were forced to quit the Pfalz, and to
draw back again into Holland; and the States' army being come to lie
before Maastricht, were forced to break up from Hochspeyer with their
army, and whole baggage and cannon: The Swedens getting notice of
their upbreaking, desirous to convey them, the Rex-chancellor and
Palsgrave Christian breaks up from Mainz towards Alsheim, and the next
day they came to Beloheim, two miles from the part the Spaniard had
broken up from, and following them hard till they got sight of the
Spanish army, which the Spaniard perceiving directs his baggage
before, and drew up in battle on a plain near a wood, where
incontinent they were brought in disorder by the Swedens, that they
were forced with the loss of three cornets and some foot, to retire
into the wood, and finding the whole Swedens army following up, they
resolved with one consent by flying to save themselves were their
best, and taking the night to their help, they marched so hard as they
could. But yet the Swedens continued their march after them, till the
Spaniard coming to a pass in the hills, threw off the bridges behind
them; Nevertheless the Swedens repaired the bridges and followed hard
after, and by Lauterecken came in sight of them again, that neither
day nor night were they suffered to rest, so that the Spaniard was
forced to burn some of his baggage on his march, and some he left to
the Swedens, that they might, the lighter they were, come the easier
off: in the end a part of them by Lauterecken was attrapped by the
Rhinegrave's horsmen, where some were cut down and their baggage
taken. The Spaniard thus in great fear, and confounded by the
hastiness of his march, and the Swedens wearied with long following,
were content at last, the Spaniards should go their way with so little
reputation out of the Pfalz, at their last good night, having lost
above two thousand men and their whole baggage.

By this time also the boors in Schwabenland again began to be
tumultuous and unquiet, so that by Kempten, they drew together very
strong, of full intention to chase the Swedens out of their lands. But
this uproar continued but short; for when the Swedens forces drew out
of the garrisons, they killed the most part, and drove the rest unto
woods, to seek their food with the swine, in burning a number of their
dorps, to give them work to think on against the winter, to build new
houses, or to dwell in woods: but repenting their rebellion, they
turned their arms against their own masters, that moved them to rise
against the Swedens: and cutting off a number of them, they possessed
their houses, turning good Swedens again, being beaten with the rod of
correction in their bodies and means.

By this time Duke Barnard of Weimar, with his troops did cut off above
five hundred men of Leopoldus folk by Fuessen on the Lech, where he
caused to demolish sundry skonces made up by the country-boors, in
time of their uproar, and divers of their skins were pierced by musket
and pistol, till they were taught to be more sober and quiet, on their
own charges; and after this uproar was settled, the Leopoldish boors
again out of Tirol recollected stronger forces, and marched towards
the Lech again on Fuessen, and Landsberg, both strong passes, and got
them in; yet in the end all turned to a slight conclusion: for Duke
Barnard of Weimar again, having come upon them with his forces; First
he took in Landsberg, and then on the sixteenth of July, he cut off
two companies of Leopoldish dragoniers, and a Troop of horsemen, by a
town called Rosshaupten, where few or none did escape, and in the end,
marching on Fuessen, having stormed the town, they cut off above three
hundred of the garrison, and took prisoners eleven hundred with their
officers; and a number of the country gentlemen, that were Papists,
and sought to save themselves in that strength, were deceived, their
colours being taken from them, and above a thousand of their soldiers
were forced to take service.

By this time also a little fleck, Freidberg in Schwabenland near to
Augsburg, treacherously having called some Crabbats of the enemies to
their assistance, they murdered all the Swedens safeguards that lay
thereabout; whereupon the Swedens forces, to be revenged on them, did
fall upon the fleck, or little town, and killed all the male-kind they
could find, and taking their wives and children out of the town to the
fields, they set the town on fire; so that there is no memory left of
this town, for their perfidiousness to those they got to save them
from the injuries of others.

I hope the reader will excuse this extravagancy of discourse, seeing
all this time we lay idle at Nuremberg, being sometimes without
employment in our calling, I thought better to collect at this time
somewhat of the actions of others, than to be altogether idle.
Therefore I crave pardon again, to tell as yet somewhat that happened
about this time in the nether Saxon Kreises, which I set down in
paper, as his Majesty was informed of it, we being then at Nuremberg
without hostile employment.

By this time the Earl of Pappenheim, a worthy brave fellow, though he
was our enemy, his valour and resolution I esteemed so much of, that
it doth me good to call his virtuous actions somewhat to memory, and
the success he had at this time in warlike and martial exploits, in
the nether Saxon Kreises. First then he had not only offended the
Hessen and Lueneburg, but also by skirmish he made them feel the dint
of the valour, which accompanied him unto his death; and as they felt
his skill in the fields by fighting disbanded in skirmish, so also
they were made to understand his experience in beleaguering of towns,
having taken in before their noses, their army being near unto him,
Einbeck and divers places more, and then having recrued his army again
out of Westphalia, he then marched on Stade, and relieved it before
General Tott his nose, that lay before it, and about it; and all
things succeeding still well with him, he not alone relieved the town
in making the Swedens to quit it, but also cut off unto them fifteen
hundred men, which were but novices, being new levied; and he did get
divers colours of theirs, as trophies of his victory; amongst others
he did get three colours of Colonel Monro of Obstell his regiment,
which were then led by Captain Francis Sinclaire, who after a little
skirmish had with the enemy, their powder being spent, and they
environed by the horsemen, knowing of no relief, took quarters for the
soldiers, and the officers were prisoners, being long kept unrelieved
at Minden, above a year and a half; but the Captain having ransomed
himself came loose soon after he was taken; but two Lieutenants Monro,
and Ensign Monro remained eighteen months longer in prison.

Pappenheim after relieving of Stade, having gotten intelligence, that
Duke Francis Carolus of Saxony Loewenberg had come to the Swedens,
with two strong regiments, of intention to block up Stade again, the
Swedens growing still stronger and stronger, so that it was thought
Pappenheim was inclosed as in a snare or grin, and which was worse,
that he was scarce of victuals in the town, and the town not strong
enough to hold out, he then resolved to quit it, taking out with him
the Imperial garrison that was therein, and taking his march again
towards the Weser stream; so that he leaving it, the Swedens
patronizing the town they did beset it again with a garrison.

Shortly after this brave fellow rencountering again with some Hessen
troops, he did sore beat them also back and side. By this time General
Lieutenant Bawtishen had got the command of the Swedens army, after
General Tott had quit it; who incontinent after followed Pappenheim
towards the Weser; But this brave fellow Pappenheim not for fear of
Bawtish coming, but being called by the Infanta for aid, crossed the
Weser; and coming on the River of Rhine, continued his march towards
Maastricht to assist the Spaniard in their need. This brave commander,
as he was full of action, so he was still employed, and I was sorry he
was not of my mind in serving the good cause.

Pappenheim gone to Maastricht, Lueneburg, and General Bawtish (under
whom was my brother Colonel Monro of Obstell) they returned towards
Duderstadt, which Pappenheim had strongly beset before his going away,
and they nevertheless got it in with little pains, by reason the
soldiers, that were therein, being fifteen hundred begun to mutiny,
and to give themselves over unto the Swedens service; after this they
commanded some forces to blocker Wolfenbuettel, wherein the Duke of
Lueneburg in person was employed; And General Major King, being with
some forces employed on a post apart, the Duke hearing the enemy was
marching strong, for the relief of the town, he did break up, and
marched away for his own safety, without advertizing General Major
King of the danger he was left unto, by the enemies' approaching so
strong, till in the end they came so near to the General Major's post,
having no conshaft of them, till they had strongly invironed him with
their horsemen, so that the General Major finding no passage open, he
being pursued did valourously with a few men defend themselves, till
in end being weakest, they were made to yield, where after divers
wounds honourably received, the General Major was taken prisoner, and
kept long under cure, till that after he ransomed himself, and being
come loose again, he levied more forces of horse and foot for the
Swedens service, to be the better revenged of his enemies, and after
that fortunately and valourously behaved himself, with the general
applause as well of strangers as of his countrymen; being also well
reported of by his very enemies, so that since his virtues and noble
carriage have still advanced his credit, which for my part, I wish to
continue, he being now Lieutenant General.

Having thus far spoken of the passages, which occurred by this time in
the nether Saxon Kreises, I return again to show the rest of our
intelligence at Nuremberg, come from the Bishopric of Trier on the
Rhine; where also on divers occasions did pass some rare accidents.

This Bishop having concluded a neutrality with his Majesty of France,
as also with his Majesty of Sweden, but seeing the Spanish not to
remove, neither yet that the principals of the gentry of the Land were
willing to embrace the neutrality: Nevertheless, the Bishop remained
in his former resolution, and the strength called vulgarly Herman
Stein, he gives it to the French, so that they being so near, in
neighbourhood to the Spaniard in Coblenz, they did agree together as
cats and rats: in the end the French seeing the Spanish garrison
growing weak day by day, the Swedens by virtue of their confederacy
with the French, they came in for their own hand, as third men, and
drawing before Coblenz, after a short beleaguering, they make the
Spaniard quit it, and getting of the city a sum of money, they remove,
giving the city over unto the French: the Spaniard after losing of
Coblenz, Montabaur, Engers, and other places thereabouts belonging to
the Bishopric of Trier, they go their ways.

The Field-marshal Gustavus Horne, being by this time sent by his
Majesty from Nuremberg towards the Rhine stream, to make resistance to
the Imperialists beginnings there; coming towards Trarbach on the
Moselle: with his forces, being the pass the Spaniard was wont to
cross at, to come unto the Pfalz; after a short beleaguering, he got
in the town and castle by accord, and then retired unto the Main to
draw more forces together, and from thence continued his march towards
Mannheim, of intention to join with the Duke of Wuerttemberg, for to
make resistance to Ossa and the Imperialists, which were recollecting
themselves strongly in Alsace again, having understood Ossa was joined
with three regiments of the Catholic League, the Grave Von Brunckhurst
his regiment of horse; as also the Freiherr Von Rollingen his
regiment, and Colonel Metternicht his regiment of foot, which were
levied for the defence of Coblenz; but shortly after; through the
alteration that happened in those quarters, were brought unto Alsace;
and being joined to twenty-five companies of horse, and some regiments
more of foot, they crossed the Rhine unto Durlach, and further unto
Bretten, where they compelled the Swedens garrison there, being two
hundred, to take service of them, and then plundered out the town,
burnt the ports, and demolished a part of the walls, being in
Wuerttemberg-land.

The Grave Von Mountecucule was General over these folks, who
perceiving that the Duke of Wuerttemberg with some new levied forces
had passed over Kinbis, he retired upon Knittlingen, and saling the
town, puts three hundred to the sword, plundered all out, and burnt
all the town to three houses.

By this time the garrison of Heidelberg coming towards Weisloch,
wherein did lie a company of dragoniers, and a troop of horse of the
Markgrave Von Tourloch's folk beleaguers it, and by casting fire in
the town sets three houses on fire, whereof the Field Marshal Gustavus
Horne being made foreseen, he with all his forces did break up, and
marched; the Heidelbergish garrison being acquainted with this
advancement of the Field-marshals, they incontinent retired in great
haste on Heidelberg, and having before their up-breaking from
Heidelberg desired succours from Ossa and Mountecucule, their corporal
and six horsemen at their back coming being taken prisoners by the
Swedens, the Field-marshal did find by their Letters, that on the
sixth of August, their whole horsemen had appointed rendezvous at
Metternich, to go for Weisloch, whereupon his Excellence did draw near
to their rendezvous place, and attended their coming, being unlooked
for by them, in the mean time the Imperialists were advertised, that
those of Heidelberg had got in Weisloch, and were again blocked up by
some Swedens forces, whereupon Ossa, Mountecucule, the Colonel
Mountelabam, and Witzone, with the fore-troops of horse, being a
thousand horse, march on for the relief, and unlooked for were pursued
by the Swedens, whereof two hundred, among whom was the Colonel
Mountelaban and other officers, were killed, many taken, and the rest
all scattered. Whereupon Ossa and Mountecucule, with the rest of the
folk, that were lying at Oberhausen and Rhinehausen, in all haste did
set over the Rhine at Philippsburg. The Field-marshal followed hard,
and finding he could get no more of them, he returned over the Rhine
again, and getting the Strasbourg pass Rheinbruecke, he held on his
march further unto Alsace with the horsemen, during which time his
foot forces with the Wuerttembergers beleaguered the pass Stolhossen,
and getting it in by accord, they marched five thousand strong over at
Strasbourg unto upper Alsace, whereat the Imperialists were mightily
afraid, and without night or days rest they marched towards Colmar,
Breisach, in the upper Alsace in all haste, by taking them to those
parts for their retreat, but the Swedens following them hot-foot, they
took in divers places, and made good booty on their march, and at
last, after in-taking of Offenburg by accord, they marched then
towards Bentfeld, the Bishop his chief strength, and beleaguered it.

By this time also, Field-marshal Arnheim leading the Saxons army, did
fall in strong into Silesia, taking in Glogau, and other parts
thereabouts, and all the Imperialists marched towards him with a
strong and mighty army. There were incontinent certain Swedish and
Brandenburg forces joined with Arnheim, who did set on the
Imperialists by Steinau, beat them in the fields, and followed them
unto Breslau; and then after the Imperialists intrenched themselves
betwixt Breslau and the Oder. Nevertheless, they were hunted up again
by the Swedens and Saxons, who followed them from place to place, and
did get the thumb at Breslau, where they did get great booty from the
Imperialists, and not contented with this, the Swedens and Saxons
followed them over the River at Ollawe, and did set on the
Imperialists again, not far from Wimslau, obtaining a great victory
over them again, where many brave fellows were taken prisoners, many
also were killed, and the rest scattered; so that the Swedens and
Saxons were masters of the greatest part of Silesia, and they made the
town of Breslau to accommodate themselves in confederacy, on certain
conditions, with the Swedens and Saxons, while as we at Nuremberg for
six weeks together used no great hostility, but lay secure within our
leaguers, as within walled towns, but at such times as we were
commanded forth, as convoys for our horsemen, that went for forage,
and then sometimes we lighted on one another, striving always for
elbow-room, whereof at length the Imperialists made us very crimp or
scarce, having but one quarter of our leaguer free, to bring in our
forage, being only from the Southwest.

The thirty-fourth Observation.

WE read in Dion, that after Caesar had won the Battle of Pharsalia,
amongst the honours the Senate had ordained to be given unto him, they
commanded to dress for him a triumphing chariot, which was set
opposite to Jupiter within the Capitol, and that he should stand on a
globe, representing the world, with the inscription, semi-deus est:
Even so the lords of Nuremberg in consideration of the great respect
they carried unto his Majesty of Sweden, at the first entering their
city, after the battle of Leipzig, they presented two globes unto his
Majesty, a terrestial and a celestial, in sign of their love and
obedience unto his Majesty, and his Majesty again by his royal word;
promised, under God to defend and protect them against all mortals;
and being thus engaged unto them, their enemies menacing their ruin,
with a mighty and a strong army, being minded to overcome them with
the sword, or to make them starve by hunger, having closed up as they
thought all passes, where through succours could come unto them, by
planting of a wonderful strong leaguer about them, of intention to
block them, and his Majesty's army both within them, being then but
weak within their trenches and walls.

His Majesty again like a wise general, pondering and considering how
weighty his enemies' enterprises were, in seeking to overcome
Nuremberg, and knowing, if that once they did get Nuremberg on their
side, the rest of the great cities would follow, in regard whereof his
Majesty resolved, the safest course for him and the town both was, to
set down his leaguer strongly betwixt the town and the enemy, as well
to hinder their correspondence, in case of their unconstancy, as for
their defence, in case of their loyalty. For his Majesty knew well
there was as great virtue in keeping of a conquest, as in getting of
it: And therefore at this time, as formerly at Stettin, Werben and at
Wuertzburg against Tilly, he resolved to take him to a defensive war,
with the spade and the shovel, putting his army within works, having
the supply of such a back-friend as Nuremberg was, to assist him with
men, meat and ammunition, until such time as he might weary his enemy,
as formerly he had done, or that succours might come to him, that he
were bastant for them in the fields; and having thus happily resolved,
both the army's strongly intrenched before others, they did bring the
eyes of all the potentates in Europe upon their actions, and designs,
to see how the end would prove, and who should be thought wisest of
both. But you shall see that he that was at this time the terror of
the world, the subduer of Sweden, the daunter of Poland and Denmark,
and  the hope of Britain, Holland and Germany, was able even unto his
death to suppress the pride and tyranny of the house of Austria, and
of his ministers and servants, being all but novices in wars, in
comparison to the Lion of the North, the invincible Gustavus, who in
glory and dignity did far surpasse all his enemies, as is cleared by
his former wisdom, in governing his victories, and hereby his great
care and diligence in preserving his friends from the fury of their
enemies, exercising his army within a close leaguer, to handle their
arms well, after his own new discipline, being taught to keep their
faces to their enemies in retiring as in advancing, never turning
backs on their enemies as of old.

It is also to be admired the great provision this city was provided
with, being no sea-town, as of victuals and ammunition, where it was
reported that they had oats, which was distributed to the army, that
had been kept above a hundred years, and this city was ever from the
beginning renowned for their wisdom and policy in counsel, more then
for their force in arms, from whence did come the Dutch proverb, that
he who had the wit of Nuremberg, the money of Ulm, the pride of
Augsburg, with the power of Venice, might do much in this world.

Here then at Nuremberg, as at a safe bay, his Majesty like unto a wise
master of a ship perceiving the storm coming on, casts out his best
anchors, riding out the storm till it blows over, and then finding the
gale to favour him, he lanches forth to look for his enemies. For his
Majesty knew well when it was time to give a blow, as he did know the
surest way to ward and hold off a blow: and we see here his Majesty's
counsel was of much worth to the good of the city, as his power in
arms; so that his very enemies did not only praise his wisdom, but
oft-times did admire it, and as the enemy did strive to starve us, his
Majesty knew well, that such a strong army as they were in the dog-
days, lying in the leaguer in time of so great infection, betime would
become near as weak as we were. As also his Majesty knowing the evil
that is incident to all army's through idleness, he pressed to keep us
still in handling and exercising our arms; for he knew well, mans
nature was like Iron, that did rust when it was not used, and on the
contrary, he knew that well exercised soldiers, as he had, would
desire to fight, when novices (as his enemies had) would be afraid to
stir out of their leaguers: for oft-times it is not the multitude doth
the turn, but it is art begets victory.

Having spoken in the discharge of this duty of the actions of some
worthy personages, I mind here to observe somewhat in commemoration of
the persons worths that did lead them.

First then we see, that the Spaniard divers times was forced with
little credit to retire out of the Pfalz, and that in respect he never
turned faces about in making use of ground, cannon, pike or musket:
which proves his retreats to have been dishonourable, and the leaders
to have been no soldiers. For we presuppose, in four days retreat the
defender could once have made choice of ground, where making use of
his cannon, his enemies would be glad they had not advanced so far;
but rather that they had suffered them to pass: but an enemy once
feared never fights well, except extremity make him desperate, and
then it is not safe to deal with him.

Likewise we see here, as they were not all Spaniards, that fled, so
they were not all Swedens, that followed; so that we find there are
some good of  all nations: but it is certain that at such times the
worth and valour of a leader is best known, not only in fighting
examplary to others, but specialy in directing others.

We see here, that the turbulent insurrection of the boors in
Schwabenland is soon stilled, when they want a head to lead them,
where we see, the giddy-headed multitude doth ever wag like the bush:
for though sometimes they grow pale for fear, they are so impudent,
that they never blush at their faults, though oft-times they are well
corrected for their errors.

Here also we see, the valour and policy of Duke Barnard much to be
commended, as a prudent commander in all his enterprises, overcoming
more by wit and policy, than by dint of arms. For though resolution
never fails, yet by stratagems he overcomes more, than by killing; and
being victorious he did show his clemency, that another time his
enemies might yield the sooner unto him, seeing he had used these
well, whom formerly he had subdued: and this cavalier being noble,
according to his birth, he knew that the strength of victory
consisteth in the using of it well, which made hime ever give the
better quarters; for as he was noble, to make him the more noble, he
was endued with reason; so that he conjoined nobility with virtue,
which made his worth much esteemed of, and though he was descended of
noble progenitors, yet his mind raised him above his condition, he
being fit to command army's, and his birth did beget the greatest
obedience next unto his Majesty over the whole army, being resolute,
noble, and prudent withal.

In the former discourse had of the acts of that noble and worthy
cavalier, though our enemy Pappenheim, his name merits to be
enregistred, for his valorous courage, extraordinary diligence in his
expeditions, and the fortunate success, that did accompany his
valorous conduct at divers times, even unto his death. This noble
cavalier was so generous, that nothing seemed difficult unto him,
fearing nothing, not death itself, once resolved, and as he was
valiant, so he was most diligent in all his expeditions; for while he
lived, those armies next unto him were never suffered to sleep sound,
which made his Majesty of Sweden esteem more of him alone, then of all
the generals that served the Emperor, wishing one day he might
rencounter with him, to try his valour, whom he honoured so much,
though his enemy.

This valorous captain after the Battle of Leipzig, was the first that
adventured, with a single convoy, to pass through his Majesty's
armies, unto the nether Saxon Creitz to put life in the cause, being
come again betwixt his Majesty of Sweden and home, desirous to gain
credit, he delayed no time, but on the contrary used all diligence,
till he got an army of old soldiers together out of the garrisons, and
then began to take advantage of his enemies, catching them unawares,
like a valiant captain and chieftain, he suffered no grass to grow
where his army did tread, but traversed from one place to another,
adding and augmenting still to his own credit, but diminishing and
substracting from the reputation of other generals, till he obtained
the name and fame of the most valiant, and most vigilant general that
served the Emperor, being in effect more furious sometimes in his
conduct then requisite for a general, fearing nothing but the
indignation of his superior, whom he served valianty and truly. This
kind of boldness, though haply it doth prosper for a time, yet
sometimes in others, it  may overwhelm all the good fortune that
formerly they attained unto. For nothing is less to be allowed of in a
commander, then boldness without reason, though sometimes things
happen to succeed well, being pregnable for such daring men, as the
King of Sweden and Pappenheim was, being both truly courageous.
Nevertheless, this daring is not to be made a custom of; so being oft-
times the example is as faulty, as the deed in an army.

This Pappenheim in his attempts, so far as I could learn, was
unblameable in his carriage, as a leader, except at Maastricht, where
he was blamed for too much forwardness with disadvantage, having lost
more men then the attempt proved credible.

As this valiant cavalier strived to do notable service unto the
Emperor, even so Field Marshal Gustavus Horne, being a valiant
cavalier, without either gall or bitterness (as they say) but on the
contrary he was wise, valiant, sober, modest, vigilant and diligent,
striving in all his actions to please God, and his master the King of
Sweden.

And as Pappenheim was thought bold, and heady in his resolutions; The
other Gustavus Horne was remiss in advising, but very resolute and
courageous in the execution; parts most worthy praise in a commander,
being subaltern to another's command, as he was unto his Majesty of
Sweden, who could never enterprise of himself, more than was allowed
unto him by his instructions had in writing, so as he attempted
nothing rashly, he feared no danger, once being entered, and he was so
meek in his command, that with love he obliged the cavaliers that
followed him, to obedience, more then another could do by austerity:
being the best means to conquer with, and the safest way to maintain
reputation and credit; Thus beloved of all men, he was very wise, and
silent, keeping a decorum in his actions and gestures, being to my
judgment powerful to command himself, as he did command others.

Here also we have occasion to praise the wise and valorous conduct of
the Field Marshal Arnheim in Silesia, where he obtained great victory
over his enemies, being endued with a singular gift befitting a great
commander, in giving every man that was under his command, his due
means allowed to him by his superior, a rare quality in a great
commander, being one of the special points that is powerful to oblige
the love of officers, and soldiers unto their superiors, making them
refuse nothing against their enemies they are commanded unto: in the
greatest extremity soldiers can fear no danger, being well paid by
their superiors.

This virtue iustitia distributiva includes many other virtues under
it, proper to a great commander, as his actions in Silesia do witness,
having obtained several victories there over the Imperialists.

As for the vices of men of this quality, making profession of arms,
being my superiors, duty will not permit me to speak, but reverently
of them; And therefore what faults they have (as none lives without
some) they shall be better divulged by some other tongue then mine:
Nam quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri nefeceris


The thirty-fifth Duty discharged of the Accidents that occurred at
Nuremberg before the succours was come.

Having lain long still as in a sleep, without fear of our enemies,
being within a fast leaguer, in th'end his Majesty begun to stir
first, causing parties to present themselves before Wallenstein's
leaguer, as if they went to borrow a bear, or rather to provoke their
enemy to try their valour, but the Imperialists having no great desire
to fight, but attempted only in the night to fall over the Pegnitz,
giving us alarms to little purpose, being soon repulsed, finding us
always ready on our guards attending their nightly coming, our outward
watches being a mile from us, so far as Fuerth on the side of the
river, having also perdues a foot without the leaguer, our sentries on
the walls at batteries, colours and corps-de-gards; so that it was
hard to surprise us. But the greatest hurt they did us, was by their
Crabbats, while as our servants and horses went forth to forage, for
in one day for my part I lost three of my servants, and five of my
best horses; But in th'end our forage grew so scarce, that many did
quit their horses for want of entertainment; Nevertheless, twice every
week strong parties of horse, with strong convoys of musketeers were
sent forth to bring in forage, where it was my fortune to have been
oft commanded with the foot; little skirmishes we had without great
hurt, being always in hope of relief in need; Nevertheless, whatsoever
street we went out on, their garrisons were still ready to snap some
or other amongst us on our wings, and then away they went unto their
strengths; sometimes they came from Forcheim, sometimes from Buche,
and sometimes from Rothenbach, so that always some devilish garrison
or other snatched at us aside, though they durst not draw near our
bodies; neither could the enemy know on what quarter we went forth on,
and if they knew, sure that quarter we went out on was beset by
ambuscades of our people, to attend them, in case they should fall in
betwixt us.

On the twenty-eight of July, his Majesty had commanded out Colonel
Dowbattle, with some troops of horse, and some dragoniers, towards
Furstat in the upper Pfalz, which lay but two miles from Neumarkt,
where the Imperial army had their magazine-house for their victuals,
and ammunition; which was beset with five hundred soldiers; Dowbattle
the thirtieth of July coming before it ere it was day, he divided
incontinent his folks in two deals, putting the one half to the over
door or port, and the other half to the other port; the over port made
up with a petard, the Swedens entering, they gave fire; and at their
entry they killed the Lieutenant Colonel Revenheller, being one of
their own, thinking he was an enemy, being shot in the shoulder he
died shortly after at Nuremberg. All the Imperial garrison was almost
cut off; the proviant wagons were plundered, and the town was burnt,
having brought four hundred oxen, that were both great and fat, unto
Nuremberg.

His Majesty immediately after Colonel Dowbattle was marched, followed
with a party of a thousand musketeers, and some eight hundred horse
towards Burgthann on the dorps; thinking, if the enemy got
intelligence of Dowbattle's march, they would set after him; And
therefore to make his retreat good, his Majesty went towards Bosbowre.
At the same time General Major Sparre, with eight hundred horse,
twenty cornets of Crabbats, and five hundred musketeers commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Gordon, and Major Lesly, which party of the enemy
had an enterprise on Lauf, to take it in, for hindering us from
forage, having no door open to go out on, but that only; and having
met with his Majesty in the fields, his Majesty most heroically
charged them, and killed many with the first charge: General Major
Sparre kept himself by Colleredo his horsemen, and the foot were
commanded by Gordon and Lesly, two Scots cavaliers, who then serving
the Emperor did behave themselves valiantly for a time, as I did hear
his Majesty of Sweden give testimony of their valour, alleging if the
Emperor's horsemen had behaved themselves like the foot, his Majesty
had not returned victorious; for Sparre intending to have broken
through his Majesty's horses, the Crabbats having run away, the rest
of the Imperial horsemen were overcome, and then most part of their
foot were cut down. General Major Sparre was taken prisoner, with
Gordo and Lesly, and were brought all three unto Nuremberg, with three
cornets.

In obtaining this victory Colonel Ree was killed, his Majesty after
his death being forced to light from his horse, and command the
musketeers, having skirmished well for an hour on both sides, the
praise whereof his Majesty did give to the Scots cavaliers, that
commanded the Imperialists, to whom he promised before they were
taken, within three days to let them loose again ransom-free.
Nevertheless, they were kept for five weeks with us their countrymen,
where we made merry as friends. Here also in this conflict was killed
his Majesty's kammerjunkare, called Boyen; and another chamber-man,
called Cratzistene, that attended his Majesty.

About the ninth of August, the Imperialists catched a great number of
our horses at forage, and waited on us so well, that there was no more
hopes to bring forage unto the leaguer; so that many of our horsemen,
for want of horses, were put to their feet, till our succours were
come unto us.

The thirty-fifth Observation.

Here we have two mighty armies waiting to take advantages one of
another, being resolved for to gain credit to endure all toil and
misery, and they contemned all hazard and danger, to win glory to
themselves, being armed with courage and military virtue, contemning
spoil and riches, leaning to their virtue they delight in the war,
being taught by discipline heartily to embrace poverty for their
mistress; and here the soldier wearied, is content to make the ground
his bed to lie on, as also making the first morsel, that chances to
his hand, to satisfy his appetite, and instead of sleeping out the
whole night, he is contented with a nod, nothing seeming impossible or
impregnable unto his courageous and resolute mind, glorying more in
his contented poverty, than others do in their greatest riches; for he
thinks he hath not to do with gold, being able to command his own
desires: as the bravest leaders, and most valiant captains of armies
have ever made greater esteem of honour and renown, than deceivable
riches, or of the spoil of their enemies; reserving glory and honour
unto themselves, they allowed the spoil for the common soldier,
hunting after an immortal name to leave behind them after death,
rather than with the spoil of others to be thought rich, robbing
themselves of a good name, and their soul and conscience of eternal
rest.

We see then, that it is much better to contest with honest men for
virtue and a good name, than with the avaricious or niggard, that hath
come to an estate with the spoil of his enemies, or perhaps with the
spoil of his friends, or worst of all, by detaining their means from
them, who did serve valiantly for it, with the loss of their blood.
Such conquests unlawfully made by some officers, are rather to be
pitied than envied; and I am of the mind, he hath provided well for
his wife, children, and friends, that leaves an immortal name behind
him for himself and his after death, rather than to leave them rich in
the Devil's name by unlawful conquest.

His Majesty of Sweden having had here but a weak army (though expert
in military virtue) he resolved to weary the enemy having a strong and
mighty army, to be entertained with all sort of provision, which must
needs be brought from afar, out of Bavaria, upon the axle or wagons,
being a labour of infinite pain and toil, to transport entertainment
for fifty thousand men daily, and corn for horses such a far way; and
having appointed their magazine-house in the upper Pfalz, to weary
them the sooner, his Majesty very wisely, as we see, plotted the ruin
of it, to be effectuated by Colonel Dowbattle, being known for a
cavalier of much worth, that formerly had done his Majesty divers
notable good services, as at this time, which made his Majesty to be
the more careful of his safe retreat, in coming himself with a party
betwixt the enemy and him, to be his second; being no small honour,
where in the first rencounter Colonel Ree was killed, and then a
little captain of the Leeffe regiment, throwing off his doublet did
valourously command, supplying the place of the Colonel, till such
time as his Majesty took notice of his noble carriage, and then
lighted from his horse, taking the command to himself: Nevertheless,
at his Majesty's return to quarters, he did give his own portrait,
with a gold chain to the Captain, and advanced him to a lieutenant
colonel's place, for reward of his virtuous carriage in sight of his
master.

Colonel Ree being killed, I being then the eldest Lieutenant Colonel,
under his Majesty's army of foot, having served three years before as
Lieutenant Colonel, I sought of his Majesty, as my due, according to
the custom then used, that I might be made Colonel to Ree's regiment,
which his Majesty confessed openly to have been my due; Nevertheless,
on other considerations showed by his Majesty unto me, I was contented
to give way to his Majesty's will; whereupon his Majesty urged me to
be Colonel to the regiment I had commanded so long, in absence of my
Lord of Rhees, seeing his Lordship had advertised his Majesty, he was
not to return to his charge: As also, he had sent his warrant under
his hand unto me, to deal with his Majesty to get the regiment being
weak to be made up for myself; but I being desirous to have commanded
strangers, the other regiment being strong, and ours very weak, my
intention was to have joined them both in one, seeing at that time his
Majesty would not admit me to recrue the regiment from Scotland; but
having given me patent as colonel, his Majesty assigned a muster-place
for me in Schwabenland, from whence I was to receive moneys to
strengthen my regiment (being then but seven companies) to twelve; and
before the next summer, I made them up to ten companies; his Majesty
having the eighteenth of August 1632, placed me colonel over the
regiment, at which time Major John Sinclaire was placed my lieutenant
colonel, and Captain William Stewart was made major.



The thirty-sixth Duty discharged of the joining of our army with the
Succours, and of our service at Nuremberg.

The sixteenth of August the succours being come from Saxony, Hessen,
and Thuringia, brought up by the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne, and Duke
William of Weimar, being come together at Weltzheim, the eighteenth at
Aiorach and Prugg, and the twenty-one at Fuerth, by four of the clock
in the morning they presented themselves in battle before Fuerth,
where did lie above a thousand Imperialists, which were presently
chased away, taking their retreat unto Wallenstein's leaguer; which
done, Duke Barnard of Weimar, and General Banier continued the army's
march, being thirty thousand strong, through the fields towards a dorp
called Grossreuth, and draws up in battle in plain champaign, half a
mile from the enemies' leaguer; his Majesty then marching out of his
leaguer with the army from Swyno towards Kleinruthe; incontinent
presented himself in battle before the enemies' leaguer; but the
Imperialists unwilling to be seen in the fields, they kept themselves
close within their leaguer, playing on us with their cannon, having
done no more hurt, than the killing of one constable and a few
soldiers, and we attending their resolution and out-coming,
enterprised nothing all day, but stood ready in battle till night,
that the foot brigades had orders to advance within cannon reach of
their leaguer, where our batteries were ordained to be made all in
front, as our army stood, alongst the face of the enemies' leaguer,
where we had cast up a running trench before the front of our army,
from the right hand to the left, going from one battery to another; on
which batteries were planted seventy-two pieces of cannon, great and
small, well guarded with strong guards of musketeers and pikemen; the
brigades lying ready at hand to relieve them in time of need, and our
horse-brigades being appointed without them, to stand in readiness for
to second the foot.

The day peeping, the Imperial generals were saluted with a salvo of
cannon, which untimely stirred some from their rest, making them
retire unto their strengths, not having the courage to show their
faces in the fields.

This service of cannon having continued the whole day, in the night
the Imperialists retired their forces towards their works on the old
hill, being mighty strong on that quarter, so that there was no
possibility to harm them any more with cannon.

His Majesty thinking, if it were possible to get in the hill, he was
then able to beat the enemy out of his leaguer, and therefore in the
night gave orders to draw off the cannon from the batteries, and
having the army in readiness, we marched in the night through Fuerth,
towards the other side of the enemies' leaguer, of intention to take
in the hill, and then to beat them out of their leaguer, and his
Majesty having got intelligence, the enemy had marched away and left
but a rear-guard on the hill, to make his retreat good, we marched
near the hill, and drew up in battle alongst the side of it, horse,
foot and cannon, by seven of the clock in the morning, where
incontinent, on slight information, his Majesty resolved, in earnest
to pursue the hill.

Duke William of Weimar then lieutenant general next unto his Majesty
had the command of the army, General Banier had the command of the
foot, and Duke Barnard of Weimar commanded the horse, Colonel Leonard
Richardson had the command of the artillery; divers other cavaliers of
note were ordained to attend his Majesty, for giving assistance in
command, to be directed by his Majesty, as occasion offered; such as
Grave Neeles a Sweden, then general major of foot, General Major
Boetius a Dutch, Sir John Hepburne then having left command of the
brigade, being out of employment he attended his Majesty, General
Major Rusteine being then Stallmeister to his Majesty attended also,
General Major Striffe commanded the horse next to Duke Barnard.

The army thus in battle, and the whole officers of the field attending
his Majesty, and their several charges, the service being but begun,
General Banier was shot in the arm, and so retired; General Major
Rusteine being also shot did retire incontinent, his Majesty commanded
strong parties of commanded musketeers out of all brigades, led by a
colonel, a lieutenant colonel, and a competent number of other
inferior officers, to lead on the party towards the hill, to force a
passage or entry unto the enemies' works; which being hardly resisted,
the service went on cruel hot on both sides, so that the parties were
no sooner entered on service, but it behoved the reliefs to be
incontinent ready to second them, death being so frequent amongst
officers and soldiers, that those who were hurt rejoiced, having
escaped with their lives, seeing in effect the service desperate on
our side, losing still our men without gaining any advantage over our
enemies, being always within their close works, while as we, both
officers and soldiers, stood bare and naked before them, as marks to
shoot at, without any shelter whatsoever, but the shadow of some great
trees, being in a wood, so that we lost still our best officers and
soldiers, while as the basest sort durst not lift head in the storm.

The service continued in this manner the whole day, so that the hill
was nothing else but fire and smoke, like to the thundering echo of a
thunderclap, with the noise of cannon and musket, so that the noise
was enough to terrify novices; we losing still our best soldiers, grew
so weak in the end, that the brigades of foot had scarce bodies of
pikemen to guard their colours, the musketeers being almost vanished
and spent by the continuance  of hot service, where the service was
not alone amongst the foot in pursuing of the hill, but also about the
hill without the wood, on the wings, the horse men furiously charged
one another, being also well seconded by dragoniers and musketeers,
that did come on fresh with the reliefs.

By one o'clock in the afternoon, Duke William of Weimar commanded me
(being the first service I was on as Colonel) for my credit, to go
towards the post on the hill, where the Grave Von Torn was shot, and
to command those five hundred musketeers, I taking leave of my
comrades went to the post, and finding the place warm at my coming,
divers officers and soldiers lying bloody on the ground, I went first
and ordered the soldiers on the post, to my judgment, as most to our
advantage for our safeties and the harming of our enemies, and
perceiving the enemy sometimes to fall out with small platoons of
musketeers to give fire on us, and to spy our actions, returning
again, as their powder was spent, to trap them the next time, I
advanced a sergeant with twenty four musketeers, to lie in ambush to
attend on their next out-coming, which they perceiving came out no
more, but one single man to spy; I retiring again to my main reserve
to direct others, sometimes standing, sometimes walking, and being
taken notice of, as a chief officer, the enemy commanded out a single
man, with a long piece, who from a tree aiming at me, shot me right
above the haunch-bone, on the left side, which lighted fortunately for
me on the iron clicket of my hanger, which cut close the iron away,
taking the force from the bullet, which being battered flat with the
iron entered not above two inches in my side, where I found, a little
arms of proof being well put on most commodious, in preserving my
life, by God's providence for that time.

Notwithstanding of this my hurt, finding myself in strength, though I
lost much blood, I remained on my post till near night; my Lieutenant
Colonel John Sinclair was sent with five hundred musketeers to relieve
me, where I did bring off but the least number of my men, having lost
near two hundred, besides those officers and soldiers that were hurt,
and my Lieutenant Colonel brought off the next morning fewer than I
did: for those who were not killed or hurt, being in the night,
through plain fear they left him, so that at last he brought not off
of his whole number above thirty, officers and all.

On this occasion a valorous young gentleman, being one of my captains,
called Patrick Ennis, who having behaved himself well the whole time
that he was on service, being commanded amongst strangers on another
post than mine, a relief being come to relieve him, he went to show
the post he was on to his comrade, and showing him where his sentries
stood, then after, out of resolution to show more courage than was
needful in open view of his enemy, florishing his sword, and crying
aloud, Vive Gustavus, he was shot through the head, being much
regrated by all his comrades. Likewise with him a young man Hector
Monro Catvall's son, uncommanded voluntarily having taken a musket,
and gone on service, he was shot alongst the brains, and lived a
fortnight after, which shot was wonderful; for the side of his head
that the bullet lighted on, the skull was whole, nevertheless, through
his great torment, the chirurgian having made incision on the other
side of his head, to see if the skull was whole, but being found
splent on that side, so that his brains could be seen, his wound was
uncurable.

Likewise on this day's service were killed on our side, General Major
Boetins, Lieutenant Colonel Septer, Lieutenant Colonel Macken, Rut-
master Morrits, Lieutenant Colonel Welsten, and divers inferior
officers, and above twelve hundred soldiers, the Grave Von Erbach was
also killed, and divers officers were hurt, as the Grave Von
Ebersteene, the Grave Von Torn, Colonel Port, and of our countrymen
under Spence his regiment, Captain Traile was shot through the throat;
As also Captain Vausse, under Colonel Monro of Fowles his regiment,
was shot in the shoulder, and the Colonel of the artillery, Leonard
Richardson, with Colonel Erich Handson, being both Swedens with two
lieutenant colonels were taken Prisoners.

Likewise on this service there were hurt of our soldiers above two
thousand, which were put under cure in Nuremberg.

The officers killed of the Imperialists were, Colonel Jacob Fugger,
Colonel Obdo Brandine, Colonel Von Maria de Caras, and above forty
inferior officers, with twelve hundred soldiers, which they lost.

Likewise Wallenstein his horse, and Duke Barnard of Weimar's were both
shot under them. The day thus passed, in the night for the most part,
they lay quiet, and the day being come, I was commanded notwitstanding
of my hurt, by Duke William of Weimar having attended on him the whole
last night, to go and receive five hundred musketeers, for to bring
off those had been all night on the post, being ordained to come off
with them, and to make the retreat good; I being gone to receive the
party come together, his Majesty coming by, and knowing I was hurt,
commanded me to retire back with the party, and went himself to make
the retreat wonderfully, bringing them off from all posts without one
shot of musket or pistol, till we drew up the army again, within reach
of cannon, so that there were killed to me of my own company three
soldiers, and having removed a little further off, his Majesty drawing
up the whole army in battle, horse, foot and artillery, there was
presently order given for drawing out of a new leaguer, the draft
whereof being finished, every brigade's quarter being known, we begun
to work again, in sight of the enemy, till that in spite of him we
were closed in ten days time within a fast leaguer again, which was
strongly pallisaded without the graff, where we did lie without
invasion in quietness to the sixth of September, that his Majesty
perceiving the scarcity of victuals growing great from day to day, and
the scarcity of forage; Therefore his Majesty resolved to take the
start of his enemy, in being the first up-breaker, knowing assuredly
he was not able to lie long after him.

The thirty-sixth Observation.

HERE we see, that nothing is more forcible to suppress the vaunting of
an enemy, than a timely succours, as came here unto our army in
despite of the enemy, who, before their coming, did mightily vaunt
they would cut off our succours, before they could join with us
really; and then they would with hunger, starve both the city and our
leaguer, which hardly they could do, we being provided of good men to
fight, as also of good entertainment to sustain our number. But the
enemy feebly remaining within his works, though beyond us in number,
we thundered on them with cannon, repaying their cannonading spent
before Werben, the year before, on the Elbe. And it is thought, that
the invention of cannon was found first at Nuremberg, for the ruin of
man, being at first a long time used for battering down of walls and
cities, and for counter-batteries; till at last they were used in the
fields, to break the squadrons and battles of foot and horse, some
carrying pieces called spingards, of four foot and a half long, that
shot many bullets at once, no greater than walnuts, which were carried
in the fields on little chariots behind the troops, and how soon the
trumpet did sound the enemy was thundered on, first with those, as
with showers of hail-stones, so that the enemies were cruelly
affrighted with them, men of valour being suddenly taken away, who
before were wont to fight valiantly and long with the sword and lauce,
more for the honour of victory, then for any desire of shedding of
blood: but now men are martyrized and cut down, at more than half a
mile of distance, by those furious and thundering engines of great
cannon, that sometimes shoot fiery bullets able to burn whole cities,
castles, houses or bridges, where they chance to light; and if they
happen to light within walls, or amongst a brigade of foot or horse,
as they did at Leipzig on the Grave Von Torn his brigade, spoiling a
number at once, as doubtless this devilish invention did within
Wallenstein his leaguer at this time.

Likewise here we have set before us the revolution of human affairs,
being ever inconstant, showing us that good fortune, luck, or chance,
as they call it, is never still in one side: for his Majesty that
formerly was alike fortunate with few, as with many, here though
having a mighty strong army, he is crossed, being frustrate of his
expectation, arising by the neglect of a small point of recognoscing,
his Majesty having trusted too much to others wrong relation, that did
not satisfy themselves; which made his Majesty contrary to his custom
engage his army, and once being engaged upon slight intelligence, the
reliefs went on so fast, the service being so hot for a time, that it
was long before the loss was perceived, where it is to be pitied, that
the error and fault of another should be made to posterity, as his
Majesty's over-sight, by those that know no better: for though a king
leading an army had Argus' eyes, yet it is impossible he should look
unto all things himself. The fault of one here we see with the loss of
many was irrecoverable, and he that before this day was the terror of
the Empire, by his former success, being deceived with false
intelligence, is thought to have overseen himself, the error of
another being imputed unto his Majesty in losing so many brave
fellows; which shoued teach others to be the more circumspect in
recognoscing, before they should engage men in bringing them upon the
shamble banks.

Here also we see, that his Majesty was was ever enemy to idleness: for
he had no sooner brought off his army from pursuing his enemies, but
incontinent he sets them again to work, for their own safeties, and
that within reach of his enemies' cannon, to the end it might not be
said, but he attended their out-coming, lest his army might be
discouraged at a present retreat, after such a great loss, for if the
service had continued, the whole army had been endangered; yet a
valourous Captain, as our leader was, as he fears nothing entering on
service, so he ought to set light by nothing, he sees tending to his
prejudice, but ought timely to retire, with as little loss as he may:
for it were a gross error to despise our enemies through too much
confidence in ourselves; for some times by despising our enemies (as
here) we make them the more valiant, and if they be ambitious, the
more respect we give them, the less we need to fear them. And it is
necessary, when an army doth get a clap, as we did here, then
incontinent and with all diligence we should press to try our enemy
again; wheresoever we can have any advantage, lest our enemy might
judge us altogether to have yielded and given over, which were very
dangerous.

The boldness of one bold fellow at first, being a leader may engage a
whole army for want of judgement, as was done here going before this
hill of Nuremberg, where as many were brought in danger, as did tread
in the first leaders' paths, through lack of judgement, having been
all of them more heady than wise; yet to dare being annexed unto 
virtue is the beginning of victory: nevertheless, a hasty man in an
army, without judgement and discretion, is to be disallowed of, as
well as a coward.

On my post under the hill, after I was shot, a sudden fear came
amongst the soldiers, some thirty horse having suddenly come through
the wood, as if they had been chased, the most part both officers and
soldiers ran away, leaving me with a few number on the post, so that
if the enemy had fallen out, I could not have escaped from being
killed or taken; but as soon as they perceived, that I with the
soldiers remained by me, had unhorsed and taken some of the horsemen,
who were found to be friends, they being ashamed of their miscarriage
retired, having accidentally rencountred with Hepbur's Captain
Lieutenant, who brought them up again, whom I threatened to show his
Majesty of their behaviours: nevertheless being loath to incur the
hatred of a brave nation, for the misbehaviour of some unworthy
fellows, their blemishes I pressed to cover: notwithstanding
afterwards some of the officers amongst themselves came to a public
hearing, having blamed one another, till the question and disgrace was
taken away; by showing their particular courage in fighting one
against another, whereof I kept myself free, suffering them to deal
amongst them, being countrymen.

This kind of panic fear without cause doth betray many brave men, and
divers good enterprises. And therefore all good commanders ought most
carefully to look unto it, to avoyde the inconveniences incident unto
the like, while as they lead either party or army. We once marching
through a woode towards Frankfurt on the Oder, the White Regiment
marching in the van, having a natural fool, that marched always before 
them, going within a bush, throwing off his clothes returning naked,
and crying, he had seen the enemy, the whole soldiers of that brigade
throwing down their arms, they ran back on the next brigade being
Swedens, and they running also away, till they were holden up with
pikes by our brigade, being the third, who having stood, and asked the
reason of their running away; in end, being found a false, and a
foolish alarm, the poor fool was pitifully cut and carved by the
officers, for the soldiers phantastic fear, being a poor revenge for
their cowardice, so that we see by the example of the third brigade,
that the best remedy against such panic fears is not to fear at all;
and none should lead armies, but those that are both wise and stout.



The thirty-seventh Duty discharged of our up-breaking, from Nuremberg
towards Neustadt.

AFTER this last days service, his Majesty having intrenched his army
before the Imperial leaguer, and finding them unwilling to hazard the
combat, as also the scarcity of victuals growing so great on both
sides; his Majesty resolved to beset Nuremberg with four regiments,
Fowles his regiment being one, General Major Kniphowsen had the
command over the Swedens, and General Major Salammers-dorffe had
command over the burghers; and the Rex-chancellor Oxesterne was
appointed by his Majesty to have the direction of all.

His Majesty leaving Nuremberg in this manner, in the night he sent
away his great cannon with a convoy towards Neustadt, and before day
the whole drums had orders to beat, first afore troop gathering, and
then a march, so that we were in readiness standing in battle before
the enemies' leaguer by day; where we stood till mid-day, and then the
whole army was commanded to make a quarter turn to the right hand,
making our front before, to be our left flank, whereon our colours and
small ordnance did march, and our right wing being our van, we marched
off, in view of the enemy, Duke Bernard of Weimar with a thousand
horse, and five hundred musketeers, commanded by my Lieuenant Colonel
John Sinclaire, who was appointed to march in the rear, for making our
retreat good, which in a manner was needless, seeing our enemy lacked
courage to follow us, but suffered us to depart in peace.

At night we drew up in battle a mile from the enemies' leaguer, where
we encamped setting forth strong watches of horse, and musketeers on
the passes betwixt us and the enemy, and our rear-guard betwixt us and
them, and our own guards, without our brigades, so having quietly
passed over the night, the next morning we marched to Neustadt, being
the fifteenth of September, where we resolved to stay a few days,
attending what the Imperial army would undertake, having still an eye
in our neck-pole.

We got intelligence, that the Duke of Friedland Wallenstein, and the
Duke of Bavaria did break up with their army's, taking their march
through Fuerth, towards Boocke, and then to Forchheim, burning off all
the dorps, that lay nearest Nuremberg; being all the valiant deedes,
they had done the whole summer: and the fourteenth of September, being
quite gone, divers burghers and soldiers of the Nurembergers with the
country boors in all haste ran unto their leaguer, where they found a
thousand wagons, besides those were burnt, which they transported to
Nuremberg, together with a great quantity of Iron, above ten thousand
centners of weight, and a great quantity of meal, corn and flesh,
which all in fourteen days was not brought unto the town after their
going, whereat many did wonder.

The enemy also left behind them many sick and wounded soldiers
uncured; amongst whom all that time death was very frequent, as well
of men, as of beasts, for thousands of horse and cattle were lost.
Likewise, in the Swedens leaguer, about the city were fallen above
four thousand horse and cattle, and within the city were also many
dead.

As Wallenstein was come to Forchheim, he directed General Major
Galasse with some horse and foot, unto the Vogtland, who in his march
by Nuremberg, did deal very slightly with Lauf, Greifenberg, Welden,
and Archbrucke, which he took in; and Greifenberg he burnt, and in the
rest he caused to cut off divers burghers and soldiers, making many
poor men with plundering, and cruel exactions of money, and from
thence, in Vogtland, towards Egger, and further, till he joined with
Holke, being both as Simeon and Levi, continuing their march towards
the Elbe, taking in Chemnitz, Freiberg, Meissen, and divers other
parts, exacting great contribution, and borneshets, or compositions,
pressing an infinite deal of money out of the Duke of Saxony's
hereditary lands; using great and extraordinary enormities over the
whole lands belonging to the Saxon, by reason the Duke's army lay then
far off in Silesia, not being possible for him to relieve his own
country; Wallenstein also, from Forchheim marched towards Saxony; and
the Duke of Bavaria, to quench the fire, that was already kindled
there by the Swedens; marched to Bavaria.

The Imperial army thus separated, his Majesty lay still at Neustadt,
till such time, as he saw their several intentions, and then disposing
of his army accordingly.

First, the Marquess of Hamilton was graciously dismissed by his
Majesty, taking his journey from thence towards France unto Britain
and having taken leave of his Majesty at Neustadt, his Excellence was
most honourably conveyed by the whole officers his countrymen, that
served the Swedens, who having taken leave of his Excellence, a mile
from the leaguer, they returned, and his Excellence, accompanied with
Sir James Hamilton of Priestfield, Colonel Sir James Ramsey, called
the Fair Colonel, and Sir John Hepburne Colonel, having taken good
night of all their noble comrades they continued their journey unto
Britain; and we returned to prepare ourselves for a march, and a
separation; which immediately the next day did follow; his Majesty
having given orders to call in all safeguards, and the next morning to
be in readiness to march.

The thirty-seventh Observation.

The separation of these two mighty armies was wonderful, without shot
of cannon, musket, or pistol, the like we can hardly find in any
history.

We see then here, that when the foundation of man's actions is laid
sure by virtue, the building hardly can fail, especially when we lay
our chief dependance on God, and our cause being good, the lawful
means used (as was done here by the Lion of the North, the Invincible
King of Sweden) in defence of Nuremberg, the liberty of Dutch-land,
and freedom of Christ's Gospel, then I say, the event must needs be
answerable to the ground laid, to wit, the freedom of this city, and
the preservation of his Majesty's army, both which we see by this
separation, where the enemy had not the heart to pursue us, having
Gustavus and his fortunes with us; Notwithstanding of their powerful
and mighty army; which the Papists themselves did set and esteem to be
threescore thousand men, being then of opinion, that that summer they
were able to over-swim the whole Empire, and  all their enemies; yet,
with all their bragging, they durst never present themselves in the
fields, with one cornet, colour, or regiment before Gustavus, being
terrified at his presence, which did prove their valour was not
correspondent to their power in arms, otherwise they had given us
greater reason to have esteemed better of their conduct, so that we
see, there is neither wisdom, force, or power of counsel, that can
prevail against that cause the Lord defends; and who can think those
could prosper better, who formerly pressed by their cruelty to have
subverted the truth of religion; by banishing the gospel, and
ministers of it, forcing commons against conscience, either to forsake
their country and possessions, or to renounce the truth they
professed, persecuting those that would not conform themselves to
their devilish traditions; what wonder then, those generals could not
prosper against the truth, or against him that took the defence, both
of truth and people, against the tyranny of the house of Austria, and
their cruel generals, that were not only cruel to their enemies, but
also to their servants and soldiers, whom they left bleeding behind
them in their leaguer, destitute of all comfort; not so much as once
to cause to dress their wounds, that they received honourably for
their safeties? Truly I dare be bold to say, the Lord will not suffer
the negligence and inhumane cruelty of such commanders to be
unpunished, that left unchristianly those poor soldiers, which were
bold to open their breasts to receive wounds, for the safety of those
that had no compassion on them in their extremities. O cruelty of all
cruelties! when we see a valiant soldier naked, hungry, or pined, with
his wounds bleeding for our sakes, and then to leave them destitute of
help, to the mercy of their enemies, especially, when we are not
compelled to leave them! This fault of all faults in a commander or
soldier, in my mind, is most unpardonable, which is too common.
Therefore, I conclude, such persons to be unworthy command, that
prefer anything before the health of those, who were willing to give
their lives for the safety of their commanders.

Sith then we see, that the greatest part of human happiness doth
consist in virtue, let him that would prove wise, fix his eyes and
mind to judge other men's actions, to the end he may grow the more
circumspect and prudent, pressing to do good by continuance of time,
if he but observe the varieties of chances incident unto all estates,
from the crown to the lowest cottage, in the end, through their
examples, he may learn to better himself, and become wise in his
profession: for a diligent servant to such a master as Gustavus was,
might in a few years time observe many things belonging to the
knowledge of a commander, though I grant, never attain unto the
perfection of his calling; for the accidents of wars being infinite,
the knowledge of them can never be limited. But we must always be
learning of new things, till we become more prudent, though not
perfectly wise in our calling, being infinite; and though many think a
man may be wise, and not courageous, seeing the wise foresees all
dangers; truly I will think, he that is circumspect and wise in this
kind, may be called a stout commander: for to a wise man, we say,
nothing comes wrong; and he that cannot be surprised in this kind,
must needs be both wise and stout.

To conclude then this observation, out of the separation of the
Marquess and his countrymen, at our leave-takings, and at the parting
of Colonel Lodowick Lesly, and his regiment from Spence his regiment,
going with  Duke Barnard unto Saxony from us; which separation was
like to the separation death makes betwixt friends and the soul of
man, being sorry that those who had lived so long together in amity
and friendship, as also in mutual dangers, in weal & in woe, & fearing
we should not meet again; the splendour of our former mirth was
obnubilated with a cloud of grief & sorrow; which vanished and
dissolved in mutual tears of love, severing from others, as our
Saviour did from his disciples, in love and amity; wishing one another
the mutual enterchange of our affections, as soldiers and not as
complimenting courtiers, in the way of love and courtesy, we wished
again and again, being loath to depart from others, the accomplishment
of all happiness here, and of eternal glory else-where.



The thirty-eighth Duty discharged of our March from Neustadt towards
Windsheim.

Having come unto the fields, the army being drawn up and divided, Duke
Barnard of Weimar was directed to march on Kitzingen on the Main, and
the rest of the army on Windsheim, and his Majesty with a strong party
marched back unto Nuremberg, to see the enemies' leaguer, and the
unhappy castle on the old hill, where so many brave fellows were lost.
From thence his Majesty returned on Outzbach, at which time on the
march some new levied men, that were come from Switzerland, joined
with the army at Windsheim, where we rested two days, I being cruelly
tormented with a burning ague, contracted with neglecting of my wound
received at Nuremberg.

Wallenstein his Field-marshal Holke at this time with his little army
did domineer in Saxony, using barbarous cruelty in burning, scalding,
and plundering of towns, flecks, and dorps; murdering and cutting down
the inhabitants, that it was pity to hear of such barbarity in a civil
land to be used by one of their own profession; making no conscience
of religion, he showed less compassion than the Papists did: for their
villany, whom he led, was so great, that after abusing the women, in
satisfying their filthy lusts, they did burn them and their families,
their hearts thus hardened, that it was evident, that the judgements
of the Lord were not far from them, and those he commanded, having
suffered such tyranny to have been used to Christians, before a month
was passed, he died raging of the plague, and those who followed him
were also rewarded of God for their cruelty.

The eighteenth of August, Holke took in Zwenkau (Zwickau?) by accord,
promising unto the burghers the freedom of their religion and
liberties, providing they would take in a garrison of two hundred
Imperialists; then Gallas and Halke being joined, soon after
Wallenstein himself, after the in-taking of Coburg, continued his
march towards Leipzig; after spoiling the land of Coburg and Kulmbach,
he marched through the Voigland towards Olsenburg; and from thence to
Leipzig, which he got in on accord the twenty-second of October, and
on the twenty-third he got in the castle of Pleisenburg, putting out
the Duke's garrison, and putting in his own. And after he took in
Weissenfels, Moosburg, Naumburg, and divers towns more in Saxony,
spoiling and ruining all that side of the Elbe: Halle also he took in,
but the castle of Moosburg, being well beset by the Swedens, by that
time could not be brought to hear of any accord.

Pappenheim now retired from Maastricht, having in vain attempted then
the relief of it; at his back-coming he relieved the city of Paderborn
from the beleaguering, and skirmished with the Lieutenant General
Bawtish, he also dissolved the blockquering of Wolfenbuettel, and did
get some cornets and colours from the Brunswicker forces, and from
thence he did come before Hildesheim; alleging, he had beaten the Duke
of Lueneburg and Bawtish, by which stratagem he did get Hildesheim in
his power, and beset it with a garrison, as the principal strength on
the Weser stream, appointing the Grave Von Gronsfield to command
there, and then he marched towards Eichsfeld, and took in Muelhausen,
getting a great composition of money from them, he marched on Salz and
plundered it out, wherein he did get much hidden riches, and his
soldiers making rich booty, they did cast in the water, that which
they could not carry; he proceeded also in the same manner with
Hainstadt, from whence he carried with him the burgher-masters in
pledge of their city's ransom, and finding by the way they were not
able to pay, what they had promised, he caused to take all three and
hang them up, till they were half dead, and then caused suddenly to
cut them down: Krotzenburg also he used little better, from Erfurt he
desired twenty thousand Dollars, and threatened if the moneys were not
told down, he would not fail to do them all the mischief he could,
whereupon with much ado they did get him two thousand Dollars, and
hearing his Majesty of Sweden was drawing near, he stayed not on the
rest; but marched to Moosburg at Halle.

The thirty-eighth Observation.

Memory and forgetfulness are both necessary in friendship. Shall I
then forget here to speak of our separation, being so long companions
of one danger together? No, this love of comrades to each other is
most worthy remembrance, seeing we were divers times willing to give
our lives for one another's safeties: shall we then be oblivious of
this mutual love and dangers? No, though distance of place separate
our bodies, we shall still be conjoined in mind, and power against our
common enemy, that desireth the hurt of us all alike. Let us then
though severed, maintain one another's credit in absence, ever
honouring the worth and virtues of our dear comrades, for the kindness
past, let us learn to be ever thankful to their friends alive, and
after their death, let our love increase to their successors; for if
there be any nectar in this life, it is in sorrows we endure for the
goodness and love of our absent friends, especially of those that were
our dearest comrades; for if we sorrow for them, amending our lives,
knowing we must pass shortly through the same passage, they did pass
before us, truly one day our sorrow shall turn to joy, and our tears
shall turn to smiles, our weeping unto a stream of pleasures, and our 
labour unto eternal rest, that as we followed the Lion of the North,
the invincible King of Sweden, in fighting the Lord's battles here,
even so we shall follow the Lamb unto the heavenly Jerusalem
hereafter.

The cruelty and tyranny used by the Imperial officers in Saxony, who
neither spared man nor woman, is rather to be pitied by Christians,
then any ways to be imitated, which cruelty did presage their ruin to
come; for nothing vehement in that kind did ever remain long
unpunished, and though for a time the Devil's rage, at last they are
cast into perpetual darkness.

Pappenheim returning from Maastricht, we see was immoderate in his
victories, and forbearing to show mercy at all, he domineered in his
tyranny, running so long as he had feet, some he did hang by their
purses, and some by their necks by halfs, for not paying the ransom of
others. Such injustice the God of mercy and goodness did not suffer
long unpunished: and it is to be pitied, that such exorbitant pride
had been cohabitant in so valorous a captain, for it is certain, when
a man of war groweth too proud of his victories, refusing mercy, then
commonly approach punishment's woe, for a proud warrior as this was
(viz.) error in counsel, and unhappy success in his best actions; for
how soon a man beginneth to grow proud and to be secure, then cometh
punishment; and as pride groweth, so virtue decayeth, and though the
punishment of pride and cruelty sometimes comes late, yet sure it
never comes light, and it is most certain, there is ever some fatality
incident unto those, who are desirous of vain glory through pride. Our
desire then should be, to be humble, that we be not rejected with
disdain, as those proud cavaliers rejected the poor supplicants, who
though begging mercy, were not heard: whose exorbitant wickedness
should teach us, not to imitate their examples, but rather through
grace, press to eschew their punishment both temporal and eternal.



The thirty-ninth Duty discharged of our March to Dinkelsbuehl, and
from thence unto Bavaria.

His Majesty returning from Rothenbach with the Queen's Majesty, they
marched with the army towards Dinkelsbuehl, where they did lie three
days; during which time I was glad, looking for no life, to have been
eased by the help of good and learned physicians. There I was left,
the army continuing their march upon Noerdlingen, making all the
expedition and haste was possible, to relieve Rain on the Lech being
beleagured by the Duke of Bavaria his forces, and his Majesty coming
to the Lech, he received news, the town was given over, and the bridge
being cast off, his Majesty was hindered the passage, whereupon his
Majesty directed back the Queen to Donauwoerth, and incontinent begun
to prepare for the beleaguering of Rain again, the bridge being
repaired, he set over his army, the thirtieth of September, and
incontinent begun his approaches, the Imperialists at first played
hard with cannon and musket till night, that his Majesty's batteries
were ready.

The first of October early in the morning the mist was so thick, that
his Majesty approached very near the walls, and that orderly the
batteries being ready, the cannon planted in the mist, by nine of the
clock his Majesty saluted the town with a salvo of musket and cannon,
where incontinent the feeble, bearish commanders entered in accord,
which was granted unto them, so that his Majesty, by the assistance of
God, got this town again in two hours' time, after the batteries were
ready, and that contrary to his Majesty's expectation, who did not
expect the getting of it in less then six days.

The Duke's foot soldiers were suffered to march out without arms, and
the horsmen without their horses, and his Majesty being offended with
the Dutch colonel called Metzfell, notwitstanding of the recovery of
the town, he was brought before a council of wars at Neuburg on the
Danube, being accused, he had given over the town without any
necessity, making his accord contrary to his officers' wills, which
they having testified against him, by a sentence of the council of war
he was beheaded the eighth of October; and those officers of his
regiment, which subscribed the accord, were ordained to carry no
charge under his Majesty's army; and the officers, which withstood the
accord, were assoiled from the sentence, as faithful servants to their
master.

The said day, after the execution, his Majesty returned with the army,
towards Rain from Newburg, where again his Majesty divided the army,
and having beset Augsburg, Rain and Donauwoerth well, he took the
yellow and blue brigade with himself, leaving our brigade after long
advisement, and the rest of the army under the command of Palsgrave
Christian, Von Brickfeld, and General Major Ruthven to attend on the
Duke's forces, and to maintain Schwabenland with the passes, which we
had already in Bavaria. His Majesty then taking leave of our brigade,
in view of the whole army thanked us for our former service, and in
particular he expressed his affection unto me, and to Lieutenant
Colonel Mustein: showing he was grieved to leave us behind, yet, in
respect of the long march he had unto Saxony, and considering the
weakness of both our regiments, that were weakned by the toil of war,
and the dint of the enemies' armies, and therefore in consideration of
their former good service, he had ordained muster places for us, the
best in Schwabenland, for to strengthen our regiments, against his
return, and withal, commanded us to see it done, as we would expect
his favour: and then calling on Palsgrave Christian, to whom he had
given command over us and the army, recommending us particularly unto
him, desired him to give us contentment of the moneys were then
resting unto us, and that out of the first money was to be received at
Augsburg.

Having after that taken leave of the whole army, his Majesty returned
to Donauwoerth, where the Queen did attend his coming, being making
ready for the march unto Saxony. As soon as his Majesty had dined at
Donauwoerth with the Queen, going to his Coach, I took leave of his
Majesty and the Queen, in presence of General Banier, Palsgrave
Christian, Sir Patrcik Ruthven and divers other worthy cavaliers,
being the most doleful parting I ever suffered, having been still both
I and our regiment with his Majesty, on all service of importance,
since his Majesty's upbreaking from Stettin in Pomerania, till this
parting at Donauwoerth on the Danube, the eleventh of October. 1632.

His Majesty having that night lain at Noerdlingen, from thence the
next day he directed the Queens Majesty with the foot brigades to
march on Dinkelsbuehl, and from thence to Rotenberg, his Majesty then
with a party went for Nuremberg, and before his coming, Kniphowsen
with some forces was marched to take in Lauf from the enemy, who at
first defended themselves well; But in the end they were compelled to
come forth and be at his pleasure, and were all made prisoners. By
midday his Majesty hearing there were not far from Nuremberg some
Imperialists seen, so soon as his Majesty had gotten sure intelligence
of them, he broke up with seventeen troops of horse and some foot, and
marched on Enschbrooke, whence the Imperialists had gone but a little
before, his Majesty lying there that night, getting intelligence again
of some Crabbats that did lie on the castle Richell, showing there
were some six hundred Imperialists coming to relieve Lauf, hearing of
his Majesty's being there, they retired towards Bavaria, yet his
Majesty following them in the night falls on them, and cuts off three
hundred, where fifty were prisoners and two cornets taken from them,
with a great deal of booty; his Majesty then turning back continued
his march towards Saxony, having left all behind him in Franconia and
Schwabenland in good order, his Majesty in all haste to relieve the
Duke of Saxony and his country, went from Nuremberg to Schweinfurt,
and from thence over Thuringia Wald, where he joined his forces with
Duke Barnard of Weimar, and then continued the march towards Arnstadt,
where they lay still two days, to refresh the army wearied with hard
marching; and from Arnstadt he marched to the general rendezvous,
being then appointed at Erfurt, the army being then eighteen thousand
strong, under whom there was no other Scots regiment, but Colonel
Lodowick Lesly his regiment.

His Majesty having made a speech to the Counsel of Erfurt, he left the
Queen's Majesty there and blessed her, and then marched from thence on
Boodestawde, from whence Pappenheim with the Leguisticall army had but
passed a few days before, and his Majesty having quartered the army in
the Ampt Freeburg, he commanded Duke Barnard of Weimar, with fifteen
hundred horse to fall on the enemies' rear or hinder troops: But
Pappenheim having in haste passed over the Saale towards Moosburg, the
Duke could have no advantage of him, but retired again to his
Majesty's army.

His Majesty understanding the Imperialists had sent thirty musketeers
towards Naumburg, to get in the rest of the money, they had promised
unto Tilly the year before; his Majesty incontinent commanded some
forces with Colonel Brandesten to see if they could get in Naumburg,
who having come before it, the twenty ninth of October before day,
desired to make up the ports in his Majesty's name of Sweden, those
who had the watch at the port answered it behoved them first to show
their commanders of it, otherwise they could not answer for it, which
they understanding, unwilling to stay so long, taking a short
resolution, with axes and hammers they cut down the port and entered
perforce, finding at another port a wicket open, they enter also, and
incontinent they bring the town in subjection, the Imperialists then
in the town were in danger, if the inhabitants had not interceded for
them to spare them, who did get quarters; soon after six hundred
Imperialist horsmen came before the town, led by Colonel Breda, who
desired  to make quarters in the town, but beyond their expectation
having perceived the Swedens horse-watch before the ports, altering
their resolution, incontinent they retired back towards Weissenfels.

The thirtieth of October, betimes in the morning his Majesty sets over
the Saale, with the horsemen at the dorp Altenburg, directing the
infantry to pass at the bridge, where before mid-day the whole army
were come to Naumburg, and marching by on this side of it, they lay
that day, and two days after that in the fields before Jacob's port,
on the street that goeth to Leipzig.

After this his Majesty being advertised, that Wallenstein with his
army was marching on Weissenfels, showing himself as if he meant to
stand and fight; incontinent his Majesty entrenched his army about
Naumburg with skonces and redoubts, and set two bridges over the
Saale, where on all occasions he could transport the Infantry over
such a water, and being ready, then he threw off all bridges from
thence over the Unstrut till Freyburg, whereby they should not be
helpful unto the enemy. Whereupon the Duke of Friedland Wallenstein
changing resolution, the town and castle of Weissenfels being in his
power to use them for his advantage, he plundering both town and
castle the fourth of November, marched with his army towards Luetzen,
two miles from Leipzig, and incamped there.

The thirty-ninth Observation.

IN the discharge of the former duty we see his Majesty was troubled
with a double care; the one for his Queen, the other for his army;
being diligent in bringing both forwards, as also careful to put them
both in assurance; for having left the Queen at Donauwoerth, he
marched on Rain to subdue his enemies. Where we see, that it behoved
him first to put his impedimenta in assurance, teaching thereby
cavaliers, that followed him in time of service, to quit their wives,
whereby their care might be the better employed in discharging the
points of their calling; which shows us, that such impediments at such
times were better away than present: for our nature is ever to grieve
much for the loss of things we love. Therefore our care that are
soldiers having wives should be to settle them, where they should not
be impedimenta unto us, in discharging of our duties before our enemy,
to the end we might the better be freed of this double care, his
Majesty was subject unto at this time, which no question troubled his
Majesty's resolutions more than anything else.

The tragical end of this Dutch Colonel Metzlaffe, should teach all
cavaliers, to whom strengths are concredited, not to give over without
great necessity; especially being made foreseen of a relief to come.
And the greatest blame, that was imputed unto him, was his too much
neglect of the duties of his calling, being too careful to entertain
comradeship night and day, the fruit whereof in the end was ignominy,
with the loss of life and credit. Which should teach all men to avoid
such a beastly life, dishonouring the noble profession of arms.

We see then no law or justice is more strict or more summary, than the
discipline military; where the articles we are sworn unto, are our
laws,  which being transgressed, we are subject to the punishment: and
if our laws were not strict, and our punishment sharp, it were
impossible to keep us in obedience. But I am sorry, that for the most
part we abstain more for fear of punishment, than for obedience to God
and the law. This censure though hard from me, the truth is still the
same, though man were silent.

On this march towards Saxony, all things succeeded to his Majesty's
desire, as presages of his ensuing victory; seeing Fortune smiled on
him, during his life time, being Fortunes fellow, he was still
encouraged to the combat, though weakest: for magnanimity and the
virtue of true humility were both cohabitant in him. For as he had
courage with a weak army to rencounter a stronger; Even so he humbled
himself before God, acknowledging before the people, he was but dust
and ashes, like unto other men. And therfore he wished the people they
should not trust or repose anything in him, but to put their trust and
confidence in God, saying, he was but a servant: and though the Lord
would be pleased to take him away from amongst them, yet, he doubted
not, but the Lord would raise up others more powerful than he, to
defend the good cause he had begun, till at last it were brought to a
good end.

These speeches, and much more to this purpose, his Majesty out of
humility uttered on this march; and as his Majesty was humble, so his
courtesy to all men that loved him, was the gem of his crown,
especially honouring and respecting ever his queen, as the glory of
her sex, his royal Majesty being truly endued with such true splendour
of noble worth, that he ever seemed like unto the sun, that shineth
alike on the peasant in the field, as it doth on the emperor in his
Throne. And when his Majesty departed from us at Rain on the Lech,
then our sun on earth went away unto another horizon, leaving us
eclipsed, through the want of our leader; so that in the rest of our
warfare we had none to depend on, but on God alone, the only sure
anchor for a troubled soul to rest on.

To conclude then this observation, having followed the Lion of the
North thus far unto the Battle of Luetzen, though I was not at the
battle, yet for my love to my master, and to discharge the duty I owe
unto my country, I will relate the true manner of this battle in
short, being the end of the second part of my expedition, under his
Majesty of Sweden, of never dying memory, leaving the third part of
the expedition to a fitter opportunity; except so far as we marched
before we were sworn to the evangelist Stends, under the conduct of
Palsgrave Christian Brickerfeild in Bavaria, and afterward under the
Field-marshal Gustavus Horne in Schwabenland.



The fortieth Duty discharged of the Battle of Luetzen.

The King's Majesty of Sweden knowing that the Duke of Friedland had
quit the town and castle of Weissenfels, and had the fourth of
November marched with his army towards Luetzen, two miles from
Leipzig, his Majesty on the fifth of November, with the whole army,
two hours before day broke up from Naumburg, setting after the enemy,
coming the same day after noon-tide in sight of them; He presented
himself with his army in order of battle, so that incontinently the
skirmish went on apace by the troops, which were commanded out from
both armies, whereupon the Swedens made still good use with their
small cannon, till the night did put them asunder. In which skirmish
the Swedens had gotten one of the Crabbats' standards, whereon was
drawn the Fortune, and the eagle, which on our side was holden for a
good beginning.

The Swedens army this whole night standing in battle, his Majesty was
of intention to have fallen on the Imperial army two hours before day:
but by reason of a thick mist which had fallen, it behoved his Majesty
to attend the rising and clearing up of the day. But the enemy
perceiving the Swedens coming so near unto him, it could not go off
without fighting: he did in the mean time see well to his own
advantage, giving out orders they should incontinent make the graff or
ditch, they had before their front, deeper than it was first made, and
to lodge musketeers within it, which they might have before them,
equal to any breast-work or parapet for their better safeties.

His Majesty then having ended the morning prayers, and that the mist
was vanishing away, by the rising of the sun, giving out, by all
appearance, the tokens of a cleare day. His Majesty then with
comfortable exhortation exhorted every man, foot, and horse, to fight
bravely, especially directing his speech unto the Swedens and Finns:
You true and valiant brethren, see that you do valiantly carry
yourselves this day, fighting bravely for God's word, and your King;
which if you do, so will you have mercy of God, and honour before the
world; and I will truly reward you; but if you do not, I swear unto
you, that your bones shall never come in Sweden again.

The Dutch also his Majesty exhorted after this manner: You true and
worthy Dutch brethren, officers and common soldiers, I exhort you all,
carry yourselves manly, and fight truly with me; run not away, and I
shall hazard my body and blood with you for your best, if you stand
with me, so I hope in God to obtain victory, the profit whereof will
redound to you and your successors: and if otherwise you do, so are
you and your liberties lost. His Majesty having ended this speech
saith, now let us to it, and let us cry unto God with one voice, Jesu,
Jesu, Jesu help me this day to fight, for the glory of thy Name: He
advanced then in full battle fasting, having neither tasted meat nor
drink, right forwards towards the town of Luetzen, where on both sides
the Duke of Friedland his horsemen did present themselves, until such
time as their general had brought their infantry in battle, beside the
wind-mill, and then to a side, by the ditch that was before their
front, they retired back a little, and set themselves in battle, on
the right hand of the town of Luetzen, and then putting the town on
fire, to the end the Swedens on that quarter could do them no harm.

Notwithstanding whereof, with full resolution the Swedens' army, in
full battle marched by the side of the town on the ditch, where their
musketeers were lodged, and presented themselves in good order,
against the mighty and strong Imperial army, whereupon, the
Imperialists great cannon, that were planted by the wind-mill, began
to give fire in the midst of the Swedens' army, and were incontinent
repaid and answered with the like noise; so that the cannon played two
long hours on both sides, the fight going bravely on, betwixt nine and
ten of the clock, that his Majesty himself advanced towards the enemy,
with the vanguard of his army, even to their graff, where their
musketeers were set much to his Majesty's disadvantage, so that
sundries of his Majesty's forces fell therein; Nevertheless, they
chased the enemy a little out of the ditch, and took seven of the
Imperialists' cannon, that were planted alongst the graff. After this,
the other Swedens' brigade, or yellow regiment of the guard is come
after, and not esteeming of the graff in their way, or of the three
squadrons, or battles of the enemies' foot, being four times stronger
than they, which they manfully did beat, making them to give ground,
till they were ruined, and then on the second time, scattering them
also even until the third advancing, and being grown weak, and weary
with so many brave charges, being resisted by the enemies' third
battle, which were seconded well with two squadrons of horsemen, at
last, with the blue regiments coming up to relieve them, driven back,
and almost so scattered, that they were ruined, and the seven cannon
which formerly they had won, were taken from them again. In the mean
time, the Swedens' small cannon, that were planted before the
brigades, being righted on the enemies' cannon at the wind-mill,
whereon also Duke Barnard's cannon, which were before his brigade,
played on the enemies' cannon towards the wind-mill, doing great hurt
to the enemy, so that they were forced to retire their cannon a little
behind the miller's house; in this mean time, his Majesty with some
squadrons of horse charged the enemy, that was thrice stronger than
they, charging with their right wing, his left wing falling on them
with such fury, that their rearguard, or reserve were astonished,
being so furious, that they went through their enemies, putting them
to the flight. But especially his Majesty himself having charged too
far with four cornets in the midst of the enemies' troops being deadly
wounded gave up the ghost, fighting for God and for the defence of the
true religion, he departed valiantly and happily for him, in Christ
our Saviour.

Nevertheless two great bodies of Crabbats of the enemies' left wing
stood firm, and falling on the right wing of the Swedens' horsemen,
with such a cry and fury, advanced so far, that they were masters of
the Swedens' ammunition wagons, bringing also some of the Swedens'
horsemen in disorder: whereupon incontinent did fall on three
squadrons of the Swedens' horsemen, under whom Lieutenant Colonel
Rolingen was one, that did second the rest bravely, who was shot in
the arm. Nevertheless the Crabbats were beaten back again with loss,
during which time, Duke Barnard of Weimar was not idle, with the left
wing of the Swedens' horsemen, but with the commanded musketeers being
of Leslie's regiment, and with the small cannon, charged the enemies'
right wing, making them retire on their cannon by the wind-mill and
gallows, and after long fighting, they were made at last to give
ground, quitting to the Swedens fourteen pieces of great ordnance.

As the Duke of Weimar did charge the enemy, their ammunition wagons
took fire, which did damage the enemy much, but thereafter, Pappenheim
coming from Halle with a fresh supply unlooked for, the service was
begun again more sharp and violent, than before, which continued for a
while very vehement, he having recollected the scattered troops, the
order whereof can scarce be well set down, by reason it was so near
night, before Pappenheim's coming; yet the service continued hot and
cruel so long as he lived, till it was past eight o'clock at night,
that in end Pappenheim being killed, the Imperialists losing courage,
through the assistance of God, and the manly, and valiant courage of
Duke Barnard of Weimar, the victory was come on the Swedens' side, the
enemy having quit the field, and burnt off his leaguer with his whole
baggage, and three pieces of cannon, which he could not get carried
away with him; he took his retreat again on Leipzig.

There were killed of the Imperialists the Abbot of Fulda, the Grave
Von Pappenheim, Colonel Lane, Colonel Vestrum, Lieutenant Colonel
Lorde, Liuetenant Colonel Taphim, Lieutenant Colonel Camerhooffe,
Colonel Seves with many other inferior officers and soldiers.

On the Swedens' side were lost with his Majesty General Major Isler,
Colonel Gerstorfe, General Major Grave Neeles a Sweden, Colonel
Vildesten, and divers more were hurt, and of our nation was hurt with
the cannon, and musket twice Captain Henry Lindesey brother to
Bainshow who for a time did lie almost dead in the field, divers
officers of Colonel Lodowick Lesly his regiment were also hurt, having
behaved themselves well, being, for the most part, old, expert
officers, and old beaten blades of soldiers.

In this battle as was thought, were killed nine thousand men, besides,
those were hurt, whereof many thereafter died of their wounds, such as
on the Emperor's side Grave Berhertbold, Von Wallenstein, Colonel
Comargo, Colonel Browner, the old Colonel Viltzleben, and others. On
the Swedens side also died of his wounds after the battle, General
Major Grave Neeles.

After his Majesty's death, there was great and extraordinary grief and
sorrow over the whole army; yet they never suffered the same to be
seen outwardly, but prosecuted still the enemy more vehemently, and
more cruelly than before. For the Duke of Weimar, and the rest of the
cavaliers of the army understanding the great misfortune of his
Majesty death, resolved all alike, it was better to die on the place
with his Majesty, than to retire one foot of ground: which resolution
was the cause, that in the end they did crown the lamentable death of
the King's Majesty with a stately and heroical victory, so that his
Majesty in the highest degree of glory, may be imagined before any
King, or Emperor to have died, and his life doth eternize alike both
his praise and glory, being victorious before death, in his death, and
after death.

The Duke of FriedlandWallenstein, after the losing of this battle,
retired with his scattered army towards Leipzig, and having had no
time to continue there, he was forced to take his retreat further unto
the hills of Bohemia, and thereafter Leipzig was freed from the
enemies' forces, by the Duke of Lueneburg, and the Saxons, that were
coming with succours unto his Majesty before the battle, whose march
was too slow, their succours being come but after the strokes were
given.

The castle of Leipzig called Plassenburg having holden out long, was
taken again, together with which all other parts in Saxony, that the
Imperialists had taken, were freed again, by the Swedens the second
time, as Chemnitz, Freiberg, &c. For which service the Swedens were
evil recompensed by the ungrateful Saxon, whose unthankfulness to the
Crown of Sweden will never be forgotten.

In all this time the Swedens Field Marshal Gustavus Horne did prosper
very fortunately in Alsace, not only in taking in the strong and fast
episcopal strength Bennenfeld, in spight of the Imperialists, who had
pressed to relieve it, after a long siege of two months' time; the
Field-marshal did take it in by accord. As also the towns
Schlettstadt, Colmar, Hagenau, Muelhausen, and al most whole upper
Alsace in a short time he brought under his contribution and power.

The fortieth Observation

His Majesty at this time, though a great deal weaker in strength than
the enemy, notwithstanding he was loath to delay time, finding
Wallenstein once removing from him, Pappenheim being also absent with
the Army of the League, his Majesty resolved as best to embrace the
occasion, not giving time to his enemy, either to take more advantage,
or yet to recollect the forces which were scattered from him, thinking
it was best to deal with one before another, and he knew it was a kind
of madness to stay till his enemies' forces were augmented, feeing
occasioan taken in wars doth often profit more than courage itselfe.
Therefore we see, there was a necessity laid on his Majesty to fight
this battle in time, seeing the enemy coming together was twice
stronger than he, and then his Majesty had no place of retreat within
ten miles, which would not only ruin his army, but also discourage his
friends and confederates, for whose relief he did come. Wallenstein
retired from his Majesty of purpose to put of time, till Pappenheim
had come to him, or till they might draw his Majesty's army between
them, which his Majesty foreseeing adventured the combat, in seeking
first unto Wallenstein before Papenheim's coming. It is needless to
reason more of his Majesty's resolution, since all counsels and
advisements are allowed of, as they happen to succeed; which is most
unjust.

Here also we see, what a great charge is laid on him that leads an
army, and of all charges the greatest is, to fight a battle well with
a weak army against a strong. Wherein is requisite a wise and a
courageous commander;' for when a battle is to be fought, it is
dangerous for a king, the head and the heart of an army, with the
danger of his whole army, to hazard himself and his kingdom to the
decision or arbitrement of variable fortune; or to enterprise
difficult matters, setting all his estate in hazard, seeing the safety
of the whole depends on him alone: for there is nothing more fearful
to a commander, and with all diligence to be eschewed, than that he do
not at one time, and one moment, commit his whole estate and kingdom
unto the decision of chance, without great advantage offered. Neither
ought a king to fight with all his forces at once, except he could
perceive a sure overthrow to be seen clearly unto himself, or to his
enemies, and if then he resolve to fight, for eschewing of factions,
let one supreme commander command, which is ever best; since many wits
in command do but breed confusion. Therefore it is most requisite,
that one command and the rest obey, as was done here at Luetzen, and
the best way of command is, to keep men in awe of duty, not so much
with cruelty (as many base generals do) as with a moderate severeness:
for always commanders ought to do, as wise mariners, not to steer
their course still one way, but sometimes to give way to the tempest,
which being past, let him follow his course again: even so wise
commanders should moderate their commands according to the time. For
as in a calm sea any fellow may steer, but in a great tempest, a
skilfull and a wife mariner is requisite: even so in command, when a
battle is to be fought, a wise and a stout commander is requisite; for
no man can command well, w ho did not learn to obey. Therefore it is
the most difficult thing in the world to command well, either
ourselves or others: and he that would command well, must not show
himself cruel in words or strokes,but if possible, he ought to bring
men to his mind with entreaty and friendly exhortations, showing
himself grave, majestic and benevolent, gaining of others his
inferiors' reverence, fear and munificence, with due obedience; and
this is the only best way to command, and to keepe men in obedience:
which qualities were all plentiful in the Lion of the North, the
invincible Gustavus, who after this manner encouraged his own
countrymen and subjects, to fight, as also in a brotherly manner of
love encouraged the Dutch, being his sworn servants. Who would not
obey, such a commander to fight well, being assured under his
fortunate conduct after travail and pain, to obtain glory and honour
here, and an immortal crown after death, for fighting well the battles
of the Lord.

As his Majesty went about his enemies with wisdom and courage: so
Wallenstein went about his with craft and policy, casting a ditch
before our forces to fall in, w hich was made the burial place of his
own soldiers, being fallen in the ditch they had prepared for others.

I confess there is nothing more commodious in war than to deceive an
enemy, and oft-times through deceit men obtain victory; yet the wisdom
of Gustavus seasoned with infinite courage could notbe trapped with a
fowler's grin, but brake through it with the assistance of God, till
he was victorious over his crafty enemies.

This magnanimous king for his valour might have been well called the
Magnific King, and holden for such, who while as he once saw
appearance of the loss of the day, seeing some forces beaten back, and
some flying, he valorously did charge in the midst of his enemies with
hand and voice, though thrice shot, sustained the fight, doing alike,
the duty of a soldier and of a king, till with the loss of his own
life he did restore the victory to his eternal credit, he died
standing serving the public, Pro Deo et Religione tuenda; and
receiving three bullets, one in the body, one in the arm, and the
third in the head, he most willingly gave up the ghost, being all his
lifetime a king that feared God and walked uprightly in his calling;
and as he lived Christianly, so he died most happily, in the defence
of the truth: and to witness all this was true, I could take heaven
and earth, sun and moon, minerals &c. to witnesse that his colours
ever flourished and spread in the name of the Lord, and that his
confidence was not set on the arm of man, though he was a warrior from
his youth up, he was the Captain over Israel, whose fingers the Lord
taught to fight, and to lead his people.

He had the heart of a lion, that by God's help had done such things,
that those that had seen and heard it as I did, must needs have said,
that it was the Lord that did it and not he, being it was the Lord's
work. But our adversaries and their damned crew of Jesuits and Moriks,
will say, that it was their power and might, and the goodness of their
cause, that made his royal Majesty to fall. But we may say with
Solomon in the twenty-eight of the Proverbs and twenty-one verse, It
was for the sins of the land, and our sins, that he was taken from
amongst us, and from those poor cavaliers, that did follow him, for
his Majesty's love, and the love of the cause. He was shot with three
bullets, dead with the last, for our sins and the sins of the land.
And what he did before his death, for the liberty of Dutchland, and
freedom of the gospel none but knows it: he left his own kingdom, to
bring strangers to freedom in theirs, he set light by his own life for
Dutchland, that they might keep theirs, he waked and cared day and
night for them, as a father for his children, that at last he might
bring peace for them to sleep sound; he brought the keys and opened
their Church doors that were closed up by the antichristian idolaters,
that the Devil's doctrine was banished again out of the Pfalz, and
Christ's gospel preached, and the sacraments duly administred, which I
saw, and was partaker of, singing thanks unto God for their
deliverance.

He it was and none other under God, who helped them to their
liberties, he it was and none other relieved Israel. Notwithstanding
whereof, the unthankfulness of the people was so great, that with my
ears, divers times I did hear some of them say, he might as well have
stayed in his own country, till they had sent for him, so great was
their unthankfulness! Likewise they said, if he had had much at home,
he had not come unto them overseas such a far journey. Was not this to
recompense good with evil? Was not this right the chief butler's part,
that did not remember Joseph, but forgot him? Was not this Joash his
part to Jehoida his father? O then this was the poisonable bullet of
ingratitude of the people, for which our King and master was taken
away! Oh would to God the people had never been so unthankful, that
our king, captain and master had yet lived!

Moreover as these people were unthankful, so they were Godless many of
them in the time of their troubles, as I did behold oft-times with
mine eyes a careless security amongst them, thinking their victories
were so frequent, and their own power so great, they needed not the
assistance of the Swedens nor of strangers, and their pride was so
great, that disesteeming of strangers in their pride, they led a life
very insolent and debauched, being given to the works of the flesh,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry &c. In a
word, it was even amongst them, as it was in the days before the
flood, as if the Lord had forgotten them, or could not see their
villany, so it behoved God to have punished them by his Majesty's
death. For in their hearts they said there was no God; so that their
mischief came on them unawares; and this the peoples' carriage caused
his Majesty's untimely death, being shot the second time. O would to
God they had done otherwise, and served God more truly, that we might
have had the presence and conduct of our magnanimous King longer, till
the pride of Austria had been more humbled, and the whore of Babylon
brought unto repentance of her idolatries! O would to God I could
enough lament his death! As also lament my own sins, and the
wickedness of the people, that was the cause of this untimely death,
through their sins! And his Majesty's self also being a sinner, as he
himself oft-times confessed, wishing that God would not lay to his
charge the great respect and reverence the best sort of the people did
give unto him, being but a sinful man, as they were; for which he
feared the Lord was angry with him; showing by his confession he  did
glory in nothing but in the Lord, ascribing ever all his victories
unto God, and nothing presuming of himself. For I dare be bold to say
he was a man according to God's mind, if there was one on earth. Such
was our master, captain and king. As was Abraham the father of many,
so was our master, captain and king. Was Noah in his time
unreproveable? So was our master, captain and king. Was Job in his
sufferings patient? So was our master, captain and king. Was Jonathan
true and upright in keeping his word? So was our master, captain and
king. Was Jehosaphat in his wars penitent, and busy craving the help
of the Lord? So was our master, captain and king. Was Simeon good and
full of the spirit? So was our master, captain and king. Was young
Tobias mindful all his days of the Lord, in his heart, and his will
not set to sin? So was our master, captain and king, like unto a stone
most precious, even like a jasper, clear as crystal ever and ever. And
truly if Apelles with his skill in painting, and Cicero with his
tongue in speaking, were both alive, and pressed to add anything to
the perfection of our master, captain and king; truly the one's best
colours, and the other's best words were not able to add one shadow to
the brightness of his royal mind and spirit; So that while the world
stands, our king, captain and master cannot be enough praised. Alas
then! it was our sins, and the sins of the army, and the land, was the
cause of our punishment in losing of him, with that unhappy last
bullet of the three shot through his head, who was the head of us all
under God our Father in Christ, that did undo us, it was we, I say,
that sinned against the Lord and his anointed. It was our misdeeds did
thus grow over our heads that made us lose our head and leader. Woe,
woe then to us that left the Lord, till we made the Lord take him from
us, that was our guard and comforter under God in all our troubles!
What then ought we to do that one day we may reign with him in glory?
While it is to day we must cast off the works of darkness, and embrace
the light in newness of life, repenting of the evil, and turning away
from our wickedness by repentance, not like unto Cain, not like unto
Saul, not like unto Achitophel, not like to Judas Iscariot, who all
doubted; but like those of Nineveh in dust and ashes, to fast and pray
believing in the Lord; and with David to say, We have sinned against
thee, and against the Heavens, be merciful unto us O Lord: like unto
Peter, let us, O Lord, weep bitterly; let us then repent, and believe
the Gospel, believe, yea and turn to the Lord with all our hearts,
with fasting and praying, and mourning with Saul, that said, Thou art
more righteous then I, in showing me good for evil: much more ought we
to lift up our voices, and with tears of repentance mourn for the loss
of our master, captain and king, through our sins and unthankfulness.
Therefore to day while we have time, let us acknowledge our sins
before the Lord, and repent, lest a worse come unto us, and that then
we be cast into prison, till that we pay the last farthing; for if the
Lord spared not his own Son who was blameless and without sin, while
he took on him our sins, what shall then become of us? No otherwise,
but except we turn from our sins, we must also die the death. Let us
not then close our ears, as at Meribah and at Massa in the wilderness;
but with the forlorn child cry, Father we have sinned against thee,
and against heaven, and are not more worthy to be called thy sons.
Lord therefore be merciful unto us, and enter not into judgment with 
us. Then let us all wear mourning, and lament the death of the valiant
King Gustavus Adolphus, while we breathe. Yet what help? Res est
irrevocabilis, et quod factum est infectum fieri nequit, what is done
cannot be recalled, and should we mourn like unto those who have no
hope? Far be it from us, seeing it cannot help us in this life, or in
the life to come. Let us then say with Micah, let it be with us as it
pleaseth God, and let us say with David, It is good for us O Lord,
that thou hast chastened us with thy rod; thou canst also help us, and
bring us to an happy end of all our miseries, the Lord will not suffer
us nor our seed to lack bread, and the Lord our God did ever give unto
the people of Israel at all times rulers, judges and kings, and jael,
though a woman despised, was strong enough to drive a nail in the
right cause. Shall not then the Lord on our repentance, stir up one,
yet to take his cause in hand, who are also Israel's, and the Lord's
people and inheritance, being also christened in the Lord's name? And
as a mother doth not forget her child, so will not the Lord forget us,
but in place of our master, captain and king, will yet give unto us a
valiant leader, come, I hope, of the valiant Bruce, & of the first
king of the Stewarts, of the issue of Elizabeth the Queen of Bohemia,
and jewel of her sex, the most splendid in brightness of mind, for a
woman, that the Earth doth afford. From her I wish the leader to come
into the field, to fight with good luck & victory, with strength &
power, with wisdom and understanding &c. against her enemies and our
enemies, always well furnished and prepared, the Lord will give him an
horn of ron and feet of brass to beat his enemies in pieces, the Lord
will lift up his hand upon his adversaries, and cut off all his
enemies; and to conclude, he will make him tread the Devil under his
feet. The Lord of his infinite mercy grant unto us such a leader in
place of our valiant master, captain and king of never dying memory,
the Lion of the North, the invincible King of Sweden! so shall we not
need in any manner of way to doubt of a wished happy end, both to the
war and to ourselves, being victorious over all our enemies temporal
and spiritual. Amen.



The forty-one Duty discharged at the in-taking of Landsberg on the
Lech, and the relief of Rain.

PALSGRAVE Christian being left by his Majesty to command the army in
Bavaria, having left Rain with four companies of Swedens commanded by
Colonel Worbran his Major, he broke up with the army towards
Eichstaett in Bavaria, and having taken it by accord he continued his
march towards Landsberg on the Lech. Where having arrived within half
a mile of the town, we quartered for a night, till preparation were
made of victuals and furniture convenient for the beleaguering, which
being made, the next day we marched towards the town in battle,
drawing up within reach of cannon to the walls in the safest part:
they thundering with cannon amongst us, our foot army was divided in
brigades, and directed to several posts, our horsmen were also
divided. Some were commanded out to scour the fields on that side the
enemy was to come, others were appointed to remain beside the
Infantry, to second us against the out-falling; or otherwise to second
us against the relief, that might come to the town. The rest of our
horsemen were directed to quarters, having left Ordnance Rutters to
bring them intelligence.

The town being beleaguered on all quarters, a bridge was made over the
river, where a strong guard of horse and foot were sent to hinder both
their supply and escape on that side. Likewise the approaches were
begun, and orders were given in haste for making the batteries. And
the guards being set both to the cannon, and to those that wrought in
the trenches, the colonels were recognoscing about the walls before
their several posts. Where at the first, Colonel Fowle was shot
through the thigh with a musket, who immediately was sent to Augsburg
to be cured.

Before night a second party of horse were sent forth for intelligence,
lest any misfortune might befall the first party; whereby we might not
be surprised by the enemy being strong together at Munich. Spence his
regiment and mine were appointed to attend on the general at his
quarter, my lieutenant colonel commanded the guards on the battery and
the trenches on our quarter. And the General Major Ruthven his brigade
being on the other quarter next the water, there grew a contestation
of virtue betwixt the officers of both brigades, who should first with
their approaches come to the wall; but those of Ruthven's brigade were
forced, notwithstanding of their diligence, to yield the precedency
unto us being older blades than themselves: for in effect we were
their schoolmasters in discipline, as they could not but acknowledge.
So being they were trained up by us from soldiers to be inferior
officers, and then for their preferments and advancement they went 
from us with our favours towards the General Major, such as Captain
Gunne, Lieutenant Brumfield, Lieutenant Dumbarre, Lieutenant Macboy,
Lieutenant Southerland, Ensign Denune, and divers more, which were
preferred under Ruthven's regiment, till in the end they did strive in
virtue to go beyond their former leaders. Nevertheless we kept ever
that due correspondence together, that wherever we did meet we were
but one, not without the envy of others.

This strife amongst us furthered so the victory, that before the next
morning, from our battery, where Sinclaire did command, there was a
breach shot in the skonce without the town, as also from the General
Major his quarter, there were two officers of the enemies killed on
the wall, their cannon dismounted, and a great breach made in the
wall. So that the enemy perceiving he had two breaches to defend, he
tucked a drum, desiring to parley. Which being granted; the accord
went on, and they were suffered to march out with their arms, seeing
the general had intelligence their army was coming to relieve them, he
was glad to grant them any conditions, before he were forced to rise
from the town by the enemy, being so near for relief of it.

The enemy being marched out and convoyed away, the General directed
General Major Ruthven into the town with a strong party of foot to
beset all the posts, and then to take notice of all provision and
goods that were in the town; such as corn, wine, artillery,
ammunition, horses, and all other goods or cadouks in general, to be
used at their pleasure. Which being done, the foot army were directed
to their former quarters, to rest ill further orders. The horsemen
were directed also to quarters, and then there were quarters made in
the town for the General and the Hofstaffe, as also for the colonels
of horse and foot, during the General his further pleasure.

Diverse of our foot soldiers were hurt on the batteries and trenches,
which got quarters in the town, being allowed to have hirurgians to
cure them. And the town was incontinent beset again with four
companies of Colonel Hugh Hamilton his regiment, being new levied men
out of Switzerland, and his major being an Irishman, commanded the
men. But another Dutch Major called Mountague was left to command the
garrison. Where those that entered first the town, did make good booty
of horses and other goods. But the most part was seized upon by the
general persons, taking the benefit unto themselves, though not the
pain. Where we did first find missing of our former leader the
invincible Gustavus, who not only respected cavaliers of merit, at
such times, but also was ready to reward them by his bounty, allowing
cadouks unto them, as he did unto Lieutenant Colonel Gunne.

The next day a party of a thousand horse, with eight hundred
musketeers, were commanded out toward Munich, to get intelligence of
the enemies' designs, getting orders to fall into their quarters, if
conveniently they could. But beside their expectation the enemy being
together and in readiness in a wood, unawares our party was engaged
amongst them, so that with difficulty having lost prisoners, they were
forced to retire, and the enemy getting intelligence that the town was
given over, to prevent us they continued their march towards Rain on
the Lech, to take it in, in compensation of the loss of Landsberg.

The party being retired, and the General understanding the Duke's army
had marched on Rain, he broke up with our army, and marched on the
other side of the Lech towards Augsburg. And fearing the skonce at
Rain and the bridge might be taken by the enemy, he did direct Captain
James Lyell with two hundred musketeers as a supply to the skonce,
being ordained at his coming thither to take the command of the skonce
on him. Who being come, finding Colonel Wornbran there, showing his
orders, he was made welcome by the Colonel, being hard pressed by the
enemy, and mightily afraid: so that the Captain had no difficulty in 
getting the command, which he gladly accepted, being more ambitious of
credit than of gains, directly opposit to the Colonels humour.

The army having come in time for the relief, our horsemen were left on
the side of the river next to Donauwoerth, except my Cousin Fowles his
regiment, which marched over the bridge with the Infantry, being
ordained the first night's watch to second the foot. And immediately
after our over-going there were five hundred musketeers of supply sent
unto the town, in despite of the Duke's army. And then we begun to
make up our batteries, and to run our lines of approach towards the
town, advancing our redoubts and batteries, as our approaches were
advanced.

The second night our batteries being ready, there were mutual
interchanges of cannonading amongst us, where Ensign Murray was shot
dead with the cannon, his thigh bone being broken, who was much
lamented, being a dainty soldier and expert, full of courage to his
very end.

On Sunday in the afternoon the enemy having heard certainty of his
Majesty's death, they drew up their whole army, horse, foot and cannon
before the town; and rejoicing at the news, they gave three salvos of
cannon, musket, and pistol. Which we not understanding, made us admire
the more. Nevertheless, the General resolved to get some prisoners of
them, to cause to make an out-fall the next morning: and to that
effect, five hundred commanded musketeers were sent under the command
of Lieutenant Colonel Lesly, who had orders to fall out before day
upon the enemy. Which he did; and beating them from their posts, there
were above threescore killed, and thirty taken prisoners; which
revealed the reason of their salvo. As also by them it was found, the
army had been broken up at midnight, and crossed the Danube, having
made over a ship-bridge, thinking with expedition to haste unto
Saxony, to supply the Imperialists, that were retiring after their
defeat at Luetzen unto Bohemia.

Notwithstanding of the advantage we had to prosecute the enemy, being
divided by the river, our General would not suffer to pursue them,
though General Major Ruthven with the whole officers offered to do
good service. The General fearing they might be brought to fight
through despair, he would not permit to follow them, but choosed
rather to lose a golden opportunity.

Within three days afterwards we marched towards Augsburg, where we lay
two months in open Fields, in the extremity of cold, without houses or
buildings, which undid the army being idle without hostile employment,
our generals giving time to our enemies to gather strenth to beat us
again out of the country, which formerly we had subdued by his
Majesty's valour and good conduct.

During this time I remained on my muster place at Webling Cloister,
giving out patents to my officers, and money to recrue and strengthen
their companies. But the enemy having taken-in the pass and town of
Landsberg, which was given over upon accord by Colonel Hugh Hamilton,
who was prisoner, and kept almost three years; so the enemy getting
the pass unto Schwabenland, they marched towards Menning, and from
thence to Brandenburg on the Eller, and chased me over the
Danube,being forced to quit a good muster place, we retired unto
Augsburg, having set the Danube betwixt us and the enemy; where, on
our march unfortunately my horse fell on my leg, and being six weeks
under cure I continued still with the army, on all occasions
commanding on horse-back, being unable to travel afoot.

The next day after our coming to Augsburg, General Bannier did break
up with the army to march towards Ulm on the Danube, there to join
with the Field Marshal Gustavus Horne, who was to come with a strong
party of horse, foot, and artillery from Alsace, with whom was come
Major Sidserfe, and the whole musketeers of Sir James Ramsey his
regiment; who being valourous and expert old soldiers, they were
commanded on all exploits of importance, being conducted and led by a
discret cavalier their Major.

The enemy, before our joining with the Field Marshal, had taken in
Landsberg, Kaufbeuren, Kempten and Menning where their army did lie,
while as we joined with the Field Marshal at Ulm. Palsgrave Christian
being directed to command the army on the Rhine, General Bawtishen
having left them voluntarily to go for his wedding unto Denmark.

General Bannier being also sickly, not yet fully cured of his hurt,
that he did get at Nuremberg, he was directed to the Stift Magdeburg
to collect new forces there to join with the Duke of Lueneburg and the
Saxon, who all this time, after his Majesty's death, were pursuing
hard the Imperialists conjunctis viribus, assisting the Duke of Weimar
and the Swedens army. At which time the Rex-chancellour Oxenstern made
offer, after his Majesty's death, to the Duke of Saxony, to be made
and chosen director of the armies; who was neither willing to accept
it himself, nor yet willingly would condescend to be directed by any 
other; so that their division did by time fully ruin the army, and
almost lost the good cause, few or none looking to the weal of the
public, but all pleasing their own fancies, suffering the enemy to
take advantage, every one looking to their particular commodities,
which did occasion the meeting at Hailbrun.

The forty-one Observation.

After his Majesty's departure unto Saxony, our brigade, which formerly
on all occasions followed his Majesty, being often the guard of his
person, as at his crossing the Rhine and at Munich, were left behind;
which then we thought very hard, as if thereby we had been lost, which
may be was the means of our safety; for as some flying from danger
meet with death, others do find protection in the very jaws of
mischief, and some others in their sleep are cast into fortune's lap,
while as others, for all their industry, cannot purchase one smile
from her. We see then, that man is but merely the ball of time, being
tossed too and fro is governed by a power that must be obeyed: and we
know there is a providence ordering all things, as it pleaseth him,
for which no man is able to find or give a reason: we must therefore
believe St. Jerome, saying, Providentia Dei omnia gubernantur, & quae
putatur poena, medicina est.

In vain then we murmur at the things that must be, and in vain we
mourn for what we cannot remedy. Therefore let this be our chief
comfort, that we are always in the hands of a royal protector: what
ever then befalls us, we must be contented, not strugling against
power.

We see also there is nothing more dangerous for commanders in wars,
then to be thought once by their fellows, officers and soldiers to be
greedy of the evil of gain: which opinion once received by inferiors,
may mightily cross the fortunes of their leaders: for when officers
and soldiers conceive an evil opinion of their leaders, no eloquence
is able to make them think well of them thereafter; for, a supreme
officer being once remarked to keep the means of those that served
them, they are without doubt thereafter despised by their followers.
And therefore he is never worthy the name of a glorious commander,
that doth not prefer the virtue of liberality before the love of
perishing gold; otherwise in his teeth he will be as well despised by
the common soldiers, as by his betters; for a brave commander ought
never to make an idol of the moneys which should satisfy soldiers, but
he should rather look unto that which may follow, to wit, his
overthrow, or at least his contempt. Therefore I would advise
cavaliers, that command and lead others, to entertain the affection of
those that have served bravely and truly, lest being unjustly
disdained, they might turn their arms the contrary way.

We see also the emulation of virtue betwixt friends commendable, in
striving who should force the enemy first unto a parley; where the
diligence and valour of Major Sinclaire is praiseworthy, who feared
nothing but discredit; where we see, that the enticement to great
travail and pains is glory and honour. And we see, all arts and
sciences are attained unto with diligent exercise; So that it is not
time, or number of years that makes a brave soldier, but the continual
meditation of exercise and practise; For soldiers should be frequented
in running, not to run away, as some do, but on the contrary, that
with the greatest celerity they may prosecute their enemies, taking
time in overtaking their flying enemies, and that they may the better
relieve their friends, for more come to be good soldiers by use then
by nature. Here also I did see our General following Guischardin his
counsel, that wished to make a silver bridge to let pass our enemies,
but if the enemy on his retreat would grow careless and amuse himself
once on booty, then it were a fit time to meddle with him being laden
with booty.

After his Majesty's death we see the alteration of time did give
greater advantage unto our enemies; for while as our army lay idle the
whole winter at Augsburg, the enemy was gathering his forces, and we
losing time neglected our duty, having lost our head and leader, when
we ought rather to have followed our enemies with fire, sword, spoil
and slaughter till we had subdued them, than to have suffered the
enemy before our noses to have taken from us that, which we by his
Majesty's good conduct had conquered before, So that we see it is
vicissitude that maintains the world: and as one scale is not always
in depression, nor the other lifted ever higher; even so, like unto
the alternate wave of the beam, we were at this time with both our
army kept ever in the play of motion.



The forty-two Duty of our March through Schwabenland under the Alps to
our leaguer at Donauwoerth, being the end of my Expedition with the
regiment.

Hving joined with the Field Marshal at Ulm, we crossed the Danube, and
quartered over-night in the earldom of Kirchberg, being General Major
Ruthven his lands, disposed unto him by his Majesty for good service?
and hearing the enemies' army were at Memmingen within six miles of
us, we advanced the next morning towards them, with a resolution to
beat them back unto Bavaria, being almost equal with them in strength,
we continued our march with extreme cold, till the second night that
we quartered in a great dorp, a mile from the enemy, so that in the
night fire entering in our quarter, with difficulty we saved our
ammunition and artillery, having lost many horses, and the most part
of the army's baggage. Notwistanding whereof, we marched the next day
towards Memmingen, and before our coming the enemy having strongly
beset the town, he marched away two miles from the town, thinking to
engage us with the town, that he might return again with advantage to
relieve it, seeing we had not time to entrench ourselves, he being
then so near.

But we find at our coming the enemy was gone, we drew up in battle
within reach of cannon to the town, where they saluted us with cannon
till it drew near night, and then leaving strong watches before the
town, for fear of out-falling, laying our watches to keep them in, we
quartered over-night in dorps, attending the up-coming of our baggage,
being scarce of victuals and without forage, but such as we brought
with us. The next morning our baggage being come, and hearing the
enemy was within two miles of us, leaving a strong hinderhalt to keep
in the garrison, we marched with the rest of the army after the enemy,
where before night our fore-troops did skirmish together, and we
having the best of it, the enemy was forced to leave a strong rear-
guard of horse and dragoniers, making the rest of his army to march
away unto a pass beside Kempten, being a strong strait pass, the
country being strait and hilly, full of woods, very commodious for
ambuscadoes, so that we could not march to them, but in order of
battle; our fore-troops of horse and dragoniers advancing softly on
the enemy, being forced to recognosce still before them, till at last
they charged their horse-watches, which being beaten by ours, we did
get three cornets from them, where incontinent Major Sidserffe with
Ramsey's musketeers fell on their dragoniers and skirmished with them, 
till they were forced to retire, and being dark, our army having set
out their horse and foot watches before them, they stood the whole
night in battle, till it was day, and the enemy being gone in the
night, the way thwart and deep, some of his cannon being left behind,
were buried, burning their carriages with their wagons as they did
break, making them unprofitable for us.

We continued our march in the morning, minding to attrap them, so that
by midday they having turned their cannon on the pass towards us, they
forced our army to stand without reach of their cannon, trying on both
hands of the pass to win through, but in vain, seeing there was no
passage near hand, but at that one place, where we did cannonade one
against another for two days, till the enemy retired their cannon
within Kempten, and the rest of their army unto Bavaria, having
crossed both the Lech and the Iller again.

The enemy being gone, we retired for want of victuals and forage, the
country being spoiled, we were forced to over-see the beleaguering of
Memmingen, for that time passing by it towards Mindelheim, where we
rested two days, and then marched on Kaufbeuren, where in two days we
forced the garrison to a composition, being content to march away
without arms, getting a convoy to Landsberg on the Lech.

The weather being extremely cold under the snowy Alps, we refreshed
our army three days at Kaufbeuren, and the fourth day marched towards
the Iller, where the water being small, we made a bridge of our small
cannon with their carriage, being placed two and two alongst the river
at an equal distance of eight foot asunder, where we laid over deals
betwixt the cannon, passing over our whole infantry alongst the
bridge; which being past and the deals taken off, the horses spanned
before the cannon, led them away after the army. And quartering that
night in the fields, the next morning we beleaguered Kempten; Having
battered hard for three days together with cannon, at last the breach
being made and the town almost brought to an accord, having lost
divers soldiers and officers before it,  hearing the Duke of Bavaria
his army was crossed the Lech again at Landsberg, having gotten a
strong supply, and being made certain, they were to march unto the
Duke of Wuerttemberg's Land, the Field Marshal, after great pains
taken, was forced to quit Kempten, and to march with the army to be
before them in Wuerttemberg.

The Duke's army on their march by the way, took in a castle beside
Kaufbeuren, where Captain Bruntfield and Quarter-master Sandelens were
taken prisoners, and were sent to be kept at Lindau. As also in their
by-going, they took in Kaufbeuren, and continued their march alongst
the Iller, till they crossed with their army at Brandenburg, we lying
that night with our army within a mile of them; The next day we
strived who might pass the Danube first for going to Wuerttemberg,
where it was our Fortune to get betwixt them and the pass, having line
at Munderkingen, while as they had crossed a mile below us on the
river. Which when we understood by our intelligence of their being so
near, incontinent the Field Marshal caused our artillery and foot to
march over in the night, so that before day our army advanced towards
the pass, leaving dragoniers behind us, to burn and to cast off the
bridge; But the bridge was no sooner set on fire, but the enemies
fore-troops did drive our dragoniers after us, they coming up full
squadrons of horse and foot driving up our rear, consisting of three
regiments of horse, Colonel Daggenfield, Colonel Cratzstein and
Colonel Monro of Fowles, being three valorous Barons, who resolved
amongst themselves, Daggenfield should charge the enemy first, which
he manfully did, and then retired, who immediately was rescued by
Colonel Monro, having charged the enemy, retired, being shot through
the right foot with a musket bullet, and Colonel Cratzstein rescuing
him again, charged the enemy the last time, keeping them up till the
rest were safely retired, and then retiring himself at the spurs,
being last, was pitifully cut over the head with a pole-shable, the
enemy following them still, till they were repulsed by our dragoniers.
Nevertheless they did get the most part of our baggage, and a great
number of the horsmen's led horses, servants and coaches.

The pass being narrow, and we having the advantage of them, being able
to receive them with our whole army, horse and foot, while as they
could not advance unto us but by divisions, at most thirty in front
against a steep hill, where our army was standing ready in battle, to
receive them horse, foot and artillery. Which they considering the
great disadvantage they had to pursue us, drawing their army also in
battle, they planted their ordnance against us, where once begun, we
continued the whole day cannonading one against another, where neither
foot nor horse could join to skirmish. But the night coming on, the
Field Marshal directed his great cannon away before, and leaving a
strong rearguard of horse and dragoniers at the pass, getting orders
to remain there till midnight, we retired the rest of our army unto
Wuerttemberg Land, having five miles to march, before day, our retreat
being in the night, though safe, was confusedly made.

The enemy finding at mid-night that we were gone, followed up our
rear-guard, skirmishing a little, in the end retired. And the whole
army crossed the Danube again, of intention to ruin all our muster-
places in Schwabenland: and in their way they took a French Marquess
prisoner on his muster-place, and Colonel John Forbesse, being both
careless they were surprised in their quarters, and were kept
prisoners for three years.

The army quartered themselves in Schwabenland and Tyrol alongst the
BOdense, setting garrisons in towns, as in Constance, Biberach,
UEberlingen, and divers more. During this time our army was well
entertained and refreshed in good quarters in Wuerttemberg Land, 
having secured them for that time from their enemies, we attended the
Rhinegrave his coming with a supply from Alsace: as also we did get a
strong supply of country soldiers from the Duke of Wuerttemberg, with
a great deal of ammunition, and a supply of horse and cannon. The
Rhinegrave being come, finding ourselves strong again, we resolved to
search the enemy, for to make him retire unto Bavaria again, which we
effectuated within ten days. After our up-breaking having crossed the
Danube again, the enemy being retired, our army did settle themselves
in a close leaguer at Donauwoerth for three months together, attending
the conclusion of the meeting at Heilbronn, resolving to enterprise no
exploit or hostility against the enemy, till such time as they should
know, who should content them for their by-past service, as also whom
they should serve in times coming.

During which time I went to Heilbronn to solicite my regiment's
affairs with the Rex-chancellor, and being there my cousin Colonel
Monro of Fowles died of his wounds at Ulm, where he was buried, and
there after my brother was killed by the insolency of some Dutch
soldiers, which were of another regiment, not his own, who was also
buried at Bacharach on the Rhine, and his Lieutenant Colonel John
Monro discharging himself of the regiment, they were reduced at
Heidelberg on the Neckar to two companies under Captain Adam Gordon,
and Captain Nicholas Rosse: which two companies by the Chancellor his
orders I took from Palsgrave Christian his army, and marched with them
to Donauwoerth, where in July 1633, I joined them to my regiment, of
whom I took leave, leaving them under command of my Lieutenant Colonel
John Sinclaire, who immediately afterward was killed at Neumark in the
upper Palatinate, and was transported to be buried at Donauwoerth. My
Major William Stewart succeeded to the Lieutenant Colonel's place, I
being gone for a recruit to my regiment unto Britain. From that time
to the Battle of Noerdlingen, being a year, they were led by
Lieutenant Colonel Stewart, brother to Claire. And since I did not see
the service, I continue to speak of the last year's expedition, till I
be informed of those who did see the service, as I did the rest.

The forty-two Observation; being the last.

In wars wisdom is of such worth, that the spirit and skill of one
commander is sometimes better than thousands of armed men. And nothing
encourages an enemy more than the foolishness and ignorance of their
enemies in warlike business: But on the contrary, he sleeps not sound
that hath a wise enemy. For a wise leader doth all things wisely, and
it becomes not a leader to use himself to vanity, or to intemperate
appetites, for, how can he command others, that never pressed to
command his own inordinate desires? and brave leaders of armies and
valourous Captains should ever look to their honour and renown, more
than unto riches or pleasure, spoil or gain, quitting the spoil of
their enemies to their soldiers, they ought to reserve the honour and
fame for themselves: for, he wants not means but enriches his family,
that hath won credit, and leaves it to his posterity. Our contestation
then should be for honour and credit, and not for unlawful spoil or
gain, esteeming more of magnanimity, wherever it is found, than of
riches attained unto; it may be, through feebleness and cowardice,
lying in a garrison, having never seen an enemy, or a man killed in
the fields; when other cavaliers did show their valour before their
enemies, gaining more credit, though less wealth, which is of shortest
continuance. For we are not worthy the name of soldiers, if we glory
(as many do) more in gathering riches (that perish faster than they
come) than we do to get an immortal good name: for we must think
still, that true honour doth consist only in virtuous actions, which
should make us more ambitious of credit, than of unlawfull gain
attained unto by avarice.

Here also we see great difference betwixt leaders; For after we had
gotten Field-marshal Horne to lead us, we began by his valourous good
conduct to recover again, what others had suffered the enemy to
possesse: and before he advanced, he made his friends sure behind him,
as Ulm, and the Duke of Wuerttemberg, that always in necessity he
might make a safe retreat, as a wise general ought to do, looking what
might happen. So then we see, that as resolution is needful, counsel
is not to be despised coming from a steadfast mind; for it is better
to save ourselves and others, than to be the instruments to lose both.
But when we have no time to resolve long in matters deplorable, then
resolution should have place before long advisement.

Here also I did observe, that generals are forced to be ruled
according to the occurrences in war. For the Field-marshal thinking to
get advantage of the enemies' army, he left the garrison of Memmingen
behind him; For he knew well, if once he did beat or remove the
enemies' army, he could deal the easier with the garrison in subduing
of it. Moreover, we see here, how necessary cannon are to a general to
make a safe retreat, getting any advantage of ground.

Likewise we see here the goodness of intelligence, which is ever most
necessary to an army, without which no good can be done or
effectuated. Which made the Field-marshal quit the gaining of Kempten,
to save the country of Wuerttemberg by his diligence and celerity, in
marching to gain the pass before the Imperialists.

On the other part, sloth and neglective watch is to be condemned,
while as through security cavaliers suffer themselves to be surprised,
as became of the French Marquess and Colonel John Forbesse, being both
taken in their beds, who ought rather, through good intelligence, to
have been on horseback in the Fields before the enemies' coming.

Also the valour of those cavaliers that made the retreat good, is
worthy praise, they having carried the tokens of their valour in their
bodies, for the safety of their comrades.

My cousin Fowles being shot in the foot, retired to Ulm to be cured,
who through the smart of his wound fell into a languishing fever: and
as the wound was painful to the body, so the sinful body was painful
to the soul, the body being endangered except the wound were cured,
and the soul was not sound till the body's sin were healed, and both
for six weeks did much smart the patient, while as his wounds were
dressed. But though his bodily wound was incurable, yet his soul was
cured by the punishment of his body. For, all the time, he like to a
good Christian, made himself night and day familiar by prayers unto
God, till he found reconciliation through Christ. So that his end was
glorious, having long smarted under correction, though his life was
painful.

O happy wounds that killed the body, being they were the means to save
the soul by bringing him to repentance! Let no friend then bedew their
eyes for him that lived honourable as a soldier, and died so happy as
a good Christian. My brother Colonel Monro of Obstell being untimely
and innocently taken out of this life, being a true Christian and a
right traveller. His life was his walk, Christ his way, and Heaven his
home. And though during his life time his pilgrimage was painful, yet
the world knows, his way did lead to perfection: for he leaned still
on Christ, in whom he was made perfect. And therefore let no man
doubt, that though his end was sudden, but his home was pleasing,
being by his brethren after death made welcome to Heaven: and though
he travailed hard, yet I persuade myself he walked right, and
therefore was rewarded and made welcome through Christ his Redeemer.

Shortly after him, my dear cousin and Lieutenant Colonel John
Sinclaire being killed at Neumark, he did leave me and all his
acquaintance sorrowful, especially those brave heroics (Duke Barnard
of Weimar and Field-marshal Horne) whom he truly followed and
valourously obeyed till his last hour, having much worth he was much
lamented, as being without gall or bitterness.

Likewise at this time Lieutenant Hector Monro, being also a stout and
a valourous gentleman, died of a languishing ague in Wuerttemberg,
being much lamented by his comrades and friends.

We read in the Roman story; That the memory of the dead was ever
honourable and precious, so that the Romans wore mourning for their
dead friends above a year. And the Athenians had an order amongst
them, that all those who died bravely in wars, their names should be
inregistred and set in chronicle: as also frequent mention was
ordained to be made of their names, and of the exploits done by them,
in the public meetings. Moreover, it was ordained by them to celebrate
days in their remembrance, wherein the youth should be exercised in
divers exercises of body, called sepulchres, whereby the people might
be encouraged to follow arms, for to gain honour to themselves, to the
end that disdaining death they might be encouraged to fight for the
weal of the public. And polemarch the leader for those youths, in time
of their exercise, was wont to sing verses and songs made in praise of
those that died valourously serving the public, and to incite others
to the like magnanimity. The youths did sing them also before the
people.

To conclude then this observation; since GOD hath made me poor by the
want of my friends, I find no other remedy, but to enrich myself in
being content with his will; being persuaded, as they have gone the
way before me, I must needs follow, and then others by my example must
learn to be contented to want me: And though I leave them poor, they
can be rich in God being content; For, we are neither rich nor poor by
what we possess, but by what we desire.



Table of Time spent and Distances Travelled

The second Part.

In June 1629, sent from Elsinore to the Pillau into Prussia first
three companies, and then three by water, : Days 4 : 100 Dutch Miles
These six companies did lie in garrison in Braunsberg in Prussia
without hostile Employment. : a whole year:
The thirteenth of August 1630, shipped at the Pillau in Prussia, and
landed the eighteenth at Ruegenwalde in hinder Pomerania, being at
Sea, : Days 5: 80 Dutch Miles
At Ruegenwalde we lay in good quaarters. : Weeks 9:
From Ruegenwalde to Kolberg we marched,: Days 2: 7 Dutch Miles
From Kolberg we marched to Schivelbein in the Marck. : Days 1: 5 Dutch
Miles
From Schivelbein to Greifenberg in Pomerania, : Days 1: 5 Dutch Miles
From Greifenberg to Priemhausen we marched, : Days 2: 7 Dutch Miles
At Priemhausen in extreme cold weather we lay in the Fields. : Week3:
From Priemhausen we marched to Stettin : Days 2: 9 Dutch Miles
At Stettin we lay getting weekly pay. : Months 2:
From Stettin we marched to Neubrandenburg, : Days 3: 10 Dutch Miles
At Neubrandenburg we rested after the in-taking of the town : Days 3:
From Neubrandenburg we marched to Treptow and from thence to Loitz in
: Days 2: 7 Dutch Miles
At Loitz we rested three Days, and then marched to Demmin. : Day 1: 1
Dutch Miles
At Demmin we lay Days three before the town was taken in, and marched
to Treptow, : Days 2 : 5 Dutch Miles
At Treptow we lay three Days, and from thence marched to Malchen in 
Mecklenburg, in : Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
At Malchen we remained : Days 8 :
and marched to Friedland in : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
At Friedland we remained : Days 8:
and marched to Anklam in : Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
From Anklam having lain there : Days 4.:
we marched back to Friedland in : Days 2.: 6 Dutch Miles
At Friedland we lay at our back-coming, : Days 6 :
and then marched unto Schwedt, in : Days 3 : 12 Dutch Miles
At Schwedt we rested : Days 8:
and then marched to Francfurt on the Oder, in: Days 5: 15 Dutch Miles
After the in-taking of Frankfurt we marched to Landsberg on the
Warthe, : Days 8 : 9 Dutch Miles
and lay before it ere it was taken, in: Days 2:
From Landsberg we retired to Frankfurt back in : Days 2: 9 Dutch Miles
At Frankfurt we rested weeks five and then marched to Berlin in the
Mark Brandenburg, in : Days 3 : 11 Dutch Miles
From Berlin we marched to Spandau, : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
At Spandau we rested : Days 4:
and marched then to Potsdam. : Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
At Potsdam we lay, : Days 10:
and retired to Spandau back. : Days 1: 4 Dutch Miles
At Spandau again we lay : Days 10:
and then marched back to Berlin. : Days 1: 4 Dutch Miles
At Berlin we lay : Days 4:
and then marched to Bernau in : Days 2: 9 Dutch Miles
At Bernau we lay : Days 12:
and then marched to old Brandenburg in : Days 4 : 15 Dutch Miles
At old Brandenburg we rested : Days 10:
and then marched to Rathenau in : Days 2 : 5 Dutch Miles
From Rathenau we marched to Tangermuende on the Elbe in : Days 2 : 6
Dutch Miles
From Tangermuende we marched to Werben down the Elbe's side in : Days
2 : 5 Dutch Miles
At Werben we lay in leaguer : Weeks 5:
and then marched to Wuerttemberg on the Elbe in : Days 6 : 22 Dutch
Miles
At Wuerttemberg in Saxony we lay, : Days 8:
and then crossing the Elbe, marched to Bad Dueben in : Days 2 : 5
Dutch Miles
At Bad Dueben we lay : Days 3:
and then marched to the place of battle called God's-acre near
Leipzig, in : Days 2 : 5 Dutch Miles
From the place of battle, we marched to Leipzig : .: 12 Dutch Miles
At Leipzig we lay : Days 3:
and then marched back to Halle in : Days 2 : 5 Dutch Miles
At Halle we rested : Days 9:
and then we marched to Erfurt in Thuringia : Days 3 : 9 Dutch Miles
At Erfurt we lay: Days 8:
and then marched to Schmalkalden over the Walt in : Days 2: 6 Dutch
Miles
From Schmalkalden to Meiningen in Franconia, : Day 1 : 3 Dutch Miles
From Meiningen to Mellrichstadt: Day 1 : 3 Dutch Miles
From Mellrichstadt to Bad Neustadt on the Saale in Franconia, : Day 1
: 3 Dutch Miles
From Bad Neustadt to Hammelburg : Dy 1 : 3 Dutch Miles
From Hammelburg to Gemuenden on the Main : Day. 1 : 3 Dutch Miles
From Gemuenden to Carlstadt on the Main : Day 1 : 2 Dutch Miles
From Carlstadt to Wuerzburg : Day 1 : 2 Dutch Miles
From Wuerzburg to Ochsenfurt on the Main in a : night 1 : 4 Dutch
Miles
From Ochsenfurt back to Wuerzburg: Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
At Wuerzburg we lay near: Weeks 5:
and then marched down the Main to Prozelden in : Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
From Prozelden w mrhd to Wertheim : Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
From Wertheim to Miltenberg : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Miltenberg to Sulzbach: Day 1.: 4 Dutch Miles
From Sulzbach to Steinheim : Day 1 : 1 Dutch Miles
From Steinheim to Offenbach, before the ports of Frankfurt : Day 1 : 1
Dutch Miles
From Offenbach the seventeenth of November we marched through
Frankfurt unto Hoechst : Day 1: 2 Dutch Miles
At Hoechst we rested : 4 Days:
and then crossed the Main and marched by Darmstadt unto the
Bergstrasse towards Oppenheim skonce : Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
At Oppenheim before the skonce was gotten in we lay in the open fields
in extremity of cold, and then crossed the Rhine and took in Oppenheim
town and castle, where we rested : Days 3:
From Oppenheim we marched to Mainz on the Rhine in : Days 2: 5 Dutch
Miles
Before Mainz we lay in extreme cold weather in open fields, before we
got it in, : Days 4 :
and then rested the army there for : Weeks 10:
From Mainz we marched near Frankfurt in : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Frankfurt we marched to Aschaffenburg  on the Main in : Day 1 : 5
Dutch Miles
From Aschaffenburg  we marched unto Franconia towards Estenfeld in :
Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Estenfeld we marched to Lohr in : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Lohr we marched to Gemuenden in : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Gemuenden we marched to Karlstadt in : Day 1 : 2 Dutch Miles
From Karlstadt we marched to Dettelbach in Franconia in : Day 1 : 4
Dutch Miles
From Dettelbach we marched to Ochsenfurt in : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Ochsenfurt we marched to Windsheim in : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
At Windsheim we rested three Days : Days 3:
and then we marched to Wilhermsdorf in : Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
From Wilhermsdorf to Fuerth on the Pegnitz in : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Fuerth to Schwabach: Day 1 : 3 Dutch Miles
At Schwabach we rested: Days 2:
and marched to Weissenburg: Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
From Weissenburg to Noerdlingen : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Noerdlingen to Donauwoerth : Day 1: 3 Dutch Miles
At Donauwoerth we lay before it was taken : Days 2:
and rested thereafter : Days 3:
and then crossed the Lech at Rain in : Day 1 : 2 Dutch Miles
From Rain to Augsburg : Day 1 : 5 Dutch Miles
From Augsburg to Aichach in Bavaria : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Aichach towards Ingolstadt : Days 2.: 7 Dutch Miles
From Ingolstadt to Gaisenfeld : Day 1: 2 Dutch Miles
From Gaisenfeld in Bavaria to Moosburg : Day. 1: 4 Dutch Miles
At Moosburg we rested : 4 Days, :
and from thence to Landshut: Day 1: 3 Dutch Miles
From Landshut to Freising: Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
From Freising  to Munich : Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
At Munich we lay, : 3 Weeks:
and then marched back to Donauwoerth in: Days 4: 15 Dutch Miles
From Donauwoerth back to Weissenburg: Days 3.: 9 Dutch Miles
From Weissenburg to Fuerth on the Pegnitz : Days 3 : 9 Dutch Miles
At Fuerth we lay : 8 Days:
and marched then to Lauf: Days 1: 4 Dutch Miles
From Lauf to Hersbruck in : Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
From Hersbruck in the upper Palatinate to Amberg : Days 2.: 7 Dutch
Miles
From Amberg back to Hersbruck: Days 2.: 7 Dutch Miles
At Hersbruck we lay, and then retired to Nuremberg in : Weeks 3:
and then retired to Nuremberg in : Days. 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
At Nuremberg we lay in leaguer till the succours was come, and then we
braveerd the Imperial leaguer. : Months 3 :
From Nuremberg to Neustadt : Days 2.: 5 Dutch Miles
From Neustadt to Windsheim : Days 2.: 6 Dutch Miles
From Windsheim to Dinkelsbuehl.: Days 2: 6 Dutch Miles
From Dinkelsbuehl to Donauwoerth.: Days 3: 9 Dutch Miles
From Donauwoerth to Rain on the Lech : Day 1: 2 Dutch Miles
From Rain to Newburg on the Danube : Day 1: 3 Dutch Miles
From Newburg to Rain back : Day 1: 3 Dutch Miles
From Rain to Augsburg : Day 1: 5 Dutch Miles
From Augsburg to Eichstaett : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Eichstaett to Landsberg : Days 2 : 7 Dutch Miles
From Landsberg to Augsburg : Days 2 : 5 Dutch Miles
From Augsburg to Rain back again : Days 2: 5 Dutch Miles
From Rain again to Augsburg : Days 2: 5 Dutch Miles
At Augsburg the army did lie after his Majesty's death, without any
hostile imploiment. : near 3 Months:
From Augsburg to Ulm in February 1633 we marched : Days 3 : 9 Dutch
Miles
From Ulm to Memmingen we marched : Days : 2 6 Dutch Miles
From Memmingen to the Pass at Kempten : Days 2 : 7 Dutch Miles
From the Pass we marched back to Mindelheim in Schwabenland : Days 2 :
7 Dutch Miles
From Mindelheim to Kaufbeuren we marched : Days 2 : 7 Dutch Miles
From Kaufbeuren to Kempten we marched : Day 1: 4 Dutch Miles
From Kempten back to Biberach : Days 2 : 7 Dutch Miles
From Biberach to Munderkingen on the Danube : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Munderkingen to Reutlingen in Wuerttembergland in a : Night 1 : 5
Dutch Miles
From Reutlingen to Esslingen : Day 1 : 4 Dutch Miles
From Esslingen to Munderkingen back : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Munderkingen to Biberach back : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Biberach to Ulm on the Danube : Days 2 : 6 Dutch Miles
From Ulm to Donauwoerth being the end of the second part of the
Expedition, which we marched in : Days 3 : 9 Dutch Miles
Summa Dutch Miles of the March made under his Majesty of Sweden and
the Crown in Germany in : years 4: extends to 779 Dutch Miles



An Abridgement of Exercise for the Younger Soldier His Better
Instruction
Wherein first we show a complete company, and then we make twelve
companies to complete a brigade.

To make a complete company of marching men under arms, there must be
one hundred twenty six men in arms, being reckoned to twenty-one rots,
each rot being six men, of which two are esteemed as leaders, being a
corporal a rot-master or leader, and an under rot-master, being the
last man of the six in field, which also is sometimes a leader when on
occasion his leader is made to be under rot-master; then in a company
you have twenty-one leaders, being six of them corporals, and fifteen
rot-masters, which to close the fields have allowed twenty-one men,
called under rot-masters: a company thus consisting of twenty-one
rots, is divided in six corporal-ships, whereof three being pikemen,
and three rot, being eighteen men, makes a corporal-ship of pikes.
Also there must be to complete this company, three corporal-ships of
musketeers, each corporal-ship being counted twenty-four men, being
four rots, so that to make up the company complete, there must be nine
rots of pikemen, which have the right hand, and twelve rots of
musketeers on the left hand, being drawn in one front, they make a
complete body of a company without officers.

This company hath allowed them for officers, a captain, a lieutenant,
an ensign, two sergeants, four under-beifells, being a captain of
arms, a furer of colours, a furrier, and a muster-schriver; as also to
serve the company, three drummers are allowed, and fourteen pass-
volants, with four muster-youngs, are allowed to the captain, as free
men unmustered, to make up the complete number of one hundred and
fifty, besides the officers.

The company being drawn up complete, the pikes on the right hand, and
the musketeers on the left hand, then the ensign or his furer with a
drummer and three rots of pikes goes to bring out the colours to be
placed in front of the company, before they march; As also the colours
are to be conveyed again, in this manner, at all lodging and
dislodging.

The company marching to parade or watch, with complete officers, the
captain leads off six rots of musketeers, his drum beating betwixt the
second and the third rank, then follows up after that division the
oldest sergeant, leading up the first five rots of pikemen, the ensign
leading up the other division of pikes, his furer furing his colours
after him, and the second drummer beating betwixt the two divisions,
then the lieutenant leads up the last division of musketeers, being
six rots also, and coming in equal front with the rest, the captain
making a sign for the drum beating, they order their arms, the captain
standing in front on the right hand, the ensign on his left, and the
lieutenant on the left hand of both, with a sergeant on each flank,
and the under-beifells with half pikes stand in the Rear of the
company.

Twelve companies thus complete would make up three squadrons, every
squadron of pikes and muskets being drawn up several apart, after the
former example of the less body, pikes and colours on the right hand,
and the musketeers on the left, which three squadrons thus drawn up
and complete would make a complete brigade of foot, to be divided as
follows (viz.) eight corporal-ships of musketeers, being thirty-two
rots divided in four platoons, every platoon being eight in front, led
off by a captain, and every division after him led up by a sufficient
officer, till at a halt all were drawn in even front, after this
division should follow the thirty-six rots of pikes, being twelve
corporal-ships with their colours, a captain leading off the first
five rots before the four colours should stir, where betwixt the
second and third rank of the first division of pikes, the drummer
should beat, then the ensigns should lead off the other division,
their furers with their colours following them, till they drew up in
even front with the first division of pikes, which ought to be in one
front with the thirty-two rots of musketeers, that make the right wing
of the brigade, keeping their arms orderly shouldered, till they were
commanded otherwise, and their sergeants ought to look unto the
flanks, till such time that the whole squadron of pikes being thirty-
six rots were drawn up in even front with the musketeers, after this
manner, the other squadron of pikes being thirty-six rots also, which
should make the battle of the brigade, ought to march by divisions,
being led up in all respects and order, after the manner of the former
squadron of pikes, till they were in even front with the rest, then
the other thirty-two rots of musketeers belonging to that squadron,
which are appointed to be the battle of the brigade, ought to be led
up as the first division of musketeers were in all points, which ought
to draw up at a reasonable distance behind their own squadron of
pikes, appointed for the battle of the brigade: where their sergeants
on the flanks ought to look to their order, and not to suffer them to
stir their arms, till they were commanded. And after them should march
up the last squadron of pikes in all respects observing the order of
the former squadrons in their marching, till they were led up in equal
front with the other pikes, and then march up the last thirty-two rots
of musketeers in four divisions, observing the order of the former
divisions, till they were in equal front with the whole pikes, and
then they making up the left wing  of the brigade, the colonel of the
brigade ordaines the battle of pikes being the middle squadron of
pikes to advance in one body before the rest, till they are free of
the musketeers and pikes, which makes the wings of the brigade, and
then the battle of pikes standing firm, the thirty-two rot of
musketeers which were drawn up behind them, march up, till they fill
up the void betwixt the squadrons of pikes standing right behind their
own pikes, that is the battle of the brigade, and then the colonel
making a sign to the drummers, they beat all alike, till the brigade
in one instant doth order their arms, all officers of the brigade
standing on their stations, according as they were directed, then the
superplus of the three squadrons of musketeers being forty-eight rot,
are drawn up, behind the brigade, having also officers to command
them, they attend orders, which they are to obey, being commanded out
as pleaseth their officers, either to guard cannon or baggage, or to
be convoys to bring ammunition or victuals to the rest.

A direction to Train single soldiers apart.

Having thus formed a company, and shown the manner to draw up a
complete brigade, for the younger officer his better understanding,
being a novice to this discipline, I will set down briefely the best
way, suddenly to bring a young company to be exercised, which in my
opinion would be thus. First, since every rot of the twenty-one,
whereof the company doth consist, hath allowed a corporal or a rot-
master as the leader of the other five, which leader is supposed to be
more expert in handling of pike or musket, then the other five, who
make up the rot, and the under rot-master is supposed to be more
expert in handling his arms than the other four, so that he is
appointed as a second to the leader, being sometimes a leader himself,
then after the company is made up, for the first week I would have
every corporal of the six, and the fifteen rot-masters, being leaders,
with the help of their under rot-masters, in a weeks time, to make the
other four as expert in handling of pike and musket, as themselves, or
to be punished with Irons in case of their neglect, which the
sergeants should see done, as they should answer to the lieutenant,
the lieutenant to the captain, and the captain to the major, the major
to the lieutenant colonel, and they all to the colonel, which they
ought to practise in the fields apart, till the rot were acquainted,
every one with his leader, from the first to the last: and while as
the under rot-master should turn leader, then all the followers
before, were then leaders also, and then the rot being apart, the
middle man of the rot should be taught to double to the front, till
their deep were three, that was six before, and in falling off again,
the middle man should turn to the contrary side or hand he came up
upon, carrying their arms handsomly free from others,  without making
noise in their retiring to their former station, and orders.

Likewise I would have the corporal, rot-master or leader, being a
musketeer, having his rot once expert, in handling severally the
musket well, then to discharge their muskets in winning ground,
advancing to an enemy, the leader having discharged his musket,
standing still to blow his pan and prime again, having cast off his
loose powder, then to cast about his musket to his left side, drawing
back with his musket his left foot and hand, till the mouth of the
musket come right to his hand, to charge again in the same place,
standing firm till his follower marched by him on his right hand,
standing at the same distance before him, that he stood behind, and
then to give fire, blowing his pan, priming, casting off and retiring
his musket with his left hand and foot, and to charge again, as is
said, and so forth, one after another, discharging at a like distance,
till at last the rot-master should be under-rot, and the under-rot
leader, and then his follower marching up by him, while as he is
charging, giving fire on the enemy, and having discharged, standing
still also charging, till in th'end, the rot-master come to be leader
again, and so forth, still advancing per vices, till the enemy turn
back, or that they come to push of pike, and butts of muskets. Thus
having exercised the rots apart for a week or two, doubtless they will
become expert soldiers in using their arms, when they are joined in a
strong body, less or more. The pikemen would be exercised also by rots
apart, in the several postures thereof, till they were acquainted also
with their leaders, and were made expert in using their pikes aright,
till thereafter the whole body of pikes might be exercised apart, with
great ease to their officers; The musketeers being drawn in a body,
being sixteen or thirty-two men in front, being but six ranks deep,
the first rank discharging at once, casting about their muskets and
charging all alike, the second rank marches through every follower,
going by on the right hand of his leader, standing before him at the
distance they were behind, and then being firm, they give fire all
alike on their enemies, blowing, priming, casting about and charging
all alike where they stand, till per vices the whole ranks have
discharged, and so forth ut antea, successively advancing and giving-
fire, till the enemy turn back, or that they come to push of pike, and
being thus well exercised in advancing to the enemy, and winning
ground, if through necessity they be forced to retire from an enemy,
losing ground, they must also keep their faces to their enemies, the
rear being still in fire, and the last rank having given fire, they
march through the ranks till they that were last are first coming off,
and so per vices, till they have made a safe retreat, the rear which
is ever the front, coming from an enemy is in fire.

The manner to exercise a body of musketeers.

To exercise a squadron of musketeers, how strong soever they be, the
number of ranks being no deeper than six, the files being even may be
so many as your voice can extend to, ever observing that your command
be given in the front, otherwise may breede disorder, and before you
begin to command, you would enter first with a prologue, as good
orators commonly do, to reconciliate their hearers' attendance: even
so you ought with an exhortation of attendance entreat, but by way of
command, your soldiers not to be gazing in time of their exercise, but
with steadfastness to settle their minds on their exercise, that they
may the better observe and obey the words of command; and above all
things, you are to command them to keep silence, not babbling one to
another, neither in their motions, to suffer their arms to rattle one
against another, always to take heed to their leaders, that go before
them, and to follow them orderly without disturbance, keeping and
observing their due distance either of ranks or files: which may be
easily done, if they but duly follow their leaders, and have an eye on
their right and left fellow comrades, for keeping their ranks even in
a like front. Likewise they are to observe when they are commanded to
turn any where, whether it be by ranks or files, that their faces may
by turned to the hand they are commanded to, before they sturre to
march, and then to march alike, and when ever they double ranks or
files, or counter-march, they must ever observe to retire to the 
contrary hand, they were commanded to double on, if they doubled to
the right, when they fall off they retire turning to the left hand, et
contra, for avoiding of disorder or hindrance, that their arms would
make, if they retired to the same hand they were commanded to double
or march to; In their counter-marches it is also requisite in time of
exercise, that neither officer nor soldier do presume to command,
direct, or find fault with the error, but he that commands in chief,
whether he be superior or inferior officer for the time, since it is
said, when many speak few hear; Therefore he must command alone,
suffering no rival, for avoiding of disorder. Order therefore of
distance being a chief point observed in exercising is three fold, to
wit, open order of ranks or files is six foot of distance, being
betwixt ranks and files both alike, only requisite to be observed in
mustering, or while as they stand in danger of cannon, not being in
battle, where in battle order the distance to be observed betwixt
ranks or files should be three foot, where elbow to elbow of the side
comrades may join, where in the open order aforesaid, hand to hand can
but join. But in close order used most in conversion, or wheeling is
shoulder to shoulder, and foot to foot, firm keeping themselves
together, for fear to be put asunder by the force of their enemies,
and then to disorder, which is ever to be looked unto, chiefly before
an enemy. Your speech thus ended, for your general directions, you
begin again to command silence, and to take heed what is commanded to
be done, saying. Height your musketeers, dress your ranks and files,
to your open order of six foot, and take heed.
To the right hand turn,
as you were.
To the left hand turn,
as you were.
To the right hand about turn,
as you were.
To the left hand about turn,
as you were.
To the right hand double your ranks,
as you were.
To the left hand double your ranks,
as you were.
The even ranks or files double ever unto the odd, and the fourth rank
is the middle rank of six.
To the right hand double your files,
as you were.
To the left hand double your files,
as you were.
Middle-men or fourth rank to the right hand double your front,
To the left hand retire as you were.
Middle-men to the left hand double your front,
To the right hand as you were.
Nota. The sixth rank is called bringers up or rear, or under rot-
masters.
Bringers up to the right hand double your front,
To the left hand as you were.
Bringers up to the left hand double your front,
To the right hand as you were.

All that doubled, turn first about, and then they retire falling
behind those were their leaders, before in the same place or distance.
This doubling of the bringers up or of middle-men, is very requisite
in giving a general salvo of musket, and as it is to be observed in
ranks, that the best men are placed in front, rear and middle, even so
in files, every corporalship being four files of musketeers, the
likeliest are put ever in the right and left files of the four, being
also of best experience.

The doubling of ranks being done, and all remitted in good order, and
to their first distance of open order, you are to command, and
exercise soldiers in three several ways of counter-marching, requisite
in some respects, but in my opinion to be used but seldom, except it
be in necessity in such parts, as the ground will not permit
otherwise, therefore to avoid disorder, soldiers ought not to be
ignorant of any of the three sorts of counter-marching.

First having commanded the soldiers to dress their ranks and files,
and to carry their muskets handsomly keeping silence, say.
To the right hand the counter-march without noise or losing of ground.
To the left hand retire again to the former ground.

Then command again to dress ranks and files, and to right their arms
keeping silence, taking heed to what is to be commanded, and say.
To the right hand turn.
Then the flank before being now the front command,
To the right hand counter-march and lose no ground.
To the left hand as you were.

This is used ordinarily to change one wing of battle in place of the
other, then that the front may be as it was first before they
countermarched.
To the left hand turn, dress your ranks and files, and be silent.

Another sort of countermarch is the Slavonian countermarch, where you
lose ground, the front being changed also: then you command the first
rank to turn about to the right hand, then you say to the rest,
Countermarch, and through to your former distance after your leaders,
Then say, leaders as you were; and to the rest:
To the left hand countermarch as you were to your first ground.

The third sort of countermarch I esteem most of to be practised, being
rather a conversion very requisite to be well known to all soldiers in
all armies, chiefly to be used before an enemy: for as it is most
sudden; so in my opinion, it breeds least disorder and disturbance,
the soldiers once used to it, of themselves they will willingly do it
on any occasion, the body being before in open order or battle order,
say. Close the ranks and files to your closs order, without
encumbering one of another, every man following right his own leader,
keeping close to his side man, then say. To the right hand the quarter
turn half or whole, as the occasion and the ground doth permit, and
then say. Dress your arms, and follow your leaders, and open again to
your battle order.

Lastly, the body of your musketeers exercised perfectly after this
manner, for the better bringing of them in exercise and breath, that
in case any disorder may happen amongst them, they may the better
afterward be acquainted one with another, say to your open order of
six foot distances. Open both ranks and files, and set down your arms
handsomely where you stand, then command your sergeant to go an
hundred paces from the  body of your musketeers, and stick in his
halberd in the ground, then admonish your soldiers, that at the tuck
of your drum they run from their arms about the halberd, and to stay
there till the drum recall them again to their arms, which being done,
it makes the soldiers able in breath to know one another's place, in
case they should be brought at any time in disorder, to recover
themselves the better. Thus much for the training of soldiers in
changing of place, as you will have them, without giving of fire.

When you have gotten your soldiers thus experimented in their motions,
then are you to acquaint them with shot in giving of fire, to make
them fix against their enemies, which is easily done, having once
apart and singularly used their muskets, after the order of the
several postures, belonging thereto, as was commanded their inferior
officers and leaders to teach them before they were exercised.
Therefore before you come to the particular forms of giving fire, you
shall first give some general directions to be observed by all, for
avoiding the hurting of themselves, or of their comrades, as also how
they can best offend their enemies; and to this effect, you shall
admonish in love all brave musketeers, first to have their muskets
clear and handsome, and above all fix in the work, especially every
soldier would be well known with his own musket and cock, to cock
aright, then to hold the mouth or cannon of his musket ever high up,
either being on his shoulder, or in priming or guarding of his pan,
but in giving fire, never higher or lower than level with the enemies'
middle, then your musketeers being in readiness, your muskets charged,
they may be commanded to give fire in skirmish, disbandoned as their
officers do direct them, to advance or retire, as the occasion offers;
also to give fire by ranks, files, divisions, or in salvos, as the
officer pleaseth to command, to the effect they may be fixed Omni
modo, though in my opinion, one way is the best, yet there are several
ways of giving fire in advancing to an enemy, as retiring from an
enemy, or in standing firm before an enemy, either by ranks, or by
files made to ranks.

Advancing to an enemy not being disbandoned, but in one body they give
fire by ranks to ranks, having made ready alike, they advance ten
paces before the body, being led up by an officer that stands in even
front with them, the cannon or mouth of their muskets of both ranks
being past his body. The second rank being close to the back of the
foremost, both gives fire alike, priming and casting about their
muskets they charge again where they stand, till the other two ranks
advance before them, and give fire after the same manner, till the
whole Troop hath discharged, and so to begin again as before, after
the order of the through-countermarch; ever advancing to an enemy,
never turning back without death, or victory. And this is the form
that I esteem to be the best: as for the rest, they are not to be much
used; but this order can be used winning ground, advancing or losing
ground in a retreat. When you would command the body of your
musketeers to give fire in a salvo, as is ordinary in battle, before
an enemy join, or against horsemen; then you command the bringers up
or rear to double the front to the right hand, and to make ready,
having the match cocked and their pans well guarded, having closed the
three ranks, though not the files, the officers standing in equal
front with the foremost rank, betwixt two divisions, he commands  to
give fire, one salvo, two or three, and having charged again, and
shouldered their arms, they retire to the left hand again, every man
falling behind his own leader.

Being on retiring from the enemy, the whole body having made ready, as
they march off in order, a qualified officer being in the rear, and 
qualified officers in the van to order them that fall up, the last two
ranks in the rear turn faces about, and the whole body with them, and
the two ranks having given fire, they march through the body to the
van, and order themselves as they were before, and so successively the
whole body gives fire ever by two ranks, and falls off till such time
as they have made their retreat sure. Thus much of fire-giving by
ranks on two or three, as you please, at once and no more.

Now a little for the exercising of the squadron of pikes in general;
for the general motion certain directions are to be observed
concerning pikes, that the soldiers keep their pikes clean and clear,
and never to be suffered to cut off the lengths of their pikes, as
often is seen upon marches, being very uncomely to see a squadron of
pikes not of one length; likewise in all motions with the pike, the
hand and foot ought to go alike, and the soldier would be expert in
giving the right pousse with the pike backwards and forwards. Your
squadron of pikes as they ought to march with the drum; so they ought
to obey the drum beating a troop, a charge, a call, a retreat. As also
to traile their pikes, to make reverence with the pike being
shouldred: and your squadron of pikes being but six deep in rank, your
files may be so many, as can well hear your voice in command,
providing there be no odd file; and thus well ordered at their open
order of six foot distance, command to mount their pikes, then calling
for a drum beside you, let him beat a march, then they are to shoulder
their pikes, flat or slant carried, and then to march a little, let
your drum again beat a troop, then they mount their pikes and troop
away fast or slow, as your pass leads them stopping, or advancing as
you do, then let your drum beat a charge, then they charge their pikes
and advance fast or slow, as you lead them, and retire also backwards,
their pikes charged as you will have them, then troop again, and they
mount their pikes, march and shoulder; and halting, let the drum beat
again, and they order their pikes on the ground as first, being at
their distance, and trooping again they mount their pikes, so that you
can command them to battle order or closs order, for wheeling or
counter-marching at your own pleasure.

In repairing to their colours, or coming from watch, they should ever
walk with their pikes mounted, as also they may use this posture on
sentry; and your pikes mounted and at your open order, you can use all
doublings that your musketeers used, as also to present, to front,
rear, right or left hand, the curiosity of the turns to the right or
left hand in van or rear, the pike being shouldered, you can also
teach them, as you will, though not much to be used in exercise: and
the pikes thus well exercised, having seen frequent danger, can do
good service against horsemen and against foot to foot, either in
battle entering a town or breach, or retiring, or advancing to choke
an enemy, on walls within  towns or forts they are very commodious for
service, providing they resolve to fight well and to abide by their
officers, and, in my opinion, being well led they may beat musketeers
accidently off the field, and being well lined with shot they are a
safeguard against horsemen, having the least advantage of ground. Thus
much in brief for the use of the pike, the most honourable of all
weapons, and my choice in day of battle, and leaping a storm or
entering a breach with a light breast-plate and a good head-piece,
being seconded with good fellows, I would choose a good half-pike to
enter with.



Certain Observations Worthy the Younger Officer his Consideration
Being short and practical for his Highness special use.

I.

This life is a comedy or a play, wherein every one doth his part, we
should press to pass it over with moderate affections, that the end be
not cruel or doleful, as in tragedies, but full of mirth like a
comedy.

II.

Unto the victor the life is sweet and happy, but to those that are
overcome, nothing is more bitter, then to put their hopes in their
enemies' mercy.

III.

As unto champions of old lots gave fellows, and not election, with
whom they should fight: so every one of us hath destinies in our
times, wherewith to strive.

IIII.

As he who goeth a journey doth reckon the miles: so he that hath
entered the way of this life, shall not determine of his years. For as
from the spring flow the rivers, from the root the branch: so from the
first education cometh the rest of man's life. And if thou wouldst
live truly, thou must press to profit thy country, to defend the
commonwealth, and to live well without liberty: thou must prefer death
before ignominious shame,  or slavery. For as this life is rosy, so it
hath flowers mixed with thorns, the one to be plucked up, the other to
be eschewed so far as we may.

V.

It is a part of victory to trouble the enemy before we fight, and as
it is laudable to overcome an enemy, it is no less praiseworthy to
have pity on the miserable. For as courage doth merit infinite glory,
so the love of all, and the good will of all merits mercy and
meekeness.

VI.

The feeble and weak minded man is ever prideful in prosperity: for he
thinks his virtues are such, as can maintain the fortunes which he
hath gotten, and thinks still he is able to attain and acquire more
and more: but when the tempest of adversity doth arise, then is he so
far afraid, that he becomes void of all hopes; and this oftentimes is
the cause of the sudden change of his fortunes.

VII.

Nothing doth diminish more the publishing of praise, then when one
continually casteth up his own success in actions of war, and oft-
times striving to get abundance of honour; men show their riches, of
swelling pride; for disdaining his former friends, he misknowes his
acquaintance, pressing to go before, he is greevous or displeasing to
all his familiars. Our care then should be, to want this arrogancy,
ostentation or pride, and pray for humility, being more acceptable
unto God then detestable pride, which is an unprofitable evil, a
secret poison, a hidden pest, the ingenier of deceipt, the mother of
hypocrisy, the parent of envy, the beginner of vice, the moth of
holiness, the blinder of hearts, breeding sickness out of remedies,
and begetting langour out of medicine.

VIII.

There is ever some fatality incident unto those that desire vain-glory
or ostentation: and those that are proud rejecting the prayers of the
humble with disdain, they often incur the indignation of God, and fall
oft into calamity, except they take heed unto themselves.
IX.

These spirits are bentest on ambition that are of great and sharp
wits, and of high minds, being ready to think on great matters, and to
undertake them: but heroic spirits on the contrary, considering the
worthy acts of others, are stirred up unto virtue, while as others
with glory of succession becoming more insolent and negligent, make
tragical ends, being oppressed with small things, they die unworthily.

X.

The duty of a good man, is to reserve himself for the well and use of
his country and friends, being wary lest he should be lost rashly (as
my dear and only brother was) who did not neglect his duty, neither in
word nor deed, but to his death served God in his calling, though his
death was sudden, being the condition of mortal men, that are still
subject unto such changes, that oft-times in their greatest prosperity
comes adversity, and from their adversity their prosperity again, God
hiding the cause of both from us. It were better then to prevent a
wound, then out of time to seek remedy: for in the midst of evil is
not the time to be merry, and those hurts are most, which we receive
unlooked for. Therefore it were much better to prevent, then to
suffer, and it were much better to enter in danger being guarded, then
out of time to grow pale. Vain then are the counsels of mortal men,
when we see no human happiness to be permanent, since the roots are
taken up before they come to maturity, except they be confirmed by the
divine providence; And chiefly in wars, as being most uncertain, as we
see by the untimely death spoken of; but no man can forbid God's
decree. Nevertheless men that through age, and long experience have
obtained wisdom, before they enter in a business, they should look
unto the event, and unto that, which by all expectation may happen:
for it is ever the greatest wisdom to use the present time best; we
ought then on all occasions we are employed on, to strengthen our
minds with virtue, that we may be safe overcoming all encumbrances,
that once we have condemned in the judgment seat of wisdom, which
always is accompanied with praise and glory, when we not only equal
ourselves with those that excelled in virtue, but also press to go
before them.

XI.

Wisdom goeth before all other things in esteem, as the most precious
jewel we can possess, being spread she is gathered, given away she
returneth, being published groweth greater; by her the noble treasure
of conscience is spread unto the secrets of the mind, the fruit of
inward joy by her is attained unto: this is the sun wherewith the
light of the mind doth show itself and appear in darkness, being the
eye of the heart, the delightful paradise of the soul, the heaven upon
earth immortall, changing man into God, through knowledge, deifying
him, this fellow is invincible against all strokes, he stirs not a
foot for poverty, grief, ignominy, pain, he is afraid of nothing, and
is ever full of joy, merry, pleasant and untouched, living like a god.
Who desireth then to be wise and partake of this goodness that is so
excellent, they must not use themselves to vanity, but they must think
on that which is most profitable for them, being not forbidden to use
bodily exercise moderatly: they may become wise, first by thinking
what is past, and in whose time of their predecessours things were
best governed. Secondly, he must diligently observe the good to come,
what can be profitable for him and what not, that he may eschew the
evil to come, and embrace the good. Thirdly, he should observe the
good customs and laws passed, being provident, mindful, understanding, 
reasonable, diligent, tractable, expert and cunning; and he must
consider four good things; What is his aim; The way and manner he aims
at; The person aiming; And those he governs.

XII.

A soldier without letters is like a ship without a Rudder, or like a
bird without feathers; but having letters, he finds wherewith he can
be made wiser, finding out by letters, courage, and many other great
helps to govern and direct those aright, whom he commands: neither is
that fortune in the world to be had, where out of letters his
knowledge may not be bettered, if he be but painfull, for being
lettered he can strictly keep under the cruel, and defend laws without
terror, temperating them to his mind, the meek also he can civilly
admonish, and the deceitful he can wisely go about, and the simple he
can handle with lenity, showing his prudency in all his actions,
foreseing all dangers which may happen. Therefore we see, that science
to a man of war is a brave mistress, teaching him to do all things as
they did in old times.

XIII.

It is a hard matter when the diligent, and industrious soldier is
disappointed of his hire, and that he is rewarded with injury who did
merit better. This of all evils is most insufferable, that he, who
deserveth a reward, should be frustrate of his hopes: for reward is
due unto valiant captains and soldiers that were instruments in chief
of victory, glory and honour: as Sir James Ramsey and Sir John
Hamilton were, in forcing the passage to the castle of Wuerzburg, who
nevertheless were frustrate of reward, and therefore I cannot but
allow of the resolution of Sir John Hamilton being no soldier of
fortune, that took his pass of the Sweden for being frustrate of the
reward of his virtue, seeing those disdained that did merit best.
Where we see that a gentle heart, being crossed contrary to reason,
doth presently resent his wrongs, pointing out to the world, that he
is not the man that can suffer or swallow a seen injury done to him
and his nation.

XIIII.

It is better to fear evil, preparing ourselves for danger, than
through too much security, and contempt of the enemy to suffer
ourselves to be overcome; for it is dangerous to have to do with a
desperate body, seeing necessity maketh those that are fearful to
become stout, and those who fear no dangers are easily lost, as
witnesseth the death of the Invincible King of Sweden: and those
dangers ought to be eschewed, from whence ariseth greatest evil; and
experience hath taught us, that nothing is more dangerous in wars,
then to fight great battles on unequall terms, as witnesseth the
doleful battle fought at Noerdlingen in August 1634. After which loss
those, that should have fought for their country, their wives and
children, did prove feeble cowards (viz.) the German Princes, Saxony,
Brandeburg, Lueneburg, with the rest of the gentry, giving occasion to
others, that came to help them, for to leave them. It is no wonder
then, they be plagued themselves wishing help another time, when
justly they cannot have it, having rewarded their helpers so ill as
they have done, and through their covetousness and niggardly sparing
been the cause and instruments of their own overthrowes, and of the
loss of the cause, being I fear the fore-runners of their successors'
punishment, which I wish may not happen.

XV.

Before the fall of Kingdoms arise dissensions, that overthrow the
confederates more than their enemies, as it happened here in our late
wars of Germany, after the death of his Majesty of Sweden, the Dutch
princes, especially Saxony, slighting his Excellency the Rex-
chancellour of Sweden and his Directorium as supreme, calling him
disdainfully a pedant, or a penman. So that we see that dissension, or
discord amongst the superiors was the first cause of the sudden loss
of Noerdlingen. Next we see that the country was destroyed, not only
for their sins, but also for not punishing of sin. For after his
Majesty's death, what punishment was to be seen in our army? none at
all: when our own horsemen plundered their friends, not being
punished, they began to intercept letters, and to rob the common post,
and to hinder the country's correspondency, and common traffic: which
being overseen, and winked at by our generals, they begun then to
plunder the Chancellors' own wagons, abusing his servants, and taking
his baggage: thereafter the strongest amongst themselves set the
weakest party to foot, taking away their horses, till at last the
whole army refused to obey the Director and his Concilium formatum,
lying idle for three months in Donauwoerth leaguer, suffering the
enemy to over-run the country, and all because that the officers
alleged after his Majesty's death, that the scriveners who followed
the Chancellor, were in better esteem, than the cavaliers, that had
done notable good service unto his Majesty: so that, through this
jealousy, the army came in disorder, being the first change, and the
rest, piece and piece did follow, till at last the whole army was
lost, through the number of wrongs that went before, in the end custom
and use of wrongs infected the nature itself, and the lack, or want of
punishment, and the liberty and freedom, which was given to offend, at
last the ruin of families, that were famous did follow, for not
punishing of sin. We see then, when a potent king, and heroic, as
Gustavus was in the time he did live, all things florished in a good
order, but he once gone, the commonwealth was punished for their
former sins committed in time of their plenty, and peace; when they
had their heaven upon earth, as other nations have now, who ought to
look unto themselves in time, lest that the Lord raise not up another
heroic to make them to be punished, as other nations have been, to the
eversion of great cities, as Magdeburg, and divers others: for when
the public burdens do grow, then governements do change, as was seen
here; for laws being cast away, and discipline put in fetters; then
suddenly did follow change, and great ruin, after the King's death of
worthy memory.

XVI.

Nothing loses more, as we see, the common cause, than the want of
authority in one person, as was formerly said of the Saxons' jealousy
over the Rex-Chancellor's governement. Also the same fault was seen in
the army under commanders: as at Noerdlingen, betwixt supreme
officers, as also betwixt their inferiors: who for want of one supreme
commander, as Gustavus was, they could not agree among themselves.
Likewise the dissension and jealousy betwixt Duke Barnard, and the
Rhinegrave helps nothing to the furtherance of the good cause, being
both brave commanders: though seldom seen command in one place, and it
is to be pitied, how the Rhinegrave after the loss of Noerdlingen, not
being bastant against the enemy, was forced to swim the Rhine on
horse-back, and died soon thereafter; who was a renowned, valourous
cavalier, as ever I was acquainted with of the Dutch nation, serving
in those wars; all these mischiefs were caused through the want of one
Supreme leader to conduct them, as the enemy had. Which should teach
all men to submit themselves to authority, lest by doing otherwise
they procure their own ruin.

XVII.

To repent a thing, when it is done, is most foolish, which might have
been prevented with counsel: for none that do repent counsel can be
esteemed wise. Therefore a counsellor should be very faithful, never
counselling his friend for his own aim, lest he that is counselled
perceive not his drift, and then be deceived. But counsel is taken
from necessity, and followed. And a good commander deserves praise as
well for his wisdom, as for his valour: But evil counsel is a plague
or judgement from the Lord; yet those counsels are ever safest, that
come from him that will be partaker both of the danger, and of the
counsel. Therefore it is not good rashly to use the counsel of a
traitor, nor of an enemy: but we should rather examine, and shift
counsels, and not trust easily, and be deceived. Counsel then we see
is the chief ground to govern matters well, being secret, true and
free, without flattery, or respect of persons, just and holy, casting
aside all private gains, and utility, foresing the public weal; and if
thou wouldst be truly counselled, thou must take heed to those
caveats: first that the speech be wholesome, and unreproveable; his
counsel profitable, his life honest, his sentence pleasant, not
wavering like a child, or unconstant, neither ought you ask many what
you would do, but show it to a few and trusty friends, which are rare
to be found: and when thy near friends cannot resolve thee, flee to
those for their counsels, whose daily experience is approved for their
wisdom in their own affairs, and then you shall do well.

XVIII.

Military discipline is lost, when the cruelty and avarice of officers
is extended in detaining of soldiers' means; and supreme officers
neglecting to content cavaliers, make the whole army turn rebellious,
as at Donauwoerth, the Concilium formatum and their treasurer, having
not given the army one  month's means complete of the whole
contribution they had collected the year after his Majesty's death,
but paid themselves, and their secretaries duly, which raised great
envy against them, the army having mutinied for want of pay: which
made them afterward want both the contribution and the country,
through misgovernement of their Consilium.

XIX.

It is in vain for a cavalier to fear anything but God, and the offence
of his Supreme officer; for being honest, modesty hindering his flight
makes him victorious in midst of danger, and of his enemies: as
chanced me and my collegues at Ruegenwalde in Pomerania, having
escaped danger by sea, were come to land in danger of our enemies, but
the Lord and the duty we ought our master, made us abide the danger of
our enemies, which the Lord turned to our best, giving us victory and
freedom. Shall I then distrust this God, having had this time, and
divers times before, great experience of his mercies? God forbid. No,
I will still trust in him, do to me what he will; for I know his
mercies go beyond all his works, and they endure for ever.

XX.

A man unjustly hurt, as many were, that served the Sweden, once
escaped, their commanders are now their greatest enemies; for the
memory of injuries received, is ever more recent in the actor, than in
the patient: and is also more difficult to be reconciled: as oft times
experience doth prove. Therefore I would advise my friend not to
suffer injury if he can, & if injury be done him, not to pass it over
for flattery, lest in accepting of a slight satisfaction, he should
injure himself more, than the other did. But by the contrary, I would
advise him timely to repair himself, that he may preserve the former
dignity. Likewise the greater our injuries received are, & the greater
they commove us, the more ought our wit to moderate our revenge;
seeing to moderate ourselves, and to overcome our desires, is the
greatest praise we can have, being revenged. Yet injuries do ever
stick nearer unto us, then the remembrance of benefits received: for
in remembering of benefits, we ascribe the good to our own merits,
flattering ourselves; but on the contrary, remembering our injuries
received, we call them to mind a great deal more cruelly, than they
were done without moderation. I must then advise my friend, that he
not only prevent the deed of his enemy, but also his counsels, lest
they bring detriment upon him: for he ought to be alike with the offer
of an injury being a cavalier, and with the intention, as if the deed
had followed. The offering then of a stroke may be repaired with a
sword, the giving of a lie is repaired with a blow, words not tending
to disgrace are repaired with words again, the loss of goods is
restored by restitution, with circumstances convenient, and to quarrel
for a light occasion is want of understanding, especially with thy
betters in esteem. For there should be had respect of persons, of
times, and of circumstances observed, before a man should quarrel; and
having once quarrelled, I would advise my friend not to be put back
without honourable satisfaction, or at least great hazard, not coming
unto the fields for the first bout, or blood, and then to return with
disgrace unthought of by thyself, though much by others, as I have
known cavaliers do.

XXI.

In battle fighting with the enemy, at the first be very slow against a
fierce enemy, that the enemy being weary your strength fresh and a
little succours joined unto you, the enemy is soon beaten, and having
once begun war, follow it with sword, fire, spoil, slaughter, till the
streets be full; a rover should never be a ruer, so long as his hands
are unto it, and you should never give time to the enemy to join
forces, but pursue them ever as they come, never neglecting an enemy,
though he be weak, but still keep a good reserve by yourself, and
pursue by parties supplying your own, as they need, and timely, and
without doubt you shall gain honour and credit.

XXII.

Trust never thyself rashly to a reconciled enemy, without pledges
first had, for keeping good peace; and being desirous to possess
anything belonging to thy enemy, thou hast need to use rather
diligence, then delay, that thou mayest catch them unawares, as
Gustavus did Frankfurt on the Oder. And nothing is more to be
suspected, than a near enemy, which Landsberg did find after the
taking of Frankfurt, and nothing is more cruel than a barbarous enemy,
as was found by our regiment at Newbrandenburg, and thereafter by our
comrades at Magdeburg.

XXIII

Wars may be taken on by the counsel of sluggards, but they must be
sustained with the labour, and danger of the most valiant, as was well
seen after Gustavus the Invincible's death: It was not the Prince's
confederates, or their Consilium, was able to do the turn, whose
reward to cavaliers was but paper. As their reward was naught, so
their Consilium turned to nothing, and which was worse, to contempt,
except the director alone, who as yet hath kept life in the cause,
though without their means or assistance: and which is more honourable
for him, he maintains the war against them, who unworthily have broken
their oaths and fidelity, having turned their arms against those who
formerly had relieved them, to their perpetual disgrace, shame and
ignominy, having scorned men, that had merited well in offering to
reward them with paper, their punishment is that for their infamy,
their names shall rot in oblivion. Nam ubi orta est culpa, ibi poena
consistit.

XXIIII.

All things here being but human, are unstable and unconstant, so that
there is nothing sure, except true piety; and we see our lives bring
manythings forth contrary to our expectation, so that the condition of
our human life containes the first, and the last day. For it is much
to be looked unto,  with what luck we did begin, and with what we
ended. We judge him then happy, who did receive the light happily, and
happened to restore it again pleasantly, which that we may do, I
humbly crave of God Almighty.



A short observation of Intelligence, necessary for a commander.

Conshaft or intelligence in an army is so necessary, that without it
no direction can be given with assurance, without it we cannot discern
betwixt our friends and our enemies, who are with us, or against us,
which is the first point a commander hath to know; coming in an
enemies' country: Next he ought to know the strength of his enemy's
army, foot and horse, that he may the better dispose of his own: he
ought also to know how his enemy is quartered in garrison, leaguer,
field or dorp, and what watch they keep in all those parts: And how
far their horsemen do lie from their foot, and how guarded. To have
certainty of all this he must have some secret friend with the enemy,
for giving him secret intelligence, and that he should not trust too
much in one, he must have a subtle boor, now and then frequenting
without suspicion amongst them, as ordinarily his Majesty of worthy
memory had: likewise it were needful that they debauched some
secretary on their side, for getting the lists of their strengths,
officers and soldiers, as also for their qualities, that he might the
better dispose himself against them, in directing private parties on
the ways they travail to get prisoners, and failing thereof to fall on
their watch or within their quarters.

He ought also on all marches to have a known boor with him, to
acquaint him with all passes or straits, on which the enemy can repair
to him, or from him, conferring his land map with the boor's
intelligence, which betime would enable him in knowing all the passes.

Likewise he ought to have intelligence out of the enemies' leaguer,
how they were provided of victuals, ammunition or forage, and of their
healths, if there were any infections amongst them, or what sport or
recreation they used without their quarters, and what streets they go
on, and how they are conveyed, striving still to get prisoners, for
the better intelligence how their ammunition is kept, and with what
guards, that if it were possible, accidental fire might be set to it,
and for getting this good of intelligence, the chief officers would be
liberal to those whom they put in trust, seeing without it little good
service can be effected, and the getting of it is the safety of many
cavaliers and their credits.

Therefore whether he be defender or pursuer, intelligence gives him a
kind of assurance in all his actions, and the loss, or neglect of it
hath robbed many a brave commander of their fame and credit, being
surprised through oversight, as Gustavus Horne was at Bamberg: It was
also the loss of Hanau, and Philippsburg; Intelligence then being of
such moment, it  should make generals, and all commanders under them,
according to their qualities and charge, to be open handed; otherwise
it is impossible to subsist long not being surprised.



Of Recognoscing.

Having intelligence of our enemy's strength, how he lies, whether in
quarter, garrison, field, or leaguer, then having an exploit to go on,
we must recognosce on horse or foot, according to the exploit we have
before us. As if we were to block up a town with a part of an army, we
must first being accompanied with a few horsemen recognosce the
bounds, riding the circuit short or long from it, fore-seeing how to
divide our number on the passes & avenues from or towards the town, to
stop out-fallings, or in comings, in ordering such works and skonces
to be made on the passages as may put us in safety, as well against
out-fallings, as against their pretended reliefs to come: and our
watches one from another, must keep due correspondence by their
sentries, that none can pass betwixt them without advertising one
another's guard.

Next being to beleaguer a town near hand, we ought to recognosce also
nearer, having first placed our army foot and horse battle without
reach of their cannon, though in their view: having first directed our
parties of horse to batter the streets without us, then the commander
is to ride the circuit of the town within shot, as near as he can,
having another riding at a distance behind him, and having a boor
beside him, resolving him of all questions concerning their ports,
their graffs, their bulwarks, where weakest, and where the graff is
shallowest; which being known, he disposeth the army on several posts,
where again the commanders are to recognosce nearer the walls, where
they can best lodge their greatest body in most safety, where to place
their guard before them, and where their sentries; as also where to
place their batteries, and where to begin their approaches: which
being done, they are thought the best fellows, that show most
diligence, and least loss to come to the walls; the same circumstances
are to be observed by any commander, who leads a party before a
strength or castle to block it, or beleaguer it, having cannon,
petards, and fireworks, with sufficient men and furniture belonging to
the artillery, that can discharge their duties, as they are directed
by the commander of the party, who must see to all things himself,
that it be well done, as in special to the placing of his batteries,
and in ordering all things to be brought to the batteries that are
needful, by the soldiers commanded out to attend the works, beside the
guard of the cannon, and of the workmen, he must also be very vigilant
in visiting the approaches, batteries, and guards, admonishing them to
be careful against out-falls on the trenches, batteries, or guards,
giving orders to the captain of the watches to receive the enemy
falling out with a strong body of pikes and muskets close together to
beat them back, being received with pikes charged, bravely flanked and
lined with shot, which being done, to advance their works again night
and day, till the enemy be forced to accord.

In the night also a sufficient sergeant being seconded by another
stout fellow, should creep to the graff, with two half-pikes, for to
wade through, to know the shallowest parts, being helped thereto by
some known boor, who might give certainty of the enemies' strength
within, and of their defects they have of victuals, ammunition, fire
or water. As also to know their private sorting-ports, to watch their
out-comings; he ought also to learn what draw-bridges are within, and
what portcullis, and what store of victuals, or ammunition is to be
had within, in case the strength be pregnable, that he may the better
make his accord. Also he ought to learn what artillery or arms are
within, and what cadoucks, or what number of horses pertaining to the
enemy, and what other riches they have, and where kept; or if
otherwise the town be not taken by accord, or strength of hand, we
must strive to force it to yield by hunger, or by lack of fire or
water, or otherwise by throwing artificial fire amongst them with
cannon, or with other fiery engines, firing their houses, or spoiling
their watches on their posts or guards; as also we must deal by fraud
to convey private letters unto them, for debauching the inhabitants,
to resist the garrison in making either port or post good, while as
the pursuer intends to fall on, on storm or breach.

Likewise the pursuer had need to dispose well of his own watches
without, that he be not surprised, his hoof-watch, particular watches,
reserves, or by-watches, are to be still in readiness to attend the
enemies' out-falling, lest he may cut off his guards, or spoil his
cannon by nailing of them, or by burning their carriages, or
ammunition, being disgraceful in the highest manner, as oft-times hath
happened to unprovident and sluggish commanders, who have unwisely
despised their enemies.

An enemy being in the field, either with a strong party or army, a
sufficient commander must be careful in recognoscing the field about
him, for taking his advantage of the ground, in advancing to an enemy,
as also in spying his advantage in case he be put to a retreat, that
he may the better retire in order, not being put to rout, as our army
was at Noerdlingen, which never happened unto them before during the
time I served the Sweden. As also being in the field he ought to
observe where most conveniently he can plant his ordnance, as General
Tilly did at Leipzig, and as the Imperialists did on the Hill at
Nuremberg; as also at Noerdlingen. For ordnance being planted with
advantage is oft-times the winning of the field, and the loss of
artillery is ever reputed and holden for a defeat, although both foot
and horse be preserved. There is also advantage of ground very
requisite to be taken by foot against foot, as the advantage of
hights, passages, woods, hedges, ditches, as also the advantage of sun
and wind with you, and against your enemy; which his Majesty of worthy
memory did strive to get at Leipzig against the Imperialists.

Likewise it is a great advantage of ground, when one of both the
armies is brought to that inconvenience, that they cannot come to
fight, but the one army may be forced to come up but by divisions,
while as the other by advantage of the ground may receive them with
full battles of horse and foot, the one to second the other; and this
advantage Gustavus Horne did get of the Imperialists, while as he
retired before them unto Wuerttemberg-land in March 1633, the enemy
not being able to pursue our army but with great disadvantage, which
freed us of them for that time, he being stronger than we, and
afterward the Rhinegrave's forces come from Alsace being joined with
us, we made the Imperialists again retire over the Danube unto
Schwabenland at the pass of Munderkingen, where we came within cannon-
shot; yet they getting the pass, retired in safety; as they did
another time from us, out of Schwabenland unto Bavaria, having got the
pass before us at Kempten, and afterward over the Iller in
Schwabenland, having (I say) got the pass before us, they were safe,
and we frustrate. So that the advantage of ground is of great
importance in wars, as I have often known by experience, especially
before the Hill at Nuremberg.

Likewise a wise commander being defender must observe all
circumstances, as he did in pursuing for his own safety; he must also
being defender beset well all passes, and frontier garrisons,
whereupon the enemy must pass to come unto him, having timely
recognosced the same, that it may either be beset by him, or otherwise
being found more advantagious for the enemy, it would then be timely
demolished.

As also your enemies' army, or strong party being drawn up in the
field, you are to recognosce both his strength and order, by the sight
of your eye, before you intend to pursue him, where you are to
consider, how he can advance to you, or you to him without disorder,
but do you never pursue, except with advantage; though you shall be
deemed by others to be remiss, but rather suffer him to be gone, than
to take the disadvantage of pursuit, since time will alter anything,
and he that preserves an army will doubtless find a convenient time to
fight. And it had been good for the Evangelists in Dutchland, that
this point had been more wisely looked unto at Noerdlingen than it
was, for they might have saved their army and country both, had they
not presumed with disadvantage in their own strength and courage,
where GOD the disposer of hearts made their pride suffer a great fall.



A short Observation to be observed in garrison.

Entering the place before all things you are to visit the posts, and
being duly recognosced, the round or circuit should be measured, and
then the posts to be dealt proportionably, according to the several
strengths, that no man have just cause to complain.

The posts then orderly and well beset, there should be orders given
for by-watch, or reserve, where to stand in readiness, whether on the
marketplace, or some other convenient part, having sufficient officers
ever to command them, who must be kept to strictness of duty, lest
they should be to seek when honour were to be maintained, while as on
alarm they were to repair to post, street, or wall, to resist the
enemy, and to succourse the weakness of any accident might befall by
pursuit or fire, or to resist enemies  within or without, being as
well on continual guard against the inhabitants, in case of uproars,
or treachery, as against their outward enemies: since no enemy is so
dangerous, as the inward enemy being least suspected.

Likewise the governor or commandant ought to observe and keep a due
proportion in all commandments given either for works, service,
watches, or parties, that no man might justly complain, that there is
more duty laid on him than on his neighbour, but according to
proportion of strength.

The keys of the ports, and of all sorting doors and prisons, are to be
brought in and out by the captain of the main watch to the governor,
and the captain of the watch is to appoint guards, to stand at the
drawbridges, portcullis; and sorting ports, and he is obliged to bring
all intelligence himself unto the governor, and never to open a door
night or day without a sufficient guard by him with the limits passed,
for fear he might be surprised, and the whole garrison in danger.

Also the governor is to give orders at night, whether every man must
resort with their arms in case of alarm, and the town being divided,
both burghers and soldiers should know their posts they are to repair
to, from the alarm place.

And to supply the defects of the fortifications, the town should be
divided into equal deals, to work their day about, with all materials
needful for repairing the defects, that there be nothing to mend when
they ought to fight; and to that effect, officers should be appointed
by the governor to over-see the works, that things may be the better
done, and the governor must often visit all himself, taking reckoning
what is done every day, till all be put in good order. The governor
ought to have a register of all inquartering, that he may the better
be made acquainted by the burghers of every man's behaviour for
keeping good order. He ought also to have account of all victuals in
their store-houses, both of corn and all other furniture, and of all
cadoucks within the garrison; and the out-setting of all safeguards
belongs unto him as his due. He ought to suffer no man to make
commodity without his knowledge, but all to put in to him, that he may
the better maintain his state, and entertain strangers, seeing he
ought to be a good fellow, and a common receipt for comers and goers,
otherwise he will fail to be thought of; and he must give orders to
the captain of the watch, that no man come or go without his
knowledge, under pain of punishment, and the captain of the watch
should direct those that enter the city, having seen their passes,
with a convoy and an officer by night or by day, unto the governor to
be inquired of at his pleasure.

The governor as he ought to give out the word, so he ought to see all
parades at the ordinary time they go to watch, where coming off again,
they ought to repair to the parade-place, and draw up orderly, before
they lodge their colours, and the governor is obliged to visit the
posts, and to go the round himself, and to make the rest go the rounds
orderly after him.

Likewise it is his due to command out all parties, being first drawn
up on the parade-place, seeing them to be provided of ammunition, and
of all necessaries, before their parting, giving strict orders that at
their returns all booty be brought orderly before him, and nothing to
be put out of the way or aside, on the pain of punishing the officer
that commanded the party, and the goods being known, they are to be
confiscated to the governor, seeing all booty ought to be distributed
at his discretion: and in dividing the quarters, the governor ought to
have allowed him some free houses, to contribute to his kitchen, as
also some houses kept free to lodge strangers, which ought to
acknowledge the governor so long as they have no other burden, and if
the garrison be such a place as yields other commodities by traffic,
by water or land, the governor, besides the ordinary custom or toll,
ought to be acknowledged by those who transport goods or cattle, by or
through his garrison, if they come under the compass of his watch. As
also he may take of adjacent lands belonging to the enemy, as high a
contribution as he can rack them to, providing he prove not dishonest
to his master in taking moneys, for being friend to his masters
enemies.



For making of accord, an Observation.

HIS Majesty of worthy memory, I being with him at Demmin, Brandenburg,
Landsberg, Werben, Erfurt, Mainz, Augsburg, Rain and Munich in
Bavaria, did never trust the making of the treaty to any other than
himself: for how soon either trumpeter or drummer were conveyed
(blind-folded by the officer of the watch) unto him, then being
discovered, having delivered their message and receiving an answer,
the same or another being directed back, then pledges were delivered
to be kept on both sides, till such time as the accord were
condescended to or left off, in case of variance; being continued to a
second resolution, and then the pledges were to be retired Hinc inde.
Those pledges at such times ought to be modest, sober and discreet in
their discourses, lest some things might slip them, tending to
prejudice of either parties: and if the pledges be wise, they may save
some commodities for a friend. When the defender makes a slight
accord, the heads whereof are set down in writing, and afterward
advised, but once granted cannot be recalled; the guard once changed,
a commander doth go to possess withal, according to the accord, where
incontinent the pursuer makes preparation for the enemies' out-coming,
that there be no disorder committed in breaking the accord by either
of the parties; for it is a gross error for a Christian to violate
their word once given: but they do strive before ending, for
honourable conditions on both sides, the particulars accorded on are
not necessary to be inserted here, since they do vary according to the
occasions; where sometimes the defender makes conditions for the city,
their liberties, traffic and religion, as the place is of importance;
and if the defender look for succours seeing his advantage, he shifts
in making the accord, prolonging time till in the end, as sometimes,
the Treaty dissolves; as was done at Stralsund 1628, against the
Imperialists. And the party beleaguerer finding himself weak without,
he continues their outmarching till his weakness be supplied; as his
Majesty of worthy memory did before Landsberg, where the enemy was to
march out three thousand stronger then we were without, which delayed
his out-coming, till supply was come to us from Frankfurt.

When treaties are ended, the conqueror of the place, after making his
accord, having made his best advantage of all provisions found in such
parts, as of cannon, arms, clothes, ammunition, libraries, monuments,
being all transported, and put in assurance, then the town being in
the conqueror's power, he may beset it with a garrison, or demolish it
by razing of the walls, and it had been good the Swedens had done so
in Bavaria with Donauwoerth, Rain, Augsburg, Eichstadt, Landshut and
Munich; if they had been rased at first, we had not been troubled by
taking them in twice thereafter, and it had been better to have
plundred them first, then to have compounded with them for moneys,
having after the losing of Noerdlingen battle lost our moneys, the
pledges, the country and city, which had been better to have razed
them to the ground (as trophies of our victories) at our being there,
than to have taken pledges for money, and lose all again.

It is also to be observed in making of all accords, that such
prisoners as are within the place, may be let free, that do belong to
the beleaguerer, and such soldiers as were run away from the pursuer,
may be restored again to be punished or pardoned, as pleaseth their
officers. But no man belonging to the enemy may be detained contrary
to their wills.

As also no cannon taken of the pursuer before, can be taken out of the
strength, notwithstanding that cannon be allowed unto him, by his
accord, he must transport none that belonged formerly to another.

Likewise no more horses can be allowed to be transported by officers,
than are mentioned in their accord, and that proportionally according
to their degrees they serve in, and no more: and if it be found, that
the defender fraudulently beyond his accord, hath either stolen away,
destroyed, or hid any goods, arms, cannon or ammunition, being known
or revealed, ipso facto the pursuer or conqueror is not obliged to
keep their paction, but they may use them as the Swedens did Colonel
Gramme, after his marching out of Wismar, having broken treacherously
his accord.



Of the taking of Prisoners an observation.

His Majesty having taken in Frankfurt on the Oder, I did grant
quarters to two young cavaliers, who had begged my protection, to save
them from the fury, and having once protected them, though with
difficulty, I had a care no man should wrong them: as all cavaliers
ought to do in extremity to those that stand in need of mercy, not
plundering men to their skins, as some unworthy do; But on the
contrary having once granted quarter, men ought to be careful, not
only in guarding their lives from others, but also they ought to
foresee for entertainment civilly, at least for their money, being
cavaliers of charge, which may be presupposed able to entertain
themselves, or if otherwise they cannot do it, our charity and
compassion should move us to provide bread for them, who cannot
provide for themselves, otherwise our over-sight in suffering them to
starve for want of bread, deserves a greater punishment, then if we
suffered others to have killed them at first being enemies, so that I
wish no man so uncivil as to dominier over a reconciled enemy being in
bonds.

Likewise prisoners being civilly entertained according to their
degrees, nevertheless they ought to be looked unto as prisoners; if
they be common soldiers, they should be commited to the general
gavileger, to be attended there, with a guard to watch them, being in
irons, and according to their behaviours, to be kept closer, or at
more liberty, and being on marches, they ought not to be suffered to
come so near the army as to be spies over others, and especially being
officers concredited to a gavileger, they ought to be so kept as they
could not remark, either the strength or the discipline of the army;
and being come to quarters, they ought to be visited as cavaliers, but
in discourse men ought to be sparing with them, as with prisoners:
neither must you injure them or suffer others to do it, seeing
prisoners can do no reason to cavaliers, and giving once their parole,
they may have some freedom to walk without suspicion within shot of
cannon.

But when either trumpeter or drummer is sent with letters, or message
to prisoners, he ought before he come near the guards, sound his
trumpet or beat his drum, giving advertisement to the guards before he
enter within their outward sentries, otherwise he is liable to the
highest punishment, but having lawfully advertised the guard, an
officer by command of the captain of the watch with a convoy of
musketeers ought to meet him, and having enquired for his commission
and pass, and seen his open letters, having searched him for private
letters, and finding none, then he ought to sile or blind him up, and
convey him blinded unto the chief commander, who receives his letters,
reads, and delivers them, and then after he being siled up again, he
is convayed unto the gavileger, where he is kept till he be ready, and
suffered to depart again with open letters, being conveyed out as he
came in: and no prisoner ought to deliver any letters, though open, to
any man, till first he acquaint his guard, who ought to impart it to
the commander of the place, and it is ordinary to Governor's or
commanders, to whom trumpeters or drummers do come, having received
their answer, being brought siled from the gavilegers unto their
lodging, first to talk merrily with them, and then to cause attenders
drink to them till they be merrry, and then being siled again, they
are conveyed without the whole Sentries, having their pass, they are
free to return.

Prisoners having agreed for their ransoms, or being exchanged out for
others, they ought not be suffered to depart, without getting first
the general's pass, and then he may go with a trumpeter or without one
to the next friendly garrison.



For quartering an Army in field upon March, Dorp, Town, or Leaguer, An
Observation.

A commander ought not be ignorant of the circumstances belonging to
the quartering of an army, therefore for the better information of the
younger sort, who have not seen such marches as I have been at, with
his Majesty of worthy memory, who quartered his army summer or winter,
according as the occasion or nearness of his enemy did offer, where
many times the whole winter's night, the army, horse, foot and
artillery, being without fire, did stand in battle order by their arms
in the fields, having placed their artillery apart, with a guard to
attend them, their baggage also being behind them apart, and well
guarded, and a main guard being commanded out apart before the army,
of horse and foot; And the armies' being near one another, all
officers were commanded to abide on their several charges, as they
were commanded on the march, to lead brigades, troops or divisions;
The commanded men being also apart next unto the enemy, with their
officers by them, which all being orderly quartered in this first
manner, they entertained one another with such dainties as the time
afforded, passing the night with variety of merry jests and discourses
till day, that either drum or trumpet did invite them unto earnest.

The second form of our quartering was in the fields not being near an
enemy, where we quartered a little more commodiously for our ease,
being commonly drawn up by four or five of the clock in the afternoon,
near some town or village, in some fair meadow by water, if it could
be had in the summer, and in the winter being quartered, we drew near
the side of some wood, both for fire, and for build or shelter; The
army drew up in battle by brigades, as they marched, where behind the
place the brigades drew up unto, at a reasonable distance, their
quarters were marked out severally according as they stood in battle,
and before the brigades removed from their arms, their guards were 
first commanded out, every brigade's guard being placed at a distance
of four-score paces from their colours, where they were appointed to
watch, and the watch being set, sentries were put to the colours, and
then the pike-men were ordained to fix their pikes fast in the ground
as they stood in battle, the musketeers also were ordained in dry
weather to set up their muskets in order in even front, with their
colours, but when it rained, they were commanded to keep them
carefully dry by themselves, which all orderly done they were suffered
part and part to go, and provide themselves of straw and fire,
providing also many times well for their officers kitchens beside.

The artillery and ammunition wagons being also drawn up a part, and
well guarded, their horses were sent to grass for good quarters, then
the baggage and wagons as they came up did draw up orderly behind
their own regiments, and their horses being sent to grass, the
officers' tents were set up orderly at a distance before their
colours, and then cooks went to dress meat and all being returned to
quarters before supper, the whole drums of the army did beat before
their several brigades, inviting all to public prayers, which were
never forgotten; And after prayers the majors of the regiments did
give out orders for that night to the sergeants, and for up-breaking
the next morning, and then all went to meat first, and next to rest,
and the whole horsemen were drawn up in this fashion, and parties were
sent out of their quarters to batter the streets, two or three mile
off, the whole night, lest we should be surprised by an enemy without
intelligence.

The next morning drums having called all to arms,the brigade,that had
the van,marched out first in a new ground,and drew up,the brigade,
that had the van the day before, marched out, drawing up on their left
hand having fallen back one degree from the van, and then the rest of
the brigades drew out orderly, one after another, till the left hand
of the foot army were closed up, and then they went to prayers, and
the prayers ended, they marched, the baggage marching after, being
drawn up in order, as the brigades or regiments did march, so did
they. The artillery marched with the brigades, in part, and the rest
marched before the army with their convoys, and guard of musketeers,
which were changed every two days, being commanded men out of all
regiments proportionally, having officers, commanded them accordingly.
Thus much of quartering in the fields.

The third manner of quartering, an enemy being afar off, and we near
towns, only in cold weather, quarterings were given for the Hofstaffe
(being the king or general and their followers) and the principal
officers of the army, including his majesty's household, whose
quarters were first appointed by the general quarter-master in the
towns, and next to the Hofstaffe the colonels, that commanded
brigades, were quartered, and next to them, the colonels of
regiments,their officers and soldiers: a great part, and the best
ofthe quarters ordained for the officers belonging to the artillery,
their horses and servants. The artillery and baggage standing without
the town, those who quartered within the town, had allowance of free
meat and drink, and no more; sometimes without towns we had quarters
given to brigades apart in dorps, rendezvous being appointed for us,
the next morning to draw upon for to join with the army, and while as
we quartered in dorps being drawn up without the dorp, first we
sighted the passes, and the guards placed in the fields on the venues,
lest the enemy unawares might enter the quarters, the sentries duly
set, our colours were conveyed with a troop to their lodging or
quarter, their furriers' shuts leading them aright till the colours
were quartered and guarded, then the rest shown unto their quarter,
men were appointed to go meet the baggage to lead them to their
quarters. Orders given, every man entertained another, as they had
best reason, and all being settled, parties of horse were sent forth
to scour the fields for intelligence, and lest they might be trapped
by the enemy, a second party was sent out after them, both getting
orders, how far to ride, and upon what streets, being commanded where
to halt, and forage, as also being admonished to have still a party on
horsback to advertise the rest from being surprised, which done,
Ordnance-rutters of every brigade were left to wait on the general, at
his quarter, for orders; the general rendezvous for the horse being
appointed, where to meet when ever they got orders.

The fourth manner of quartering an army is in a fast leaguer, as at
Stettin, Schwedt, Brandenburg, Werben, Donauwoerth, Augsburg,
Ingolstadt, Nuremberg, which manner of quartering is most troublesome
both for officers and soldiers, who having builded receptacles for
themselves, their charges and travels bestowed in vain, many times
they leave their houses to their enemies; yet the form is commendable,
being under an army that is well paid, where all things may be had for
money, and then the leaguer being kept clean, and in good order, it
represents a common-wealth or a city defensible against all
encumbrances which may occur, except it please the Lord to wag his
hand, and then no counsel or strength can avail against Him who is the
God of Hosts. The use cavaliers, or commanders have to make of this
sort of quartering is, that in case they happen to have command
themselves, they may learn through this practise to command others, as
also through foresight they may timely take themselves to this kind of
defensive war, till they be able to come into the fields,as his
Majesty of worthy memory did, being forced to retire by the power of
his enemies to the former Leaguers, wherein there was discipline and
good practice to be observed by cavaliers, where the King's Majesty
was made to dwell as the meanest soldier, being alike subject to the
inconvenience as others, which might happen, of air, sickness,
infection, or of watching. Thus far then for the quartering of an
army.



Of Artillery an Observation

Artillery being the third part of an army, without which no army can
be gloriously led, it is requisite then somewhat briefly to speak of
the advantages we have by artillery, being well foreseen and
commanded, as it was by the Captain of Kings and King of Captains,
Gustavus the Invincible, who with as little charge did as much as any
king or captain could (in doing of so great exploits as he did) with
his artillery. But lest I should be thought to neglect a part of my
duty in this point concerning cannon, I will set down here when his
Majesty made most use of cannon, to my knowledge; which being rightly
considered, will be thought strange, seeing in the whole course of his
Majesty's wars during his time, I never saw or did learn he shot a
breach in any place, except at Gartz, though otherwise I knew well his
Majesty made good use of his artillery, as at Leipzig, the Lech, and
at Luetzen, where in all three he shewed himself master of that art.
But against either town, or fort, I did never see in his Majesty's
time one breach shot or entered, his fortune being such, and his
diligence so great, that his enemies did ever parley before they would
abide the fury of his cannon, as at Brandenburg, Demmin, Frankfurt,
Mainz, Donauwoerth, Augsburg, and divers more; and in my opinion, the
terror the cannon breeds is as much to be feared as the execution that
follows, though it be great; and artillery in all armies and things
belonging thereto, are of infinite moment on all occasions. So that
they may be called Sine quo nihil; but supreme officers of the field,
are no more troubled with them, but so far as they direct others to do
the service, their own officers being appointed to attend them, as the
general to the artillery, his colonels, lieutenant -colonels, majors,
captains, lieutenants, constables, and all other inferior officers
needful to attend, who know and keep their own turns and reliefs, as
other officers do theirs; their furniture is great and their charges
also in buying horses to draw their cannon and ammunition, wagons,
with powder, ball, match, materials, fire-engines, petards, storming
ladders, artificial bridges carried on wagons to pass over rivers or
graffs.

In all quartering they are quartered next after the Hofstaffe before
any brigade, and the furniture and charges needful to maintain this
third part of the army is extraordinary great, there being always
something to be repaired, while as the army doth rest; and oft-times
they must be provided of a great deal of new furniture, and they lose
yearly an extraordinary number of horses of great price. But his
Majesty during his time was very fortunate in this, as in other
things; for I never knew his Majesty lose any ordnance, but I have
seen him get supply of ammunition and cannon from his enemies; as
first, at Gartz and Griefenhagen, Demmin, Frankfurt, Landsberg,
Glogow, Leipzig, Wuerzburg, Mainz, and Munich, besides the supply his
Majesty did get for his artillery from Nuremberg, Frankfurt, Augsburg,
Strasbourg and Ulm: and to discourse largely of this subject alone,
would take a volume of paper. But when every cavalier is commanded
apart with a party where he must make use of cannon, he would be
(before his departure with his party) very careful to receive his
cannon with the furniture belonging unto it timely together, with
sufficient officers for discharging that part of the duty, on his
march he must command his party as if it were a little army, being
ever well provided of guides, and of careful, witty, and painful
intelligencers, that he may lead and quarter his party with assurance,
directing always his intelligencer before him, being ever careful to
beset the passes and avenues well. As also sufficiently to guard his
cannon, baggage, and ammunition, since many times great hurt doth come
thorow the neglect of guarding the cannon and ammunition: which
oversights once committed are irrecoverable; in regard whereof I must
entreat the gentle reader to pardon me a little here out of history
(for the younger soldier his better instruction) to discourse a little
of the hurt and inconvenience hath happened many times by cannon and
powder; as also of the manner they were first invented, being found
out by God's permission for the ruin of man punished for sin;
experience doth teach daily that the strength of it is not to be
resisted.

Etienne Forcatel in his fourth book of the Empire and of the
Philosophy of the Gauls, doth attribute the invention of powder and
cannon to the Germans, saying that a piece by the help of some kindled
powder did spew a ball, the noise whereof was like to thunder, and
killed. The maker of it, an abbot, the child of the Devil, assisted by
his Father, found out this cruel invention, which serves alike for the
pursuer of towns as for the defender till it ruin both. It is said of
Archidamus, Son to the King Agesilaus, wondering at a new invention of
cannon brought from Sicily, complained the valour of men was beaten
down and trod under foot, seeing there was no more fighting without
monstrous hardness and armour. And it is thought that a black fellow
called Berthold Schwarz an Abbot invented it. Read Polydore Virgil, in
his second book and sixth Chapter de invent. and Sabellicus in his
Ennead. lib. 9. a fellow having some beaten brimstone for physick
closed in a pot covered with a stone, he striking with a file on a
stone to give fire, a spark lighted in the pot, and incontinent the
flame came forth, heaving the stone in the air; and chewing his cud
thereon, he made a cannon of iron, closing powder within it, till that
piece and piece he found out the invention. And we read that in the
Kingdom of China, in the East Indies, both printing and artillery were
known and practised there, long before they were found out in Europe,
and that there, there be many cannons, which I will rather believe
than go to see.

Virgil also in the sixth book of his Aeneid doth speak of the like in
his description of Salmoneus; and Josephus, in his third book and
ninth Chapter of the Jews' Wars, makes mention of an instrument they
used against the town of Jotapat in Galilee, and saith, the stones
shot by engines did break the walls and towers, and there was no troop
of men so well ordered, but was scattered by it, and beaten to the
ground. The same author speaking of the batteries made against the
walls of Jerusalem, affirms that the stones shot by the engines were
as heavy as a man: And nevertheless they were carried above six
hundred paces by the engine, killing many men.

Pliny writes in his thirty-one book and tenth Chapter, in his voyage
unto Babylon, that powder was in use of old, and reporteth he did see
powder-miles on the River Euphrates, though of another sort than our
powder.

Of this invention also you may read Cornel de Campe, in his story of
Friesland, in his second book and twentieth Chapter. Also Simoscus
King of Friesland, Beresne Lord of Holland, and Olympia daughter to
the Earl of Holland, where it is said, that Simoscus killed with one
shot of pistol the earl and his two sons; and that afterward he would
have killed Rowland Earl of Flanders, but the pistol misgiving,
Rowland did kill him with his sword, and did throw the pistol in the
sea. But we read that Barbadigue Admiral of Venice was the first that
carried them on his galleys and ships, wherewith he did terrify the
Genovese, being at hunting by their noise: and Paul Iove, in his third
book of illustrious persons, writes that Barthelem Cokone general to
the Venetians for the space of twenty years and more, was the first
that used cannon in the fields, while as the banished people of
Florence made wars against the family De Medicis, being first used to
make breaches in walls, and to defend walls: but afterward they came
in use to break the battles of horse and foot; for if the wars of old,
and their inventions were compared to nowadays, it were a sport to
laugh at, rather than wars.

Now of late the invention is found out of burning bullets, full of
fire, shot out of cannon, to fire houses within strengths, and to fire
palisades and gabions set before batteries on walls or in fields,
whereof his Majesty of Poland Estien Bathory made good use in his wars
of Moscow, within a few years.

This invention is thought to have been invented by the King of Poland
himself in his civil wars of Hungary, finding other cannon made
greater noise than hurt.

The manner a piece is charged with a hot bullet, is, the piece is
charged with powder convenient, then it is covered with sand in a
little quantity above the powder, then with a little greene grasse
presently plucked, being a little dampish or moist, then the hot
bullet being put in must be presently discharged, otherwise the
invention is very dangerous for the constables; for oft-times minding
to ruin others, they are ruined themselves.

Albert Gantz writes, that Christophel King of Denmark was killed by a
shot of cannon in the year 1280. Also we have a deplorable story
written by Gyrrard de Rooe and Conrade Decius, of the battle betwixt
the Emperor Albert and the Poles in Bohemia. Amongst their cannons
there was one cannon greater than the rest, which for her execution
was most used, she killed so many of the Poles, that they were so
afraid, that they ran all away, leaving their tents: and it is
reported, that at one shot she killed fourscore men, the devil (as I
said before) was (by the permission of God) the inventor of such a
monster, being offended with mankind in this last old age of the
world, those thunder-claps putting us in mind that this whole round
globe shall be shaken and perish.

We read also in the thirty-fourth book of Paul Iove his story, the
answer of a Turk reprehended of his cowardice, having run away at the
noise of a cannon, being besieged by the Emperor within Goullet.

Adrian Barbarossa reproaching Sinas for losing courage, he answered so
long as we have to do to fight against armed men, you and my enemies
do know I served ever with reputation and credit, but to fight against
the Devil and the fury of hell-fire, having against us such terrible
monsters, be not you astonished that I sought to eschew death, to
th'end I might remain whole to do you service.

We read also in the bloody battle of Ravenna fought on Easter day,
1512: betwixt the French and Dutch, and the Spaniard, that one shot of
a double cannon did kill (as Michael de Chochen) forty horsemen. We
read also that in the sea-fight betwixt the French and the
Imperialists, on the River of Amalfi, near the straight of Salerno, in
the year 1628, shot out of the galley of Captain Philip Dore, a cannon
bullet that killed above thirty Spaniards, and hurt many others, as
reporteth Paulus Enterus, in his story of the wars of Italy: and Paul
Iove writing of the same battle more largely and curiously, being eye-
witness himself, or at least, within hearing of the cannon on the Isle
of Aenary, where he did see the smoke of the cannon, saith, Philip
Dore diligent to make good execution with cannon, and not in vain
spending powder and shot on the Spaniard, his great piece called the
Basilisk, the ball being monstrous great, broke through the whole
ship, even to her keel, and killing thirty, wounded several captains
and gentlemen, that were mutilated or dismembered; So that the
Marquess of Guat was all spoiled with the blood and entrails of the
dead.

Guicciardin reported that at the siege of Calais, in the year 1558, by
the Duke of Guise, in name of the King of France, on the Three Kings'
day, in the morning, with thirty-three double cannon from one battery,
made such a noise, that the sound was heard five hours going beyond
Calais, being twenty English miles. And lest the judicious reader will
think this an untruth, I would warrant it from my own deed, for he
that pleaseth, may read the story written by the author Guicciardin.
But those pieces of cannon that are farthest heard, are called pot-
pieces or mortars, such as Mons on the castle of Edinburgh, being so
wide, that it is reported, that a man did get a child within, which I
also warrant from my own deed, but the truth is, it is a huge great
piece, from whence did come our old Scots proverb, the Devil shoot
Mons in your arse. Gentle reader excuse my homeliness, since I was not
the inventer of this proverb.

These kind of pieces are very large, and carry stones for bullets. The
mortars of Suleiman at the siege of Rhodes, in the year 1522. their
bullets weighed some of them two hundred weight, the least one hundred
and fifty pounds of great weight, when they light on a house, they go
through from top to ground; and Paulus Iovius reports of a mine made
by Peter Valler, which made entrance for the Spaniard within the new
castle of Naples, kept by the French, the French were so astonished
with the surprise of the mine, that they retired unto the last and
furthest court, so that the guards had not time to draw up their draw-
bridges, and the French letting down the portcullis to hinder the 
Spaniards' entry, coming with a furious press, the French bring a
piece of cannon to terrify the Spaniards, that had entered one gate,
or the first court, and shoot amongst them, where by chance the iron
bullet took hold of the thick of the port, where it remains to this
day shown for a monument unto strangers, that have got the credit to
go within this castle to see it. Many such stories we could infer, but
let these suffice in this place for this time.




The Christian Soldier Going on Service his Meditations.

I.

When thou seest thy comrade going to muster with a fair show
outwardly, decked with brave clothes, and delighting in his plumes,
think with thyself, such an outward show is nothing without the inward
gifts of the mind: for if thou desirest to be a soldier of Christ,
thou must be adorned with all virtues; that inwardly thou mayest be
such, as outwardly thou doest appear unto the world. Thou must then
learn to mortify those vices to which thou art most subject, taking
account of thyself, how thou hast resisted vice, and what good thou
hast done, and say then, when thou findest thou hast done nothing that
is good, Lord make us every day to renounce sin, and resist vice, that
our love and zeal to thee may be inflamed to well-doing, even in the
greatest extremity of adversity.

II.

When thou seest the king's majesty thy master, or his general coming
to look on the battle, when all front towards the king, with due
respect and reverence, think then again with thyself, and say, as for
me it is good to draw near unto thee, O Lord, for thou art my King and
my God, thee alone will I worship and love; make me happy in thy love,
and for thy sake, I will despise all things: for thou art the strength
of my head, and my portion for ever, for through hope, we attain unto
thee by faith.

III.

When thou seest thy comrades knitting all things about them handsome
and fast, before they march, say thou then, knit mine heart unto thee,
O Lord, that I may fear thy name, for he that loveth not thee, must
quake and fear, and it is a fearful thing to fall into thy hands; for
thy coming unto judgment is terrible, thy roaring is like a lion, and
thy sword a consuming fire, no place can hide man from thy presence,
thou seest the heart and the reins, no secret is hid from thee, and
who can escape thy vengeance? None, except they repent. Lord therefore
save me from that bitter death, and give me grace to repent, that I
may bewaile my misery, before I depart.

IIII.

When thou art entered in the troublesome way of thy march, and
sufferest toil, travail, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, nakedness, peril,
being called to labour, and to suffer, and not to live in pleasure and
idleness, say then; my sorrow O Lord is ever before me, for in me
dwelleth no good, I offend day by day; and which is worse, I cannot
repent; sin increaseth, and the fountain of grace is stopped, and I
find no comfort. Say then again, O Lord spur me and whip me with thy
rod, before I perish, and reserve not thy punishment, lest at last I
shall be made to pay the uttermost farthing. Lord therefore create a
new heart within me, that I may prepare a habitation for thee to rest
in, a clear conscience. O Lord for thy son Christ's sake, suffer me
not to go away empty, for with thee is mercy, and great redemption,
therefore I will be comforted whilst thou givest me time to amend my
life.

V.

When thou seest thy comrades for love of credit, and the favour of
their officers, making no difference betwixt fair and foul way, but
with patience enduring all toil, to come to the end of their march,
think then with thyself, that after this manner of old, the servants
of Christ, for the favour and love of God, and of his glory, did serve
the Lord in hunger and thirst, in cold, in nakedness, in watching and
fasting, in prayers, in meditations, in manifold persecutions and
troubles, contemning all pleasurs for Christ, they sought the glory of
God, more then their own fame. Lord therefore make us contemn and
slight all things, for the love of Christ; altering from vice to
virtue, mortifying our lusts, that we may become soldiers of Christ,
loving nothing so much as God and the salvation of our soul.

VI.

When thou seest thy comrade fix in his arms, and well exercised with
pike, musket and sword; then think with thyself, that thy duty is, to
trust in the Lord, and to do good, that thou mayest dwell in the 
land, and be fed assuredly, thy delight must be in the law of the
Lord, and thou must be exercised therein day and night, that thou
mayest be full of hope and strength, remembering thy end, ever
redeeming the time, taking heed of small sins, that by time thou maist
avoid the greatest, and if thou shalt behave thyself godly in the day,
thou mayst be assured to be merry at night.

VII.

When thou hearst the alarm given, going to thine arms, think then with
thyself, that it is more then time to abandon the universal world, and
to embrace God: and say, as for me, it is good to draw near to God,
and to put my trust in him, that I may declare all his works, For whom
have I in heaven but him, and on earth I desire none but him, he will
guide me by his counsel, and afterwards receive me unto glory.

VIII.

When thou seest thy comrade making ready, and fix against his enemies,
girding his loins, that he may fight the more valiantly, then think
with thyself, that it is thy duty, to put on the spiritual armour, and
to gird thy loins against Satan, the world and the flesh, that thou
mayst fight the spiritual combat, bridling thy riotous appetite,
bringing under the flesh, despising the worlds glory, be at no time
altogether idle, but ever doing somewhat for the public welfare,
discharging the duties of thy calling, beseeching God for Christ thy
captain's sake, to pronounce thee happy, in the day of thy appearance.

IX.

When thou seest thy comrade appointed to watch over himself and
others, lest he be circumvented by his enemies, lost and utterly
ruined, then think with thyself, that thy duty is, to watch over
thyself diligently: lest the wrath of thine enemies seize upon thee,
by God's permission, for thy punishment, crushing thee to pieces: and
consider with thyself, that as it is fearful to fall into the hands of
thine enemies; so it is more fearful to fall into the hands of the
living Lord. Stand then in awe to offend him, that infinitely loves
thee, let thy chiefst care be then to please God, and to forsake
unrighteousness, that leadeth unto death, and then surely thou mayst
rejoice, though in trembling, being merry in the Lord.

X.

When thou seest thy comrades environed with enemies, and preparing
themselves for battle, then think with thyself, that it is thy duty
also to arm thyself against thy spiritual enemies, craving God his
assistance, that he leave thee not, nor suffer thee to be tempted
above thy strength; and if thou fightest valiantly unto the end, thou
art happy, being promised for thy reward, the joys of Heaven: For the
Spirit saith to him that overcometh, I will give to eat of the tree of
life.

XI.

When thou seest thy comrades give eare to the words of command,
hearkning unto their captain's instructions, obeying the tuck of drum,
or sound of trumpet, then think with thyself, that it is thy duty to
hearken unto God's word, receiving comfort from the mouth of his
servants; for blessed are the ears that hear when the Lord whispereth,
and blessed are those who prepare themselves for the knowledge of God
his heavenly mysteries: Speak therefore, O Lord, for thy servant
heareth; since without man's help thou canst instruct, and though man
teach the letter, thy Spirit openeth the meaning, they show the way,
and thou givest strength to walk: man deals outwardly, but it is thou
that enlightnest the mind; Paul plants, Thou givest the increase:
speak therefore O Lord again, which art the ever-living truth, to the
comfort of our souls, to the amendment of our lives, and to the
advancement of thine everlasting glory.

XII.

When thou seest thy comrade trusting and leaning unto his own
strength, and not depending upon God that gives victory; then think
with thyself, that it is thy duty, not to think with thine own wings
to fly unto heaven, but with God's feathers; for it is not in the
power of man, to dispose his affairs at his own pleasure; But it is
God that giveth victory, and comforteth whom he will, and when he
will, and what he willeth must be: for of ourselves we are full of
infirmities, except the favour of God shine upon us, and then are we
strong enough to overcome all our enemies, by his power that leads us,
preserving us from dangers, and delivering us from infinit evils, for
he is our salvation, our strength and our shield in the day of battle.

XIII.

When thou seest again thy comrade like a valiant soldier going
forwards in well-doing, not fearing anything to win credit; then think
with thyself, that it is thy duty to strive to go forwards,
notwithstanding the wickedness of thy mind, though Satan should press
to hinder thee in the course of idleness; and to withdraw thee from
all religious duty and exercise, and from thy godly remembrance of
Christ's pains and wounds, and from thy care of salvation, and from
thy Christian resolution to go forwards in well-doing, making thee
abhorre prayer, and the reading and hearing of the word incorruptible,
believe him not, and care not for him, but turning his snares on his
own pate, say unto him, avoid Satan, thou unclean spirit, blush thou
cursed wretch, avoid I say, thou wouldst carry me from my God, but
thou shalt not. Jesus will assist me, and thou shalt get but a
shameful foil: I had rather die, than consent unto thee; Therefore be
quiet, and hold thy peace, for I will not hear, though thou shouldest
trouble me never so much: The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom
should I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom should I
be afraid;the Lord protecting me, and delivering me. Therefore as a
good soldier strive courageously, but beware of pride and arrogancy,
which hath led many unto error, and almost unto uncurable blindness.
Therefore pray unto God, that their fall may make thee wise.

XIV.

When thou seest thy comrades impatient, and given to pleasure and
delectation, unwilling to bear their crosses; then think with thyself,
that it is thy duty, as the soldier of Jesus Christ, to walk in his
ways without wearying, and to bear thy cross and misery patiently. For
Christ suffered, and so entered into his glory: Therefore if thou wilt
be a soldier of his, thou must needs walk in this kingly high way, not
quitting thy rank for fear, or for persecution, but must resolve to
suffer adversity; for the more the flesh is troubled and weakned by
calamity, the more the spirit is confirmed by the comfort of the mind;
and he that is steadfast in the faith, needs not fear the malice of
the Devil.

XV.

When thou seest thy comrade loose in behaviour, not fearing God,
neglecting his duty to his commanders, careless of life, and
unprepared for death; then think with thyself, that thy duty is, to
prepare thyself by unfained repentance, thinking more often of death
than of long life, call to mind God's judgements, and the pains of
Hell, let thy behaviour be so, as if thou wert presently to die, so
clearing thy conscience, thou canst not greatly fear death, being
found such as thou wouldst appear; having lamented and truly repented
thee of thy sins, thou shalt win the field, and mortality being
swallowed up of life, thou shalt live for ever.

XVI.

When thou seest thy comrade rash, heady, or obstinate in his own
opinion, or yet ready to believe every man his words, and suddenly
rehearsing what hath been told him, then think with thyself, that, as
a soldier of Christ, it is thy duty, to be wise and settled in thy
opinion, not wavering with every wind of doctrine, but constant in the
true faith thou professest, that though thou frequentest, and seest
men of divers religions, thou mayest ever prove constant in the truth
thou professest: for the soldiers of Christ, as they are constant, so
they must be fervent, and godly zealous.

XVII.

When thou seest thy comrade arrogant, thinking himself better than his
fellows, then think with thyself, that it is thy duty, to be humble,
familiar, and sociable, rather silent than babbling, not hasty &
arrogant, as he, lest God should condemn thee utterly; thou must not
suffer thyself to be drawn away with vanity, stirring with indignation
against any, but be meek and wise, watch and pray, and spend not thy
time in idleness, but depend on God; let thy conversation be honest,
living soberly and righteously in his fight, not judging others,
blinded with private affection, giving partiall sentence.

XVIII.

When thou seest thy comrade loving the world better than God
(oppressing the poor) as a citizen of Babylon, and not as a soldier of
Christ, think then with thyself, that he having made the wrong choice,
thy best is to have the true love and fear of God, in doing nobody
wrong, but contented with thy wages, strive to be made a citizen of
Jerusalem, and a soldier of Christ; endeavour to be holy, and
unblameable before him, in love and charity, the virtues belonging to
the Christian soldier, that as thou bearest the name, thou be not
found void of the virtues belonging to those that fight Christ's
battles, viz. love, courage, respect and obedience: for he that loves
anything better than those virtues, is not worthy the name of a
soldier. And he that loveth Christ doth not walk in darkness, but hath
the light of life, caring more for a good life, then for a long, 
hunting after righteousness, that all other things may be cast unto
him.

XIX.

When thou seest thy comrade not faithful unto his master, and with
love unfeigned, not advertising him of all he knows prejudicial unto
him, then think with thyself, that thou, as a soldier of Christ,
oughetst to be faithful with love unfeigned towards thy master,
fighting to death for him, till thou overcomest vice, and conquerest
thyself (of all combats the best) that thou mayest be esteemed of, as
the valiant soldier of Christ, that as thou art virtuous, so thou
mayest grow famous in glory, having abandoned thyself and thy own
will, to do the will of God. Lord make us do this, then are we sure to
be honourable in thy sight.

XX.

When thou seest thy comrade contraried in many things by his betters,
and also perhaps scandalized, then think with thyself, and resolve if
thou wouldst be counted as a soldier of Christ, that would reign with
him, thou must also resolve to suffer with him, and not to care a rush
for the reproaches of men, but thou must take all scandals in good
part, for Christ thy captain was despised in this world, and at
extremity, his very friends forsooke him. Think then, O soldier, that
thou art in respect of him but dust; and forsake this world, if thou
wouldst have rest unto thy soul, for the Kingdom of God is
righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost; put then confidence
in God, and he will handle thy cause right well, care thou to have a
good conscience in all thy doings, then thou art sure none can hurt
thee, for the Lord will defend and deliver thee.

XXI.

When thou seest thy comrade vaunting or bragging of his own deeds,
without modesty or discretion, seeking his own praise (as many vain
men do) then think with thyself, that thy duty is to contemn worldly
praise as vain, coming from man: for true and eternal glory contemneth
worldly  praise, and as man judgeth of the deed, God regards the
intent and mind; press therefore to do well, but think little of
thyself, being the surest token of a modest mind; for he that praiseth
himself is not allowed, but he whom the Lord praiseth. We ought not
therefore to wax proud, but we ought to watch continually, for Satan
sleepeth not, and the flesh is not yet dead.

XXII.

When thou seest thy comrade dissolute, vain, proud, fantastic,
arrogant, windy, railing, back-biting, vaunting of all sin and
mischief, then think with thyself, that these are the notes proper
unto the wicked, and if thou wouldst prove a soldier of Christ, thou
must oppose thyself contrary to them all, being thy duty, to be
lovely, strong, patient, faithful, wise, meek, prudent, circumspect,
modest, just, not dainty, not light, not given to vanities; but sober,
chaste, constant, quiet and temperate in all senses: even with pain
living in virtue, for without pain none can love God: for if thou
wouldst love God, thou must be painful in seeking of him, never
leaving him, till he be found of thee, and love thee, bringing thee
through his love unto perfection in Christ. For he that loves him,
will endure all things for his sake, as valiant soldiers fainting at
nothing may happen; yea thou must despise the inticements of Satan,
and of thy fleshly enemies, and that is the valiant exploit, wherewith
best thou canst please God.

XXIII.

When thou seest thy comrade stand in awe to commit wickedness, both
for fear of punishment, and his love to his commanders, then think
with thyself, that thy duty to thy heavenly Father obliges thee to
love and to fear him with a filial fear, standing in awe to sin
against him; for cursed is he that heareth the word of the Lord, and
despiseth it. Blush thou therefore, that takest more pleasure in
vanity, than in the truth, in time call thy sins to remembrance, and
that with sorrow, let thy religion be in thy heart, not in thy mouth,
wish for heavenly things, and contemn the world, seek to be made
strong in the love of the Lord, and constant to continue: for nothing
in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, is comparable to this love
of God in Christ; he that hath this love, hath all in all. Say then O
my God, and my love, as thou art mine make me wholy thine.

XXIIII, And last Meditation going before thine enemy.

When thou seest thy comrade for the love of honour and worldly credit
not fearing to die, but ready to open his breast like a valiant
soldier to receive wounds for his master's sake, then think with
thyself, that it is thy duty, as the spiritual soldier of Christ, not
to fear to die, but rather looking unto the glass of life, the rule of
righteousness, the light of the soul, the joy of the conscience, like
a valourous soldier for his love, rather let all things seem sweet 
unto thee for his sake, who is and should be the end of all our
thoughts, of all our actions, of all our speeches, of our reading,
praying and meditating; for through him we attain unto salvation, and
everlasting life; for his love, we will not fear to die, nor refuse to
live. Say then, O Jesu, how can I praise thee as I ought, or think of
thee as I am bound, for thy infinite mercies? Thee will I praise, I
will be ready to suffer for thee, being assisted by thy grace, I will
magnify and glorify thee, I humbly desire thy favour, vouchsafe
therefore to do good unto me, write my name in thy book, and let me
never be blotted out; but let me be accounted amongst the least of
thine elect, I presume nothing of myself, let all my comfort be in thy
precious blood shed for me a sinner, wherein I only repose; my desire
is to be with thee in the land of the living, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. In the mean time, I will behold thee in this life with the
eyes of faith, placing my joy in thee, in this my pilgrimage; and
though I should be tossed too and fro, yet will I retain thee fast in
my mind; for thou art my brother, that hast taken my flesh and bones
on thee, thanks be unto thee, sweet Jesu, that hast united thy human
nature unto the divine, unite me unto thee, sweet Jesu, and leave not
my soul in the grave, for thou art my Saviour and Redeemer for ever.

AMEN.



Current Placenames

Monro was very erratic in his spelling of place names. In this edition
we have standardised them at the spelling used in the early 20th
Century, except for those which have long-established English versions
e.g. Munich not Muenchen. After the First and Second World Wars, many
of these names were changed, mostly for nationalistic or political
reasons. The modern names of these places are given here.

Munro's name: Current name
Braunsberg: Braniewo
Breslau: Wroc?aw
Danzig: Gdansk
Eger: Cheb
Glogau: G?ogow
God's Acre: Breitenfeld
Gollnow: Goleniow
Greifenberg: Gryfice
Greifenhagen: Gryfino
Kolberg: Ko?obrzeg
Landsberg: Gorzow Wielkopolski
Liffeland: Estonia
Loewenberg: Lwowek Slaski
Pillau: Baltiysk
Priemhausen: Przemocze
Ratisbon: Regensburg
Ruegenwalde: Dar?owo
Ruppin: Neuruppin
Schivelbein: Swidwin
Stettin: Szczecin
Stolp: S?upsk
Treptow: Altentreptow
Wimslau: Wymys?ow



Glossary and Translations
Glossary of obsolete words, or words used in an obsolete sense; and
translations of Latin phrases.

Admire: Wonder
Advertise: To warn or inform
Advertisement: Warning or notification
Aequo pede: "With an equal foot"  The reference is to Horace, Odes,
1.4.13-14. pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas
regumque turris. "Pale death kicks equally at (the door of) the
pauper's hovel as at the king's tower"
Allege: Say
Alter homo: Another man
Amtman: A bailiff or steward
Ante omnia: Before everything
Antipathite: An enemy or opponent
Bale an Bouche: With loaded weapons
Bank: A particular drum-call which signalled all the soldiers to
assemble.
Barm: Sediment in beer
Bastant: Capable
Battle: a) The main force of an army, in the centre of the line.
b) Battle order.
Beadman: A person employed to pray
Beastial: Domestic animals
Beat a bank: To play a particular drum-call which signalled all the
soldiers to assemble.
Bedrid: Confined to bed by illness or injury
Belly-god: An exceptionally greedy person
Blocker: Besiege, blockade
Boarish-Boares: Bayerisch boors i.e. Bavarian peasants
Bonum omen: A good omen
Boors: Country people
Bruit: Rumour
Buckler: A small round shield
Burghers: Townspeople
Cadouk: A bonus payment or reward, often allocated from booty
plundered from civilians
Canonists: Scholars learned in Church law (usually, but not always,
Catholic)
Capitulate: To bargain, come to an agreement
Caracole: To wheel to the right or left.
Cartow: A kind of cannon, also called a quarter-cannon, which fired a
ball of a quarter of a hundred-weight (12.5 kg)
Castean: Made of chestnut leaves
Casualty: A payment or reward made when certain defined things happen.
Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea linguae: Arms submit to the toga,
and wreaths to the tongue i.e. as we would say, "The pen is mightier
than the sword"
Centner: A hundredweight (50 kg. approx.)
Champaign: An area of level open land
Chirurgian: A surgeon
Cithern: A instrument like guitar, with metal strings and played with
a plectrum.
Clap: A violent blow
Cleared: Clearly shown
Clicket: The loop or catch which fastens a scabbard to a sword belt
Comfortable: Encouraging
Commandment: Government or authority
Commodity: Commercial dealings
Commove: Disturb
Conceit: Knowledge, conception
Concilium formatum: A appointed council
Concredited: Assigned or entrusted
Conform: Appropriate
Conjunctis viribus: With united forces
Contemn: To despise
Contentation: Contentment
Contestation: Struggle
Convenient: Appropriate; right and proper
Convoy: A accompanying unit of men
Cornet: Variously: a company of cavalry, its standard, or the officer
commanding it.
Corps-de-gard: A guard hut or sentry box
Counterscarp: The outer bank of a fortification
Crabbats: Regiments of light cavalry, originally Croatian but later
including many soldiers from other places. They had an evil reputation
for cruelty and rapaciousness.
Credence: A sideboard
Cuirassier: A cavalry soldier, so called from wearing a cuirass, which
is a piece of armour covering the upper torso, with a breast-plate and
a back-plate connected by leather straps.
Cullion: A low scoundrel
Cunctation: Hesitation, delay
Deals: Planks
Debauched: Corrupted
Decretals: A collection of decrees issued by the Roman Emperor
Dern: To chase an animal into its lair
Disbandon: Scatter, run away
Dorp: A village or small town
Dragonier: A soldier who travelled on horseback but fought on foot
Dread: Regarded with great respect
Dutch: German
Dutch Mile: About 7.5 km or 4.5 English miles
Dutchland: Germany
En passant: While passing
Et contra: And the reverse
Et jure: And justly
Et meritò: And deservedly
Eternize: To make immortal
Ex opposito: Opposite
Ex utroque Rex: In every way a king
Experimented: Experienced
Fantastic: Having wild notions
Feared: Frightened
Firework: An explosive shell or bomb
Flanker: To defend on or from the flanks
Flankerens: Positions placed so as to defend one anothers' flanks
Flect: A small village
Forisfamiliate: To be forisfamiliate, is to have received a portion of
one's inheritance while one's father is still alive, and having no
further claim on his estate
Forlorn hope: A squad of solders sent forward of the main body of an
army, to begin the attack
Fosse: A wide trench or dry moat
Führ: To lead, guide (From German Führen)
Fured: Conveyed
Furer: Bearer
Furing: Bearing, carrying
Furrier: An officer sent in advance of an army, to find and arrange
accommodation and food.
Gabion: A wicker basket full of earth, used as temporary
fortification, as sandbags are used nowadays.
Gainestand: Defy
Garner: A granary
Gatlop: The gauntlet, a punishment where the victim was made to walk
between two lines of men, each of whom struck him with a stick or
whip.
Gavileger: The chief provost (see under proforce) of an army.
Graff: A wide ditch or moat
Grafschaft: County
Grin: A snare for animals consisting of a running noose tied to a
branch or stake
Gross: In Fighting in gross = en masse, with the whole force engaged.
Hackbut of crock: A very heavy flintlock musket which was supported
for firing on a tripod or long rod with a fork at the top (the crock),
placed near the muzzle, while the soldier held the butt.
Hagapells: Finnish light cavalry, so called from their battle cry
"Hakkaa päälle!", meaning "Cut them down!"
Hanger: A short sword, worn hanging from a belt
Hardly: With great effort
Harvest: Autumn
Hinc inde: From both sides
Hinterhalt: An ambush (German)
Hodie mihi, cras tibi: Today mine, tomorrow yours
Hoff: A house or mansion
Hofstaffe: General staff
Homo homini quid interest: How men differ from each other!
Incontinent: Immediately, without hesitation
Inter pocula: Literally "In their cups" i.e. while drinking
Jars: Quarrels
Jeddart-staff: A weapon consisting of a sword blade fixed to a long
handle
John Thomson's man: A henpecked husband; one dominated by his wife.
Jure belli: According to the law of war
Jure talionis: According to the law of retaliation"An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth"
Justitia distributiva: Distributive justice, i.e portioning out goods
& rewards etc. fairly.
Kammerjunkare: A senior servant of the king, corresponding to Groom of
the Chamber in England
Land: A province
Leaguer: A fortified camp
Lege talionis: According to the law of retaliation"An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth"
Magazine: A storehouse
Malheur: Misfortune
Menagers: Competent managers
Menagry: Management
Monomachia: Single combat
Morgenstern: A weapon consisting of a spiked iron ball fastened to, or
hanging by a chain from, a long handle
Nail: To nail (or spike) a gun was to block the touch-hole by driving
a nail into it, thus making it impossible to fire.
Nam ardua & difficilis virtutis est via, tamen, nil tam difficile est,
quod non solertia vincat: Although a virtuous life is laborious and
difficult, there is nothing so difficult that skill cannot overcome
it.
Nam quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri nefeceris: Do not do to others
what you would not want them do to you
Nam ubi orta est culpa, ibi poena consistit: For where blame is due,
that constitutes the punishment.
Nomine tenue: In name
Obnubilate: To darken or obscure by cloud
Omni modo: In every way
Oppugnation: Attack
Paction: A treaty of agreement
Painful: Painstaking
Parole: Word of honour
Parter: One who parts combatants to prevent a fight
Partizan: A long handled spear, sometimes with an axe blade or hook
like a halberd
Patronizing: Defending
Per vices: In turn
Perdue: A sentry in an exceptionally dangerous  position
Pest: Bubonic plague (The Black Death)
Petard: A kind of bomb used to blow down a wall or door.
Plane: To elevate, angle
Polemarch: In Athens, the third archon, originally the titular
military commander-in-chief; afterwards a civil magistrate having
under his care the children of parents who had lost their lives in the
service of their country, and the resident aliens. (OED)
Pole-shable: A weapon consisting of a sword blade attached to the end
of a long wooden shaft
Popular: The common people
Pousse: Thrust
Pro Deo et Religione tuenda: Defending God and Religion
Proforce: Provost, an officer whose duty was to suppress and punish
offences committed by soldiers
Proviant: Provisions supplied to soldiers
Providentia Dei omnia gubernantur, & quae putatur poena, medicina est:
The providence of God rules all things, and what is thought to be a
punishment, is a medicine
Py a Pyano: Soft of foot
Quid est homini inimicissimum?, : What is man's greatest enemy?
Ran-forced: Broke open
Ravelin: A fortification consisting of two walls or banks meeting at a
sharp angle
Recognosce: To reconnoitre
Recrue: Reinforce
Redder: One who parts combatants to prevent a fight
Redoubt: A small fortification near to, but detached from, the main
defences of a fort.
Regrated: Lamented
Reins: The loins or kidneys
Repare: Revenge
Res est irrevocabilis, et quod factum est infectum fieri nequit: The
thing is irrevocable, and what is done cannot be undone.
Rixdollar: A coin worth about 5 English shillings
Ruffle: A defeat
Rut-master: The commander of a troop of cavalry
Rutter: A soldier of cavalry
Scalade: Using scaling-ladders to take a walled town or fortress
Scout: A kind of flat-bottomed boat
Sedes belli: The seat of war
Semi-deus est: He is a demigod
Seria mista jocis: The serious mixed with the funny
Shamble: A slaughter-house
Sile: To blindfold
Sine quo nihil: Without which (there is) nothing
Singulis noctibus per vices: One night on and one night off
alternately
Sith: Since
Skonce: An earthen bank raised as part of defensive works.
Slaught-boom: A heavy beam of wood used as a barricade
Sleight: Clever
Slightly: Injuriously
Sling-piece: A kind of long-barrelled cannon
Soldateska: Soldiery
Sorting Port or Door: A door in the wall of a fortress or walled town,
through which small groups can be let out and in, either for
reconnaissance, or to make a hit-and-run raid on a besieging force.
Span: A measure of about 9 inches
Splent: Splintered
Stacket: A palisade, i.e. a fence made of stakes driven into the
ground and sharpened at the top
Stadt-holder: Governor of a city or province
Stallmeister: Manager of the Royal stables
Steadable: Servicable, helpful
Stell: To place cannon in position
Stift: Region
Stillstand: An armistice or ceasefire
Stot: To bounce off or rebound
Strait: Narrow, difficult to pass
Strength: A fortified position
Succour: Assistance, reinforcements
Succourse: To assist, reinforce
Suddenly: Quickly
Summa: Total
Summum jus: The greatest force of the law
Sutler: A supplier of food to an army
Swound: A swoon, fainting fit
Tam arte, quam marte: As much by skill as by strength
Targe: A small light shield
Three Kings' day: The feast of the Epiphany, 6th January
Thwart: Full of obstructions
Torn: A tower
Totus orbis componebatur ad exemplum Regis: The whole world was
fashioned according to the example of the king
Travailed: Laboured
Treen: Made of wood
Trinket: A stream or narrow channel
Tuck: A tap of a drum or blast of a trumpet
Ut antea: As before
Vivit enim post funera virtus: & animus moderatis laboribus adjuvatur,
immoderatis autem abluitur: The virtuous live on even after death; and
the temperate soul advances by its deeds, while the intemperate is
washed away.
Waist: The middle part of the upper deck of a ship, between the
quarter-deck and the forecastle
Wakerife: Wide awake, watchful
Water-graff: A trench filled with water used as a defence
Weal: Benefit, advantage
Weathergall: A partial rainbow,or other atmospheric phonemenon
believed to predict a storm
Without: Outside


