OUT OF THE HURLY-BURLY

By

“MAX ADELER”

(Charles Heber Clark)

DEDICATION.

I HAVE resolved to dedicate this book to a humorist who has
had too little fame, to the most delicious, because the most
unconscious, humorist, to that widely-scattered and
multitudinous comedian who may be expressed in the concrete
as

THE INTELLIGENT COMPOSITOR.

To his habit of perpetrating felicitous absurdities I am
indebted for "laughter that is worth a hundred groans." It
was he who put into type an article of mine which contained
the remark, "Filtration is sometimes accomplished with the
assistance of albumen," and transformed it into "Flirtation
is sometimes accomplished with the resistance of aldermen."
It was he who caused me to misquote the poet's inquiry, so
that I propounded to the world the appalling conundrum,
"Where are the dead, the varnished dead?" And it was his
glorious tendency to make the sublime convulsively ridiculous
that rejected the line in a poem of mine, which declared that
a "comet swept o'er the heavens with its trailing skirt," and
substituted the idea that a "count slept in the haymow in a
traveling shirt." The kind of talent that is here displayed
deserves profound reverence. It is wonderful and awful; and
thus I offer it a token of my marveling respect.




PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

"Fun is the most conservative element of society, and it
ought to be cherished and encouraged by all lawful means.
People never plot mischief when they are merry. Laughter is
an enemy to malice, a foe to scandal and a friend to every
virtue. It promotes good temper, enlivens the heart and
brightens the intellect."

This edition of "Out of the Hurly-Burly; or, Life in an Odd
Corner," has been prepared with a view to its publication in
England, and the sole right to issue the book in that country
has been disposed of by me to Messrs. Ward, Lock and Tyler,
who pay liberally for this exclusive privilege.

The volume is American in character, and in its incidents. It
is, indeed, a story of life in a quiet American village
which, unlike most of the towns in the United States, can
count the years of its existence by centuries. I venture to
hope that the book contains much that will interest
intelligent Englishmen who do not care simply to be amused,
while I am sure that those who believe that the man who
laughs is the best and happiest man, will find some things in
the volume which will provoke mirth.

It may be well to say that the use of the lash as a means of
punishment, to which allusion is made in the 13th and 14th
chapters, is peculiar to not more than two of the thirty-
seven states in the Union. The mass of the people of the
country, and, indeed, many of the citizens of the two
commonwealths in question, regard the whipping-post as a
relic of barbarism, and the flogging of criminals as inhuman,
and wholly useless for the prevention of crime.

English readers of this book will find that the orthography
differs in some respects from that to which they have been
accustomed. I have adhered throughout to the spelling given
in the dictionary of Noah Webster, which is the standard
authority in the United States. The people of that land are,
as it were, all under Noah's spell, and I have naturally
followed the common practice. It is worth while to mention
this fact so that those who are dissatisfied can find fault
with Noah and not with me. He can bear harsh criticism more
serenely than I can, for he is dead.




PREFACE

IT seems to be necessary to say a few words in reference to
the contents of this volume as I offer it to the public.
Several of the incidents related in the story have already
appeared in print, and have been copied in various newspapers
throughout the country. Sometimes they have been attributed
to the author; but more frequently they have been given
either without any name attached to them, or they have been
credited to persons who probably never saw them. The best of
the anecdotes have been imitated, but none of them, I
believe, are imitations. I make this statement, so that if
the reader should happen to encounter anything that has a
familiar appearance, he may understand that he has the
original and not a copy before him. But a very large portion
of the matter contained in the book is entirely new, and is
now published for the first time; while all the rest of it
has been rewritten and improved, so that it is as good as
new.

If this little venture shall achieve popularity, I must
attribute the fact largely to the admirable pictures with
which it has been adorned by the artists whose names appear
upon the title page. All of these gentlemen have my hearty
thanks for the efforts they have made to accomplish the best
results; but while I express my appreciation of the beautiful
landscapes of Mr. Schell, the admirable drawings of Mr.
Sheppard and the excellent designs of Mr. Bensell, I wish to
direct attention especially to the humorous pictures of Mr.
Arthur B. Frost. This artist makes his first appearance
before the public in these pages. These are the only drawings
upon wood that he has ever executed, and they are so nicely
illustrative of the text, they display so much originality
and versatility, and they have such genial humor, with so
little extravagance and exaggeration, that they seem to me
surely to give promise of a prosperous career for the artist.

It is customary upon these occasions to say something of an
apologetic nature for the purpose of inducing the public to
believe that the author regards with humility the work of
which he is really exceedingly proud—something that will tend
to soften the blows which are expected from ferocious and
cruel critics. But I believe I have nothing of this kind to
offer. If I thought the book required an apology, I would not
publish it. Any reviewer who does not like it is at liberty
to say so; and I am the more ready to accord him this
permission because I am impressed with the conviction that he
will hit as hard as he wants to whether I give him leave or
withhold it. All I ask is that the volume shall have fair
play. If it is successful as an attempt to construct a book
of humor which will contribute to innocent popular amusement
without violating the laws that govern the construction and
orthography of the English language, and as an effort to give
pleasure to sensible grown people without offering
entertainment to children and idiots, it deserves
commendation. If it is a failure in these respects, then it
ought to be suppressed, for it certainly has no mighty moral
purpose, and it is not designed to reform anything on earth
but the personal fortunes of the author.

MAX ADELER.






CHAPTER I.
THE FOUNDER OF NEW CASTLE—A SEARCH FOR QUIETNESS—LIFE IN THE
CITY AND THE VILLAGE—WHY THE LATTER IS PREFERABLE—
PECULIARITIES OF THE VILLAGE—SLEEPY OLD TOWN—WE ERECT OUR
FAMILY ALTAR.



IF Peter Menuit had never been born, it is extremely probable
that this book would not have been written. Mr. Menuit,
however, had nothing to do with the construction of the
volume, and his controlling purpose perhaps was not to
prepare the way for it. Peter Menuit was a Swede who in 1631
came sailing up the Delaware River in a queer old craft with
bulging sides and with stem and stern high in the air. Moved
by some mysterious impulse, he dropped his anchor near a
certain verdant shore and landed. Standing there, he surveyed
the lovely scene that lay before him in the woodland and the
river, and then announced to his companions his determination
to remain upon that spot. He began to erect a town upon the
bank that went sloping downward to the sandy beach, and his
only claim to the immortality that has been allotted to him
is that he created what is now New Castle.

It would be pleasant, if it did not seem vain, to hope that
New Castle will base its aspirations to enduring fame upon
the circumstance that another humble personage came, two
hundred years and more after Menuit's arrival, to live in it
and to tell, in a homely but amiable fashion, the story of
some of its good people, and to say something of a few of
their peculiarities, perplexities and adventures.

We were in search of quietness. The city has many
charms and many conveniences as a place of residence; and
there are those who, having accustomed themselves to the
methods of life that prevail among the dense populations of
the great towns, can hardly find happiness and comfort
elsewhere. But although the gregarious instinct is strong in
me, I cannot endure to be crowded. I love my fellow-man with
inexpressible affection, but oftentimes he seems more lovable
when I behold him at a distance. I yearn occasionally for
human society, but I prefer to have it only when I choose,
not at all times and seasons without intermission. In the
city, however, it is impossible to secure solitude when it is
desired. If I live, as I must, in one of a row of houses, the
partition walls upon both sides are likely to be thin. It is
possible that I may have upon the one hand a professor of
music who gives, throughout the day, maddening lessons to
muscular pupils and practices scales himself with energetic
persistency during the night. Upon the other side there may
be a family which cherishes two or three infants and sustains
a dog. As a faint whisper will penetrate the almost
diaphanous wall, the mildest as well as the most violent of
the nocturnal demonstrations of the children disturb my
sleep; and when these have ceased, the dog will probably
become boisterous in the yard.

If there is not a boiler-making establishment in the street
at the rear of the house, there will be a saw-mill with a
steam whistle, and it is tolerably certain that my neighbor
over the way will either have a vociferous daughter who keeps
the window open while she sings, or will permit his boy to
perform upon a drum. There is incessant noise in street and
yard and dwelling. There is perpetual, audible evidence of
the active existence of human beings. There is too much
crowding and too little opportunity for absolute withdrawal
from the confusion and from contact with the restless energy
of human life.

It has always seemed to me that village life is the happiest
and the most comfortable, and that the busy city man who
would establish his home where he can have repose without
inconvenience and discomfort should place it amid the trees
and flowers and by the grassy highway of some pretty hamlet,
where the noise of the world's greater commerce never comes,
and where isolation and companionship are both possible
without an effort. Such a home, planted judiciously in a half
acre, where children can romp and play and where one can
cultivate a few flowers and vegetables, mingling the
sentimental heliotrope with the practical cabbage, and the
ornamental verbena with the useful onion, may be made an
earthly Paradise.

There must not be too much ground, for then it becomes a
burden and a care. There are few city men who have the
agricultural impulse so strong in them that they will find
delight, after a day of mental labor and excitement, in
rasping a garden with a hoe in the hope of securing a
vegetable harvest. A very little exercise of that kind, in
most cases, suffices to moderate the horticultural enthusiasm
of the inexperienced citizen. It is pleasant enough to weed a
few flowers or to toss a spadeful or two of earth about the
roots of the grapevine when you feel disposed to such mild
indulgence in exercise; but when the garden presents tasks
which must be performed no matter what the frame of mind or
the condition of the body, you are apt, for the first time,
to have a thorough comprehension of the meaning of the curse
uttered against the ground when Adam went forth from Eden. It
is far better and cheaper to hire a competent man to
cultivate the little field; then in your leisure moments you
may set out the cabbage plants upside down and place poles
for the strawberry vines to clamber upon, knowing well that
if evil is done, it will be corrected on the morrow when the
offender is far away, and when the maledictions of the
agricultural expert, muttered as he relieves the vegetables
from the jeopardy in which ignorance has placed them, cannot
reach your ears. I like a house not too old, but having
outward comeliness, with judicious arrangement of the
interior, and all of those convenient contrivances of the
plumber, the furnace maker and the bell-hanger which make the
merest mite of a modern dwelling incomparably superior in
comfort to the most stupendous of marble palaces in the
ancient times. I would have no neighbor's house within twenty
yards upon either side; I would have noble shade trees about
the place, and I would esteem it a most fortunate thing if
through the foliage I could obtain constant glimpses of some
shining stream upon whose bosom ships come to and fro, and on
which I could sometimes find solace and exercise in rowing,
fishing and sailing.

Village life is the best. It has all the advantages of
residence in the country without the unpleasant things which
attend existence in a wholly rural home. There is not the
oftentimes oppressive solitude of the country, nor is there
the embarrassment that comes from the distance to the
station, to the shops and to the post-office. There are the
city blessings of the presence of other human beings, and of
access to the places where wants may be supplied, without the
crowds, without the mixed and villainous perfumes of the
streets and without the immoderate taxes. With the
conveniences of a civilized community, a village may have
pure and healthful air, opportunity for parents and children
to amuse themselves out of doors, cheap fare, moderate rent,
milk which knows not the wiles of the city dealer, and a
moral atmosphere in which a family may grow up away from the
temptations and the evil associations which tend to corrupt
the young in the great cities.

More than this, I like life in the village because it brings
a man into kindlier relations with his fellows than can be
obtained elsewhere. In the city I am jostled at every step by
those who are strangers to me, who know nothing of me, and
who care nothing. In the village I am known by every one, and
I know all. If I have any title to respect, it is admitted by
the entire society of the place, and perhaps I may even win
something of affection if I am worthy of it.

In the country town, too, you may have your morals carefully
looked after. There are prying eyes and busy tongues, and you
are so conspicuous that unless you walk straightly, the
little world around you shall know of your slips and falls.
You may quarrel with your wife for ever in the city and few
care to hear the miserable story; but in the village the
details of the conjugal contest are heralded about before the
day is spent.

The interest that is felt in you is amazing. The cost of your
establishment is as well known as if it were blazoned upon
the walls. You cannot impose upon the people with a pretence
of splendor if you have not the reality; one gossiping old
woman who has discovered the sham will make you an object of
public scorn in an hour. The village knows how your children
are dressed and trained; how often you have mutton and the
extent of your indulgence in beef. The cost of your carpets
is a matter of common notoriety; your differences with your
servants are discussed at the sewing-circle, and the purchase
of new clothing for your family is a concern of public
interest. The arrival of your wife's winter bonnet actually
creates excitement in the village society, and you are
certain, therefore, to get the full worth of your investment
in that article of dress, while the owner obtains unlimited
satisfaction; for winter bonnets are purchased for the
benefit of other people chiefly, not for the convenience and
happiness of the wearers.

Every man is something of a hero-worshiper; and if in the
city I find it difficult to select an idol from among the
many who thrust their greatness upon me, I am not so
embarrassed in the village. Here I will probably find but one
man who is revered as the embodiment of the worshipful
virtues. He has larger wealth than any of his fellow-
villagers; he lives in the most sumptuous house in the place;
he belongs to the oldest family, and his claim to superiority
is admitted almost without question by his reverent townsmen.
It gives me joy to add my voice to the chorus of admiration,
and to feel humble in that presence wherein my neighbors have
humility. Sometimes, of course, I cannot help perceiving that
the object of this adoration is, after all, a very pigmy of
his kind. I am compelled to admit that his fortune seems
large only because mine and Jones's are small; that his house
is a palace only for the reason that it dwarfs my little
cottage; that if unassisted brains carried the day, and
strutting was felonious, he would certainly occupy a much
less magnificent position. I know that in a greater community
he would be wholly insignificant. And yet I admit his claim
to profound respect. It pleases me to see him play his little
part, and to observe with what calm, luxurious confidence in
his own right and title to homage he passes through life. And
I know, after all, that the greater men, out in the busy
hurly-burly of the world, are not so very much greater. A
good deal of their claim to superiority, too, is a miserable
sham; and doubtless, if we could see them as closely as we
see our village grandee, we should find that they also depend
much upon popular credulity for the stability of their
reputations.

My pompous village nabob, too, is honest. I am sure of this.
He helps to conduct the government of the community, but he
does his duty fairly and he is a gentleman. I could love him
for that alone, and for that feel a deeper affection for life
in his village. When I go to the city and perceive what
creatures wield the power there, when I watch the trickery,
the iniquity, the audacious infamy, of the cliques that
control the machinery of that great government, and when I
look, as I do sometimes, into the faces of those who are thus
leagued for plunder and power, only to see there vulgarity,
ignorance, vice and general moral filthiness, my soul is made
sick. I can turn then with pleasure to the simple methods
with which our village is governed, and honestly give my
respect to the guileless old gentleman who presides over its
destinies.

We wish for quietness, and in New Castle it can be obtained,
I think, in a particularly concentrated form. When Swede and
Dutchman and Englishman had done contending for possession of
the place, there was peace until the Revolution came, and
with it ships of war and privateers, and such



hurrying of troops and supplies across from New Castle to
Frenchtown, from the Delaware to the Chesapeake, as kept the
old town in a stir. There was then an interval of repose
until the second war with England, when these busy scenes
were re-enacted. Later in the century a mighty stir was made
by the construction of a railroad, one of the earliest in the
country, to Chesapeake Bay; then, as the excitement died
away, the old town gradually went to sleep, and for nearly
forty years it slumbered so soundly that there seemed to be a
chance that it would never wake again. But time achieves
wonderful things, and perhaps the day will come when the
vicinity of the old town to the bay, the depth of water at
its shores and the facilities offered for manufacturing and
easy transportation, may make the village a great industrial
centre, with hundreds of mills and multitudes of working-
people. But as we join ourselves to the community there is no
promise of such an awakening. We have still the profound
repose and the absence of change that make the place so dear
to those who have known it in their childhood. There are the
paved streets where the grass grows thickly; the ancient
wharves protruding into the stream, deserted but by the
anglers and the naked and wicked little boys who go in to
swim; the tumbling stone ice-piers, a little way out in the
river; the old court-house, whose steeple is the point upon
which moves the twelve-mile radial line whose northern end
describes the semi-circular boundary of Delaware; the rickety
town-hall, the ancient churches and the grim old houses with
moss-covered roofs, the Battery, with its drooping willows
and its glorious vista of river and shore beyond, and the
dense masses of foliage, shutting out the sky here and there
as one passes along the streets.

Into such a house as I have described, not far from the
river, and with our neighbors at a little more than arm's
length, I have come with wife and family, with household gods
and domestic paraphernalia generally, to begin the life which
will supply the material wherewith to construct the ensuing
pages. It may perhaps turn out that the better part of that
existence will not be told, but perchance it may be that the
events related will be those which will possess for the
reader greatest interest and amusement.






CHAPTER II.
A VERY DANGEROUS INVENTION—THE PATENT COMBINATION STEP-
LADDER—DOMESTIC SERVANTS—ADVERTISING FOR A GIRL—THE PEASANT-
GIRL OF FACT AND FICTION—A CONTRAST.

STEP-LADDER is an almost indispensable article to persons who
are moving into a new house. Not only do the domestics find
it extremely convenient when they undertake to wash the
windows, to remove the dust from the door and window-frames,
and to perform sundry other household duties, but the lord of
the castle will require it when he hangs his pictures, when
he fixes the curtains and when he yields to his wife's
entreaty for a hanging shelf or two in the cellar. I would,
however, warn my fellow-countrymen against the contrivance
which is offered to them under the name of the "Patent
Combination Step-ladder." I purchased one in the city just
before we moved, because the dealer showed me how, by the
simple operation of a set of springs, the ladder could be
transformed into an ironing-table, and from that into a
comfortable settee for the kitchen, and finally back again
into a step-ladder, just as the owner desired. It seemed like
getting the full worth of the money expended to obtain a trio
of such useful articles for a single price, and the
temptation to purchase was simply irresistible. But the
knowledge gained by a practical experience of the operation
of the machine enables me to affirm that there is no genuine
economical advantage in the use of this ingenious article.

Upon the day of its arrival, the servant-girl mounted the
ladder for the purpose of removing the globes from the
chandelier in the parlor, and while she was engaged in the
work the weight of her body unexpectedly put the springs in
motion, and the machine was suddenly converted into an
ironing-table, while the maid-servant was prostrated upon the
floor with a sprained ankle and amid the fragments of two
shattered globes.




Then we decided that the apparatus should be used exclusively
as an ironing-table, and to this purpose it would probably
have been devoted permanently if it had suited. On the
following Tuesday, however, while half a dozen shirts were
lying on it ready to be ironed, someone knocked against it
accidentally. It gave two or three ominous preliminary jerks,
ground two shirts into rags, hurled the flat-iron out into
the yard, and after a few convulsive movements of the
springs, settled into repose in the shape of a step-ladder.

It became evident then that it could be used with greatest
safety as a settee, and it was placed in the kitchen in that
shape. For a few days it gave much satisfaction. But one
night when the servant had company the bench was perhaps
overloaded, for it had another and most alarming paroxysm;
there was a trembling of the legs, a violent agitation of the
back, then a tremendous jump, one of the visitors was hurled
against the range, while the machine turned several
somersaults, jammed itself halfway through the window sash,
and appeared once more in the similitude of an ironing-table.

It has now attained to such a degree of sensitiveness that it
goes through its entire drill promptly and with celerity if
any comes near it or coughs or sneezes close at hand. We have
it stored away in the garret, and sometimes in the middle of
the night a rat will jar it, or a current of air will pass
through the room, and we can hear it dancing over the floor
and getting into service as a ladder, a bench and a table
fifteen or twenty times in quick succession.

The machine will be disposed of for a small fraction of the
original cost. It might be a valuable addition to the
collection of some good museum. I am convinced that it will
shine with greater lustre as a curiosity than as a household
utensil.

Perhaps we may attribute to the fantastic capers of
this step-ladder the dissatisfaction expressed by the servant
who came with us from the city; at any rate, she gave us
notice at the end of the first week that she would not
remain. She is the ninth that we have had within four months.
Mrs. Adeler said she was not sorry the woman intended to go,
for she was absolutely good for nothing; but I think a poor
servant is better than none at all. Life is gloomy enough
without the misery which comes from rising before daylight to
fumble among the fires, and without living upon short rations
because one's wife has no time to attend to the cooking.

I am not sure, at any rate, that it would be a very great
advantage to have thoroughly good servants, for then women
would be deprived of the very evident pleasure they now take
in discussing the shortcomings of their domestics. The
practice is so common that there must be supreme consolation
in the sympathy and in the relief to the overcharged feelings
that are permitted by such communion.

Place two women together under any circumstances, and it
makes no difference where the conversation starts from, for
it will be perfectly certain to work itself around to the
hired-girl question before many minutes have elapsed. I have
seen an elderly housekeeper, with experience in conducting
the talk in the desired direction, break in upon a discussion 
of Pythagoras and the doctrine of the transmigration of
souls, and switch off the entire debate with such expedition
that a careless listener would for some moments have an
indistinct impression that the conversation related to the
inefficiency of Pythagoras as a washer and ironer, and to the
tendency of that heathen philosopher to take two Thursdays
out every week. And when a woman has an unusually villainous
servant, is it not interesting to observe how she glories in
the superior intensity of her sufferings as compared with
those of her neighbors, and to perceive how she rejoices in
her misery? A housewife who possesses a really good girl is
always in a condition of wretchedness upon such occasions,
and is apt to listen in envious silence while her companions
unburden their souls to each other.

Mrs. Adeler intimated that these accusations were slanderous,
but she ventured to observe that the practical question which
required immediate consideration was, How shall we get
another girl?

"There is but one method, Mrs. A.: it is to advertise. Do not
patronize the establishments which, in bitter irony, are
styled 'intelligence offices.' An intelligence office is
always remarkable for the dense stupidity of everybody
connected with it. But a single manifestation of intelligence
gleams through the intellectual darkness that enshrines the
souls of the beings who maintain such places. I refer to the
singular ability displayed in extracting two-dollar bills
from persons who know that they will get nothing for their
money."

Mrs. Adeler admitted that it would perhaps be better to
advertise.

"How would it answer to insert in the daily paper an
advertisement in which sarcasm is mingled with exaggeration
in such a way that it shall secure an unlimited number of
applications, while we shall give expression to the feeling
of bitterness that is supposed to exist in the bosom of every
housekeeper?"

She said she thought she hardly caught the idea precisely.

"Suppose, for instance, we should publish something like
this: Wanted: a competent girl for general housework. The
most strenuous effort will be made to give such a person
complete satisfaction. If she is not pleased with the
furniture already in the kitchen, we are willing to have the
range silver plated, the floor laid in mosaic and the dresser
covered with pink plush. No objection will be made to
breakage. The domestic will be permitted at any time to
disport in the china closet with the axe. We consider hair in
the breakfast-rolls an improvement; and the more silver forks
that are dropped into the drain, the more serene is the
happiness which reigns in the household. Our girl cannot have
Sunday out. She can go out every day but Sunday, and remain
out until midnight if she wishes to. If her relations suffer
for want of sugar, she can supply them with ours. We rather
prefer a girl who habitually blows out the gas, and who is
impudent when complaint is made because she soaks the
mackerel in the tea-kettle. If she can sprinkle hot coals
over the floor now and then, and set the house afire, we will
rejoice the more, because it will give the fire-department
healthful and necessary exercise. Nobody will interfere if
she woos the milkman, and she will confer a favor if she will
discuss family matters across the fence with the girl who
lives next door. Such a servant as this can have a good home,
the second-story front room and the whole of our income with
the exception of three dollars a week, which we must insist,
reluctantly, upon reserving for our own use.'

"How does that strike you, Mrs. Adeler?"

She said that it struck her as being particularly
nonsensical. She hoped I wouldn't put such stuff as that in
the paper.

"Certainly not, Mrs. A. If I did, we should cause a general
immigration of the domestics of the country to New Castle. We
will not precipitate such a disaster."

The insertion of a less extended advertisement, couched in
the usual terms, secured a reply from a young woman named
Catherine. And when Catherine's objections to the size of the
family, to the style of the cooking-range, to the dimensions
of the weekly wash and to sundry other things had been
overcome, she consented to accept the position.

"I hope she will suit," exclaimed Mrs. Adeler, with a sigh
and an intonation which implied doubt. "I do hope she will
answer, but I am afraid she won't, for according to her own
confession she doesn't know how to make bread or to iron
shirts or to do anything."

"That is the reason why she demanded such exorbitant wages.
Those servants who are entirely ignorant always want the
largest pay. If we ever obtain a girl who understands her
business in all its departments, I cherish the conviction
that she will work for us for nothing. The wages of domestics
are usually in inverse ratio to the merit of the recipients.
Did you ever reflect upon the difference between the real and
the ideal Irish maiden?"

Mrs. A. admitted that she had not considered the subject with
any degree of attention.

"The ideal peasant-girl lives only in fiction and upon the
stage. We are largely indebted to Mr. Boucicault for her
existence, just as we are under obligations to Mr. Fennimore
Cooper for a purely sentimental conception of the North
American Indian. Have you ever seen the Colleen Bawn?"

"What is that?" inquired Mrs. Adeler, as she bit off a piece
of thread from a spool.

"It is a play, a drama, my dear, by Mr. Dion Boucicault."

"You know I never go to theatres."

"Well, in that and in many other of his dramas Mr. Boucicault
has drawn a particularly affecting portrait of the imaginary
peasant-girl of Ireland. She is, as depicted by him, a lovely
young creature, filled with tenderest sensibility, animated
by loftiest impulses and inspired perpetually by poetic
enthusiasm. The conversation of this fascinating being
sparkles with wit; she overflows with generosity; she has
unutterable longings for a higher and nobler life; she loves
with intense and overpowering passion; she is capable of
supreme self-sacrifice; and she always wears clean clothing.
If such charming girls really existed in Ireland in large
numbers, it would be the most attractive spot in the world.
It would be a particularly profitable place for young
bachelors to emigrate to. I think I should even go there
myself."

Mrs. Adeler said she would certainly accompany me if I did.

"But these persons have no actual existence. We know,
from a painful experience, what the peasant-girl of real life
is, do we not? We know that her appearance is not
prepossessing; we are aware that her lofty impulses do not
lift her high enough to enable her to avoid impertinence and
to conquer her unnatural fondness for cooking wine. She will
withhold starch from the shirt collars and put it in the
underclothing; she will hold the baby by the leg, so that it
is in perpetual peril of apoplexy, and she will drink the 
milk. All of her visitors are her cousins; and when they have
spent a festive evening with her in the kitchen, is it not
curious to remark with what certainty we find low tide in the
sugar-box and an absence of symmetry about the cold beef? The
only evidence that I can discover of the existence in her
soul of a yearning for a higher life is that she nearly
always wants Brussels carpet in the kitchen, and this longing
is peculiarly intense if, when at the home of her childhood,
she was accustomed to live in a mud-cabin and to sleep with a
pig."

But I do not regret that Mr. Boucicault has not placed this
person upon the stage. It is, indeed, a matter for rejoicing
that she is not there. She plays such a part in the drama of
domestic life that in contemplation of the virtues of the
fabulous being we find intense relief




CHAPTER III.
THE VIEW UPON THE RIVER; A MAGNIFICENT PANORAMA—MR. AND MRS.
COOLEY—MATRIMIONIAL INFELICITIES—THE CASE OF MRS. SAWYER; A
BLIGHTED LIFE—A PRESENT; OUR CENTURY PLANT AND ITS
PECULIARITIES.




E have a full view of the river from our chamber window, and
it is a magnificent spectacle that greets us as we rise in
the morning and fling the shutters wide open. The sun, in
this early summer-time, has already crept high above the
horizon of the pine-covered shore opposite, and has flooded
the unruffled waters with its golden light until they are
transformed for us into a sea of flame. There comes a fleet
of grimy coal schooners moving upward with the tide, their
dingy sails hanging almost listless in the air; now they
float, one by one, into the yellow glory of the sunshine
which bars the river from shore to shore. Yonder is a tiny
tug puffing valorously as it tows the great merchantman—home
from what distant land of wonders?—up to the wharves of the
great city. And look! there is another tug-boat going down
stream, with a score of canal-boats moving in huge mass
slowly behind it. They come from far up among the mountains
of the Lehigh and the Schuylkill with their burdens of coal,
and they are bound for the Chesapeake. Those men lounging
lazily about upon the decks while the women are getting
breakfast ready spend their lives amid some of the wildest
and noblest scenery in the world. I would rather be a canal-
boat captain, Mrs. Adeler, and through all my existence float
calmly and serenely amid those regions of beauty and delight,
without ever knowing what hurry is, than to be the greatest
and busiest of statesmen—that is, if one calling were as
respectable and lucrative as the other.

That fellow upon the boat at the rear is playing upon his
bugle. The canal-boat bugler is not an artist, but he makes
wonderful music sometimes when he blows a blast up yonder in
the heart of Pennsylvania, and sets the wild echoes flying
among the canons of those mighty hills. And even now it is
not indifferent. Listen! The tones come to us mellowed by the
distance, and so indistinct that they have lost all but the
sweetness which makes them seem so like the sound of

"Horns of Elfland, faintly blowing."

That prosaic tooter floating there upon the river doubtless
would be surprised to learn that he is capable of such a
suggestion; but he is.

Off there in the distance, emerging from the shadowy mantle
of mist that rests still upon the bosom of the stream to the
south, comes the steamboat from Salem, with its decks loaded
down with rosy and fragrant peaches, and with baskets of
tomatoes and apples and potatoes and berries, ready for the
hungry thousands of the Quaker City. The schooner lying there
at the wharf is getting ready to move away, so that the
steamer may come in. You can hear the screech made by the
block as the tackle of the sail is drawn swiftly through it.
Now she swings out into the stream, and there, right athwart
her bows, see that fisherman rowing homeward with his net
piled high in tangled meshes in the bow of his boat. He has a
hundred or two silver-scaled shiners at his feet, I'll
warrant you, and he is thinking rather of the price they will
bring than of the fact that his appearance in his rough
batteau gives an especially picturesque air to the beauty of
that matchless scene. I wish I was a painter. I would pay any
price if I could fling upon canvas that background of hazy
gray, and place against it the fiery splendor of the sunlit
river, with steamer and ship and weather-beaten sloop and
fishing-boat drifting to and fro upon the golden tide.

There, too, is old Cooley, our next-door neighbor on
the east. He is out early this morning, walking about his
garden, pulling up a weed here and there, prowling among his
strawberry vines and investigating the condition of his early
raspberries. That dog which trots behind him, my dear, is the
one that barked all night. I shall have to ask Cooley to take
him in the house after this. We had enough of that kind of
disturbance in the city; we do not want it here.

"I don't like the Cooleys," remarked Mrs. A.

"Why not?"

"Because they quarrel with each other. Their girl told our
girl that 'him and her don't hit it,' and that Mr. Cooley is
continually having angry disputes with his wife. She says
that sometimes they even come to blows. It is dreadful."

"It is indeed dreadful. Somebody ought to speak to Cooley
about it. He needs overhauling. Perhaps he is too ignorant a
man to have perceived the true road to happiness. Of course,
Mrs. A., you know the secret of real happiness in married
life?"

She said she had never thought much about it. She was happy,
and it seemed natural to be so. She thought it very strange
that there should ever be any other condition of things
between man and wife.

"Mrs. Adeler, the secret of conjugal felicity is contained in
this formula: demonstrative affection and self-sacrifice. A
man should not only love his wife dearly, but he should tell
her he loves her, and tell her very often. And each should be
willing to yield, not once or twice, but constantly, and as a
practice, to the other. The man who never takes the baby from
his wife, who never offers to help her in her domestic
duties, who will sit idly by, indulging himself with repose
while she is overwhelmed with care and work among the
children, or with other matters, is a mean wretch who does
not deserve to have a happy home. And a wife who never holds
up her husband's hands in his struggle with the world, who
displays no interest in his perplexities and trials, who has
never a word of cheer for him when he staggers under his
heavy burden, is not worthy the name of a wife. Selfishness,
my dear, crushes out love, and most of the couples who are
living without affection for each other, with cold and dead
hearts, with ashes where there should be a bright and holy
flame, have destroyed themselves by caring too much for
themselves and too little for each other."

"To me," said Mrs. Adeler, "the saddest thing about such
coldness and indifference is that both the man and the woman
must sometimes think of the years when they loved each
other."

"Yes, and can you imagine anything that would be more likely
to give a woman the heartache than such a recollection? When
her husband comes home and enters the house without a smile
or a word of welcome; when he growls at his meals, and finds
fault with this and that domestic arrangement; when he buries
his nose in his newspaper after supper, and never resurrects
it excepting when he has a savage word of reproof for one of
his children, or when he goes out again to spend the evening
and leaves his wife alone, the picture which she brings up
from the past cannot be a very pleasant one.

"Indeed, my dear, the man's present conduct must fill the
woman's soul with bitter pain when she contrasts it with that
which won her affection. For there must have been a time when
she looked forward with joy to his coming, when he caressed
her and covered her with endearments, when he looked deep
into her eyes and said that he loved her, and when he said
that he could have no happiness in this world unless she
loved him wholly and truly. When a man makes such a
declaration as that to a woman, he is a villain if he ever
treats her with anything but loving-kindness. And I take the
liberty of doubting whether he who leads a young girl into
wedlock with such pledges, and then acts in direct violation
of them, ought not to be prosecuted for obtaining valuable
consideration upon false pretences. It is infinitely worse,
in my opinion, than stealing ordinary property."

Mrs. Adeler expressed the opinion that death at the stake
might be regarded as an appropriate punishment for criminals
of this class.

"But there is a humorous side even to this melancholy
business. Do you remember the Sawyers, who used to live near
us in the city? Well, before Sawyer's marriage I was his most
intimate friend; and when they returned from their wedding-
trip, of course I called upon them. Mrs. Sawyer alone was at
home, and after a brief discussion of the weather, the
conversation turned upon Sawyer. I had known him for many
years, and I took pleasure in making Mrs. Sawyer believe that
he had as much virtue as an omnibus load of patriarchs. Mrs.
Sawyer assented joyously to it all, but I thought I detected
a shade of sadness on her face while she spoke. I asked her
if anything was the matter—if Sawyer's health was not good.

"'Oh yes,' she said, 'very good indeed, and I love him
dearly. He is the best man in the world; but—but—'

"Then I assured Mrs. Sawyer that she might speak frankly to
me, as I was Sawyer's friend, and could probably smooth away
any little unpleasantness that might mar their happiness. She
then said it was nothing: It might seem foolish to speak of
it; she knew it was not her dear husband's fault, and she
ought not to complain; but it was hard, hard to submit when
she reflected that there was but one thing to prevent her
being perfectly happy; yes, but one thing, for oh, Mr.
Adeler, I would ask for nothing more in this world if Ezekiel
only had a Roman nose!'

"It is an awful thing, Mrs. Adeler, to think of two young
lives being made miserable for want of one Roman nose, isn't
it?"

Mrs. A. gently intimated that she entertained a suspicion
that I had made up the story; and if I had not, why, then
Mrs. Sawyer certainly was a very foolish woman.

My wife's cousin, Bob Parker, came down a fortnight ago to
stay a day or two on his way to Cape May, with the intent to
tarry at that watering-place for a week or ten days, and then
to return here to remain with us for some time. Bob is a
bright youth, witty in his own small way, fond of using his
tongue, and always overflowing with animal spirits. He came
partly to see us, but chiefly, I think, because he cherishes
a secret passion for a certain fair maid who abides here.



He brought me a splendid present in the shape of an American
agave, or century plant. It was offered to him in
Philadelphia by a man who brought it to the store and wanted
to sell it. The man said it had belonged to his grandfather,
and he consented to part with it only because he was in
extreme poverty. The man informed Bob that the plant grew but
half an inch in twenty years, and blossomed but once in a
century. The last time it bloomed, according to the
information obtained from the gray-haired grandsire of the
man, was in 1776, and it would therefore certainly burst out
again in 1876. Patriotism and a desire to have such a
curiosity in the family combined to induce Mr. Parker to
purchase it at the price of fifty dollars.

I planted the phenomenon on the south side of the house,
against the wall. Two days afterward I called Bob's attention
to the circumstance that the agave had grown nearly three
feet since it was placed in the ground. This seemed somewhat
strange after what the man said about the growth of half an
inch in two decades. But we concluded that the surprising
development must be due to the extraordinary fertility of the
soil, and Bob exulted as he thought how he had beaten the man
by getting a century plant so much larger and so much more
valuable than he had supposed. Bob said that the man would be
wofully mad if he should call and see that century plant of
his grandfather's getting up out of the ground so splendidly.

That afternoon we all went down to Cape May, and for two
weeks we remained there. Upon our return, Bob remarked, as we 
stepped from the boat, that he wanted to go around the first
thing and see how the plant was coming on. He suggested
gloomily that he should be bitterly disappointed if it had
perished from neglect during our absence.

But it was not dead. We saw it as soon as we came near the
house. It had grown since our departure. It had a trunk as
thick as my leg, and the branches ran completely over three
sides of the house; over the window shutters, which were
closed so tightly that we had to chop the century plant away
with a hatchet; over the roof, down the chimneys, which were
so filled with foliage that they wouldn't draw; and over the
grapevine arbor, in such a fashion that we had to cut away
vines and all to get rid of the intruder.




The roots, also, had thrown out shoots over every available
square foot of the yard, so that I had eight or ten thousand
century plants in an exceedingly thriving condition, while a
branch had grown through the open cellar window, and was
getting along so finely that we could only reach the coal-bin
by tramping through a kind of an East Indian jungle.

Mr. Parker, after examining the vegetable carefully,
observed:

"I'm kind of sorry I bought that century plant, Max. I have
half an idea that the man who sold it to me was a humorist,
and that his Revolutionary grandfather was an octogenarian
fraud."

If anybody wants a good, strong, healthy century plant that
will stand any climate, and that is warranted to bloom in
1876, mine can be had for a very reasonable price. This may
be regarded as an unparalleled opportunity for any young
agriculturist who does not want to wait long for his
vegetables to grow.







CHAPTER IV.
JUDGE PITMAN—HIS EXPERIMENT IN THE BARN—A LESSON IN NATURAL
HISTORY—CATCHING THE EARLY TRAIN—ONE OF THE MISERIES OF
LIVING IN A VILLAGE—BALL'S LUNG EXERCISE—MR. COOLEY'S
IMPERTINENCE.

Y next-door neighbor upon the west is Judge Pitman. I heard
his name mentioned before I became acquainted with him, and I
fancied that he was either a present occupant of the bench,
or else that he had gone into retirement after spending his
active life in dispensing justice and unraveling the tangles
of the law. But it appears that he has never occupied a
judicial position, and that his title is purely
complimentary, having no relation whatever to the nature of
his pursuits either in the past or in the present. The judge,
indeed, is merely the owner of a couple of steam-tugs and one
or two wood sloops which ply upon the river and upon
Chesapeake Bay. He spends most of his time at home, living
comfortably upon the receipts of a business which is
conducted by his hired men, and perhaps also upon the
interest of a few good investments in this and other places.

A very brief acquaintance with the judge suffices to convince
any one that he has never presided in court. He is a rough,
uneducated man, with small respect for grammar, an
irrepressible tendency to distort the language, and very
little information concerning subjects which are not made
familiar by the occurrences of every-day life. But he is
hearty, genial, sincere and honest, and I very soon learned
to like him and to find amusement in his quaint simplicity.

My first interview with the judge was somewhat remarkable. I
came home early one afternoon for the purpose of training
some roses and clematis against my fence. While I was busily
engaged with the work, the judge, who had been digging
potatoes in his garden, stuck his spade in the earth and came
to the fence. After looking at me in silence for a few
moments, he observed,

"Fine day, cap!"

The judge has the habit of conferring titles promiscuously
and without provocation, particularly upon strangers. To call
me "cap." was his method of expressing a desire for
sociability.

"It is a beautiful day," I observed, "but the country needs
rain."

"It never makes no difference to me," replied the judge,
"what kinder weather there is; I'm allers satisfied. 'Twon't
rain no sooner for wishin' for it."

As there was no possibility of our having a controversy upon
this point, I merely replied, "That is true."

"How's yer pertaters comin' on?" inquired the judge.

"Very well, I believe. They're a little late, but they appear
to be thriving."




"Mine's doin' first rate," returned the judge. "I guanered
them in the spring, and I've bin a-hoein' at 'em and keepin'
the weeds down putty stiddy ever since. Mons'ous sight o'
labor growin' good pertaters, cap."

"I should think so," I rejoined, "although I haven't had much
practical experience in that direction thus far."

"Cap.," observed the judge, after a brief interval of
silence, "you're one of them fellers that writes for the
papers and magazines, a'n't you?"

"Yes, I sometimes do work of that kind."

"Well, see here: I've got somethin' on my mind that's bin a-
botherin' me the wust kind for a week and more. You've read
the 'Atlantic Monthly,' haven't you?"

"Yes."

"Well, my daughter bought one of 'em, and I was areadin' it
the other night, when I saw it stated that guanner could be
influenced by music, and that Professor Brown had made some
git up and come to him when he played a tune on the pianner."

I remembered, as the judge spoke, that the magazine in
question did contain a paragraph to the effect that the
iguana was susceptible of such influence, and that Mrs. Brown
had succeeded in taming one of these animals, so that it
would run to her at the sound of music. But I permitted Mr.
Pitman to continue without interruption.

"Of course," said he, "I never really believed no such
nonsense as that, but it struck me as kinder sing'lar, and I
thought I'd give the old thing a trial, anyhow. So I got down
my fiddle and went to the barn, and put a bag of guanner in
the middle of the floor and begun to rake out a tune. First I
played 'A Life on the Ocean Wave and a Home on the Rollin'
Deep' three or four times; and there that guanner sot, just
as I expected 'twould. Then I begun agin and sawed out a lot
o' variations, but still she didn't budge. Then I put on a
fresh spurt and jammed in a passel o' extra sharps and flats
and exercises; and I played that tune backward and sideways
and cat-a-cornered. And I stirred in some scales, and mixed
the tune up with Old Hundred and Mary Blaine and some Sunday-
school songs, until I nearly fiddled my shirt off, and nary
time did that guanner bag git up off o' that floor. I knowed
it wouldn't. I knowed that feller wa'n't tellin' the truth.
But, cap., don't it strike you that a man who'd lie like that
ought to have somethin' done to him? It 'pears to me 's if a
month or two in jail 'd do that feller good."

The lesson in natural history which I proceeded to give to
the judge need not be repeated here. He acknowledged that the
laugh was fairly against him, and ended his affirmation of
his new-born faith in the integrity of the Atlantic Monthly
by inviting me to climb over the fence and taste some of his
Bartlett pears. The judge and I have been steady friends ever
since.



I find that one of the most serious objections to living out
of town lies in the difficulty experienced in catching the
early morning train by which I must reach the city and my
business. It is by no means a pleasant matter, under any
circumstances, to have one's movements regulated by a
timetable and to be obliged to rise to breakfast and to leave
home at a certain hour, no matter how strong the temptation
to delay may be. But sometimes the horrible punctuality of
the train is productive of absolute suffering. For instance:
I look at my watch when I get out of bed and find that I have
apparently plenty of time, so I dress leisurely, and sit down
to the morning meal in a frame of mind which is calm and
serene. Just as I crack my first egg I hear the down train
from Wilmington. I start in alarm; and taking out my watch, I
compare it with the clock and find that it is eleven minutes
slow, and that I have only five minutes left in which to get
to the depot. I endeavor to scoop the egg from the shell, but
it burns my fingers, the skin is tough, and after struggling
with it for a moment, it mashes into a hopeless mess. I drop
it in disgust and seize a roll, while I scald my tongue with
a quick mouthful of coffee. Then I place the roll in my mouth
while my wife hands me my satchel and tells me she thinks she
hears the whistle. I plunge madly around looking for my
umbrella, then I kiss the family good-bye as well as I can
with a mouth full of roll, and dash toward the door.

Just as I get to the gate, I find that I have forgotten my
duster and the bundle my wife wanted me to take up to the
city to her aunt. Charging back, I snatch them up and tear
down the gravel-walk in a frenzy. I do not like to run
through the village: it is undignified and it attracts
attention; but I walk furiously. I go faster and faster as I
get away from the main street. When half the distance is
accomplished, I actually do hear the whistle; there can be no
doubt about it this time. I long to run, but I know that if I
do I will excite that abominable speckled dog sitting by the
sidewalk a little distance ahead of me. Then I really see the
train coming around the curve close by the depot, and I feel
that I must make better time; and I do. The dog immediately
manifests an interest in my movements. He tears after me, and
is speedily joined by five or six other dogs, which frolic
about my legs and bark furiously. Sundry small boys, as I go
plunging past, contribute to the excitement by whistling with
their fingers, and the men who are at work upon the new
meeting-house stop to look at me and exchange jocular remarks
with each other. I do feel ridiculous; but I must catch that
train at all hazards.



I become desperate when I have to slacken my pace until two
or three women who are standing upon the sidewalk, discussing
the infamous price of butter, scatter to let me pass. I
arrive within a few yards of the station with my duster
flying in the wind, with my coat tails in a horizontal
position, and with the speckled dog nipping my heels, just as
the train begins to move. I put on extra pressure, resolving
to get the train or perish, and I reach it just as the last
car is going by. I seize the hand-rail; I am jerked violently
around, but finally, after a desperate effort, I get upon the
step with my knees, and am hauled in by the brakeman, hot
dusty and mad, with my trousers torn across the knees, my
legs bruised and three ribs of my umbrella broken.

Just as I reach a comfortable seat in the car, the train
stops, and then backs up on the siding, where it remains for
half an hour while the engineer repairs a dislocated valve.
The anger which burns in my bosom as I reflect upon what now
is proved to have been the folly of that race is increased as
I look out of the window and observe the speckled dog engaged
with his companions in an altercation over a bone. A man who
permits his dog to roam about the streets nipping the legs of
every one who happens to go at a more rapid gait than a walk,
is unfit for association with civilized beings. He ought to
be placed on a desert island in mid-ocean, and be compelled
to stay there.



This will do as a picture of the experience of one morning—
one melancholy morning. Of course it is exceptional. Rather
than endure such agony of mind and discomfort of body
frequently, I would move back to the city, and abandon for
ever my little paradise by the Delaware.

I hardly think I shall get along so well with my neighbor on
the other side, Cooley, as I do with Pitman. He is not only
exceedingly ill-natured, but he inclines to be impertinent.
Several times he has volunteered advice respecting the
management of my garden and grounds, and has displayed a
disposition to be somewhat sarcastic when his plans did not
meet with my approval. I contrived, however, to avoid a
breach of our amicable relations until the other day, when
his conduct became absolutely unendurable.

I observed in the last number of Ball's Journal of Health
some suggestions concerning a good method of exercising the
lungs and expanding the chest. They were to this effect:

"Step out into the purest air you can find; stand perfectly
erect with the head up and the shoulders back, and then,
fixing the lips as though you were going to whistle, draw the
air, not through the nostrils, but through the lips, into the
lungs. When the chest is about half full, gradually raise the
arms, keeping them extended with the palms of the hands down,
as you suck in the air, so as to bring them over the head
just as the lungs are quite full. Then drop the thumbs
inward, and after gently forcing the arms backward and the
chest open, reverse the process by which you draw your breath
till the lungs are empty. This process should be repeated
three or four times immediately after bathing, and also
several times through the day."

This seemed reasonable, and I determined to give it a trial.
For that purpose I went out into the yard; and pinning the
directions to a tree, I stood in front of them where I could
see them. Just as I began, Cooley came out; and perceiving
me, he placed his elbows upon the fence, rested his chin upon
his arms and watched me with a very. peculiar smile upon his
face. I was exceedingly annoyed and somewhat embarrassed, but
I was determined that he should not have the gratification of
driving me away from my own ground. I made up my mind that I
would continue the exercise without appearing to notice him.
In a few moments, however, he remarked:

"Training for a prize-fight, Adeler?"

I made no reply, but continued the exercise. When I had gone
through the programme once, I began again. As I arrived at
that portion of it where the instructions direct the
arrangement of the lips, Mr. Cooley, by this time some. what
incensed at my silence, observed,

"Whistle us a tune, Adeler. Give us something lively!"

As I paid no attention to this invitation, Cooley embraced
the opportunity afforded by the upward motion of my arms, in
accordance with the directions, to ask me if I was going to
dive, and to offer to bring me out a tub in case I cherished
such a design.

Then I completed the exercise and went into the house without
giving Cooley any reason to suppose that I was aware of his
presence. The next day I performed the ceremony at the same
place, at the same hour. On the third day Cooley evidently
expected me, for as soon as I appeared he came up to the
fence and assumed his old position. He had with him a couple
of friends, whom he must have summoned for the express
purpose of tormenting me. When I had gone through the
movements once, Cooley said:

"See here, Adeler, I don't want to do you any harm, but let
me advise you as a friend to go to an asylum. I have known
much worse cases than yours to be cured. It isn't kind to
your family for you to remain at large. You're afflicted with
only a mild form now; but if you don't do something, you'll
have a violent paroxysm some day, and smash things. Now, take
my advice, and put yourself under treatment."

Silence upon my part.

"How would you take it now," inquired Cooley, in a tone
indicative of yearning tenderness, "if I should get over the
fence and chain you to the pump while I go for the doctor? I
really think you are getting dangerous."



"Mr. Cooley," I said, "I wish you would attend to your own
business. I do not wish to quarrel with you, sir, but I will
not have any interference on your part with my affairs. If it
will make you any happier to learn what I am doing, I will
tell you, seeing that you are so much interested in the
matter, that I am exercising, under medical direction, for
the benefit of my lungs."

"Exercising for the benefit of his lungs!" moaned Cooley.
"His mind is entirely gone."

"Yes, sir," I said, angrily, "I am exercising for the benefit
of my lungs, according to the directions of Dr. Ball, and I
will thank you to keep your tongue quiet about it."

"He has them awfully bad," exclaimed Cooley, with a pathetic
look. "There is no such man as Dr. Ball, you know," he
remarked, in a confidential tone, to one of his companions.

"I wish you distinctly to understand that I will not tolerate
this impertinence much longer, sir," I exclaimed,
indignantly. "What right have you to interfere with me upon
my own ground, you ruffian?"

"His intellect's completely shattered," said Cooley, with a
mournful shake of his head, to his companions. "Poor Mrs.
Adeler! It will be a terrible blow for her and for the
children. My heart bleeds for them."

"Mr. Cooley," I said, "I want no more of this. I shall
discontinue Dr. Ball's exercise at this place for the
present, but I will tell you before I go that I consider you
an insolent, unendurable idiot, and I will repay you some day
or other for your outrageous behavior to me."

"Sad, sad, indeed!" said Cooley to his friends. "Strange how
he clings to that fancy about a man named Ball, isn't it?"

One of Cooley's companions observed that the deranged were
apt to get such notions in their heads, and he supplemented
this statement with the remark, "This is a very interesting
case—very."

Then I went into the house, and from the window saw Cooley
and his companions walk away laughing. Not even the
unpardonable insolence of Cooley can disguise the fact that
the affair has a certain comic aspect; and when I became
calmer, I confess that I appreciated this phase of the
occurrence with some keenness, even though I happened to
occupy an exceedingly unpleasant position as the victim of
the joke. But I shall be even with Cooley for this. I will
devise a scheme for tormenting him which will cause him to
rue the day that he interfered with my pulmonary gymnastics.
Dr. Ball's recipe, however, I think I will toss into the
fire. I will expand my lungs by learning to sing or to play
upon the flute. My family can then participate in my
enjoyment. A married man has no right to be selfish in his
pleasures.






CHAPTER V.
A LITTLE LOVE AFFAIR—COWARDICE OF MR. PARKER—POPULAR INTEREST
IN AMATORY MATTERS—THE MAGRUDER FAMILY—AN EVENT IN ITS
HISTORY—REMARKABLE EXPERIMENTS BY MRS. MAGRUDER—AN INDIGNANT
HUSBAND —A QUESTION ANSWERED.

ISS BESSIE MAGRUDER is the object upon which the affections
of Mr. Bob Parker are fixed at the present moment. He met
her, I believe, while she was attending school in the city
last winter, and what with accompanying her to matinees,
taking her to church and lingering by her side in the parlor
oftentimes in the evening with the gas turned low, the heart
of Mr. Parker gradually was induced to throb only for the
pretty maid from New Castle. She has been very gracious to
him during all the time that he has devoted himself to her,
and has seemed to like him so well that there is really no
reason for doubting that when the climax of the little drama
is reached and the question asked, she will droop her
eyelids, crimson her cheeks with blushes and whisper "Yes."

But Mr. Parker's courage has not yet been quite equal to the
presentation of the proposition in a definite form. When I
asked him the other day, good-humoredly, if he had explained
himself to Miss Magruder, he told me confidentially that he
had not. At least a dozen times he had prepared the question
in a graceful and effective form, and after committing it to
memory he had started out with a valiant determination to
declare his passion in that precise language the very moment
he should encounter Miss Magruder.

"The words seem all right enough when I'm not with her,"
sighed Bob. "The very way I wrote 'em out appears to express
exactly what I want to say, and as I go along the street I
repeat 'em over and think to myself: 'By George, I'll do it
now or die!' But as soon as I see her it seems ridiculous to
blurt out a speech like that the first thing. So we begin to
talk about something else, and then it seems's if I couldn't
break right in abruptly on the conversation. Then I get to
wondering how she'd feel if she knew what I was thinking
about. Then very likely somebody comes in, and the chance is
gone and I have to put it off. It worries me nearly to death.
I'll go down there some day soon and plump it right out
without saying another word first; I will, by George!"

It is an odd circumstance that every man who finds himself in
the position occupied by Mr. Parker should entertain the
conviction that he is the first human being who ever suffered
such embarrassment. Bob, my dear boy, you are traveling an
old, a very old road, and all those rough and stony places
whereupon you endure distress, and where your timid feet
stumble, have been passed for hundreds of centuries by love-
sick wayfarers who were as eager, as unwise and as cowardly
as you!

It is very curious to observe how quickly the partiality of a
young man for a maid is perceived by their acquaintances, and
with what zest the gossiping tongues tell the tale. Women, of
course, display deepest interest and acutest perception in
such matters. A movement made in the direction of courtship
by a young fellow sends a strong ripple of excitement
circling over the surface of the little world in which they
live; and there is something wonderful in the rapidity with
which the involved questions of suitability, social standing
and financial condition are considered and settled. It is
soon perceived whether the business is a serious one upon
both sides; and as the two chief actors proceed slowly toward
the moment when their hearts shall be unfolded to each other,
sharp eyes are watching them, and though they think they are
keeping their secret very fast from their friends, every step
of their progress is perceived, and the gentle excitement of
suspense increases and intensifies day by day among the
watchers until it culminates in the formal announcement that
they are engaged.

So they remain objects of general and tender consideration
until that other grand climax—the wedding—is at last
attained; and the bride, with her orange blossoms and her
veil, with her satin, her silver-ware and her sweetness,
becomes the central figure of a happy festival whose gayety
is tempered by the solemn thoughts which will come concerning
that great unknown future whose threshold is being passed.

And then, when all this is over, when the lights are out, the
wedding garments folded away, the practical domestic life
begun and the period of romance passed, the interest which
followed the pair from the first blossom of their love
expires, and, as far as sentiment is concerned, their day—a
time full of pleasant things, of grateful happiness in the
present and joyful expectation for the future—is done for
ever. Thenceforward their lives will be but prosy and dull to
the world, however full to them the years may be of serenity
and peace.

I have been making some inquiries concerning the Magruder
family, in order to satisfy my wife that Bob's prospective
relations are "the right kind of people." The expression, I
know, is vague; and now that we have learned something of the
Magruders, my inability to determine precisely what
qualifications are necessary in order to make people of the
right kind forbids the formation of a definite opinion upon
my part concerning them. But Mrs. Adeler will decide; women
are always mistresses of such subjects.



Mr. Magruder is apparently a man of leisure and of
comparative wealth; his social position is very good, and he
has enough intelligence and cultivation to enable him to get
along comfortably in the society of very respectable persons.
Mrs. Magruder, it seems, is rather inclined to emphasize
herself. She is a physician, an enthusiast in the study and
practice of medical science, and a woman of such force that 
she succeeds in keeping Mr. Magruder, if not precisely in a
state of repression, at least slightly in the background. He
married her, according to report, shortly after her
graduation; and as he was at that time an earnest advocate of
the theory that women should practice medicine, a belief
prevails that he became attached to her while under her
treatment. She touched his heart, we may presume, by exciting
activity in his liver. He loved her, let us say, for the
blisters she had spread, and demanded her hand because he had
observed the singular dexterity with which it cut away
tumours and tied up veins.

But if what Dr. Tobias Jones, our family physician, tells me
is true, the sentiments of Magruder on the subject of medical
women have undergone a radical change in consequence of an
exuberance of enthusiasm on the part of Mrs. Magruder. Dr.
Jones entertains the regular professional hatred for Mrs. Dr.
Magruder, and so I have my private doubts respecting the
strict accuracy of his narrative.

He said that a few years ago the Magruders lived in
Philadelphia, and Mrs. Magruder was a professor in the
Women's Medical College. At that time Magruder was in
business; and as he generally came home tired, he had a habit
of lying on the sitting-room sofa in the evening, for the
purpose of taking a nap. Several times when he did so, and
Mrs. Magruder had some friends with her downstairs, he
noticed upon awaking that there was a peculiar feeling of
heaviness in his head and a queer smell of drugs in the room.
When he questioned Mrs. Magruder about it, she invariably
colored and looked confused, and said he must have eaten
something which disagreed with him.

Ultimately the suspicions of Magruder were aroused. He
suspected something wrong. A horrible thought crossed his
mind that Mrs. Magruder intended to poison him for his
skeleton—to sacrifice him so that she could dangle his bones
before her class, and explain to the seekers after medical
truth the peculiarities of construction which enabled the
framework of her husband to move around in society.



So Magruder revealed his suspicions to his brother, and
engaged him to secrete himself in a closet in the room while
he took his usual nap on a certain evening upon the sofa.

When that night arrived, Mrs. Magruder pretended to have the
"sewing circle" from the church in the parlor, while her
husband went to sleep in the sitting-room with that vigilant
relative of his on guard. About nine o'clock Mr. Magruder's
brother was surprised to observe Mrs. Magruder softly
stealing up stairs, with the members of the "sewing circle"
following her noiselessly in single file. In her hand Mrs.
Magruder carried a volume. If her brother-in-law had
conceived the idea that the book might contain the tender
strains of some sweet singer amid whose glowing imagery this
woman reveled with the ecstasy of a sensitive nature, he
would have been mistaken, for the work was entitled "Thompson
on the Nervous System;" while those lines traced in a
delicate female hand, upon the perfumed note-paper, and
carried by Mrs. Magruder, so far from embodying an expression
of the gentlest and most sacred emotions of her bosom, were
merely a diagnosis of an aggravated case of fatty
degeneration of the heart.

I give the story literally as I received it from that eminent
practitioner Jones.

When the whole party had entered the room, Mrs.
Magruder closed the door and applied chloroform to her
husband's nose. As soon as he became completely insensible,
the sewing in the hands of the ladies was quickly laid aside,
and to Magruder's secreted brother was disclosed the alarming
fact that this was a class of students from the college.

If Dr. Jones is to be believed, Professor Magruder began her
lecture with some very able remarks upon the nervous system;
and in order to demonstrate her meaning more plainly, she
attached a galvanic battery to her husband's toes, so that
she might make him wriggle before the class. And he did
wriggle. Mrs. Magruder gave him a dozen or two shocks and
poked him with a ruler to make him jump around, while the
students stood in a semi-circle, with note-books in their
hands, and exclaimed, "How very interesting!"

Magruder's brother thought it awful, but he was afraid to
come out when he reflected that they might want two skeletons
at the college.

Mrs. Magruder then said that she would pursue this branch of
the investigation no further at that moment, because Mr.
Magruder's system was somewhat debilitated in consequence of
an overdose of chlorate of potash which she bad administered
in his coffee upon the previous day for the purpose of
testing the strength of the drug.

Mrs. Magruder then proceeded to "quiz" the class concerning
the general construction of her husband. She said, for
instance, that she had won what was called the heart of Mr.
Magruder, and she asked the students what it was that she had
really won.

"Why, the cardia, of course," said the class; "it is an
azygous muscle of an irregular pyramid shape, situated
obliquely and a little to the left side of the chest, and it
rests on the diaphragm."

One fair young thing said that it didn't rest on the
diaphragm.

Another one said she would bet a quart of paregoric it did,
and until the dispute was settled by the professor,
Magruder's brother's hair stood on end with fear lest they
should go to probing around inside of Magruder with a
butcher-knife and a lantern, for the purpose of determining
the actual condition of affairs respecting his diaphragm.

Mrs. Magruder continued. She explained that when she accepted
Mr. Magruder he seized her hand, and.she required the class
to explain what it was that Mr. Magruder actually had hold
of.

The students replied that he held in his grip twenty-seven
distinct bones, among which might be mentioned the phalanges,
the carpus and the metacarpus.



The beautiful creature who was incredulous concerning the
diaphragm suggested that he also had hold of the deltoid. But
the others scornfully suggested that the deltoid was a
muscle; they knew, because they had dissected one that very
morning. The discussion became so exciting that thumb-lancets
were drawn, and there seemed to be a prospect of bloodshed,
when the professor interfered and demanded of the girl who
had begun to cry about the deltoid what was the result when
Mr. Magruder kissed her.

"Why merely a contraction of the orbicularis oris muscle;
thus," said the student as she leaned over and kissed Mr.
Magruder.

Magruder's brother, in the closet, thought maybe it wasn't so
very solemn for Magruder after all. He considered this
portion of the exercises in a certain sense soothing.

But all the students said it was perfectly scandalous. And
the professor herself, after informing the offender that
hereafter when illustration of any point in the lesson was
needed it would be supplied by the professor, ordered her to
go to the foot of the class, and to learn eighty new bones as
a punishment.

"Do you hear me, miss?" demanded the professor, when she
perceived that that blooming contractor of the orbicularis
oris did not budge.

"Yes," she said, "I am conscious of a vibration striking
against the membrana tympanum, and being transmitted through
the labyrinth until it agitates the auditory nerve, which
conveys the impression to the brain."

"Correct," said the professor. "Then obey me, or I will call 
my biceps and flexors and scapularis into action and put you
in your place by force."

"Yes, and we will help her with our spinatus and
infraspiralis," exclaimed the rest of the class.

Magruder's brother in the gloom of his closet did not
comprehend the character of these threats, but he had a vague
idea that the life of that lovely young sawbones was menaced
by firearms and other engines of war of a peculiarly deadly
description. He felt that the punishment was too severe for
the crime. Magruder himself, he was convinced, would have
regarded that orbicularis operation with courageous fortitude
and heroic composure.

Mrs. Magruder then proceeded to give the class practice in
certain operations in medical treatment. She vaccinated
Magruder on the left arm, while one of the students bled his
right arm and showed her companions how to tie up the vein.
They applied leeches to his nose, under the professor's
instructions; they cupped him on the shoulder blades; they
exercised themselves in spreading mustard plasters on his
back; they timed his pulse; they held out his tongue with
pincers and examined it with a microscope, and two or three
enthusiastic students kept hovering around Magruder's leg
with a saw and a carving-knife, until Magruder's brother in
retirement in the closet shuddered with apprehension.

But the professor restrained these devotees of science; and
when the other exercises were ended, she informed the
students that they would devote a few moments in conclusion
to study of the use of the stomach-pump.

Dr. Jones continued: "I shall not enter into particulars
concerning the scene that then ensued. There is a certain
want of poetry about the operation of the weapon just named,
a certain absence of dignity and sentiment, which, I may say,
render it impossible to describe it in a manner which will
elevate the soul and touch the moral sensibilities. It will
suffice to observe that as each member of the class attacked
Magruder with that murderous engine, Magruder's brother,
timid as he was, solemnly declared to himself that if the
class would put away those saws and things he would rush out
and rescue his brother at the risk of his life.

"He was saved the necessity of thus imperiling his safety.
Magruder began to revive. He turned over; he sat up; he
stared wildly at the company; he looked at his wife; then he
sank back upon the sofa and said to her, in a feeble voice:

"'Henrietta, somehow or other I feel awfully hungry!'



"Hungry! Magruder's brother considered that, after that last
performance of the class, Magruder ought to have a relish for
a couple of raw buffaloes, at least. He emerged from the
closet, and seizing a chair, determined to tell the whole
story. Mrs. Magruder and the class screamed, but he
proceeded. Then up rose Magruder and discussed the subject
with vehemence, while his brother brandished his chair and
joined in the chorus. Mrs. Magruder and the class cried, and
said Mr. Magruder was a brute, and he had no love for
science. But Mr. Magruder said that as for himself, 'hang
science!' when a woman became so infatuated with it as to
chop up her husband to help it along. And his brother said he
ought to put in even stronger terms than that. What followed
upon the adjournment of the class is not known. But Magruder
seems somehow to have lost much of his interest in medicine,
and since then there has been a kind of coolness between him
and the professor?"

I shall repeat this extraordinary narrative to Mr. Parker. He
ought to be aware of the propensities of his prospective
mother-in-law beforehand, so that he may not encounter the
dangers which attend her devotion to her profession without
realizing the fact of their existence. Admitting that Jones
adheres closely to truth in his statement, we may very
reasonably fear that Mrs. Magruder would not hesitate to
vivisect a mere son-in-law, or in an extreme case to remove
one of his legs. A mother-in-law with such dangerous
proclivities ought not to be accepted rashly or in haste.
Prudence requires that she should be meditated upon.

"I want to ask you a question," observed Mr. Parker, as we
sat out upon the porch after tea with Mrs. Adeler. "I notice
that you always say 'is being done,' and not 'is doing.' Now,
which is correct? I think you're wrong. Some of those big
guns who write upon such subjects think so too. Grind us out
an opinion."

"The subject has been much discussed, Bob, and a good many
smart things have been said in support of both theories. But
I stick to 'is being done,' first, because it is more common,
and therefore handier, and second, because it is the only
form that is really available in all cases. Suppose, for
instance, you wished to express the idea that our boy
Agamemnon is enduring chastisement; you would say, Agamemnon
is being spanked,' not 'Agamemnon is spanking.' The
difference may seem to you very slight, but it would be a
matter of considerable importance to Agamemnon; and if a
choice should be given him, it is probable that he would
suddenly select the latter form."

"Just so," exclaimed Mr. Parker.

"You say again, 'Captain Cook is being eaten.' Certainly this
expresses a very different fact from that which is conveyed
by the form, 'Captain Cook is eating.' I venture to say that
Captain Cook would have insisted upon the latter as by far
the more agreeable of the two things."

"Precisely," said Mr. Parker.

"And equally diverse are the two ideas expressed by the
phrases 'The mule is being kicked' and 'The mule is kicking.'
But it is to be admitted that there are occasions when the
two forms indicate a precisely similar act. You assert, I
will say, that 'Hannah is hugging.'"

"Which would be a very improper thing for Hannah to do,"
suggested Mr. P.

"Of course it would; but there is an extreme probability that
you would indicate Hannah's action under the circumstances if
you should say, 'Hannah is being hugged.' It is in most cases
a reciprocal act. Or suppose I say, 'Jane is kissing'?"

"And her mother ought to know about it if she is," remarked
Bob.

"It is nearly the same as if I should say, 'Jane is being
kissed,' for one performance in most cases presupposes the
other. It will not, however, be necessary for you to attempt
to prove this fact by practice anywhere in the neighborhood
of the Magruder mansion. If you find it necessary to explain
to Miss Magruder my views of this grammatical question, it
will be better to confine your illustrations to the case of
Captain Cook. But you can safely continue to say, 'is being
built.' Nobody will object to that but a few superfine people
who are so far ahead of you in such matters that they will be
tolerably sure to regard you as an idiot whichever form you
happen to use, while if you adopt the other form in
conversation with your unfastidious acquaintances, you will
be likely to confuse your meaning very often in such a manner
as to impress them with the conviction that your reason is
dethroned."






CHAPTER VI.
THE EDITOR OF OUR DAILY PAPER—THE APPEARANCE AND PERSONAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF COLONEL BANGS—THE AFFAIR WITH THE
TOMBSTONE—ART NEWS—COLONEL BANGS IN THE HEAT OF A POLITICAL
CAMPAIGN—PECULIAR TROUBLES OF PUBLIC SINGERS—THE PHENOMENA OF
MENAGERIES—EXTRAORDINARY SAGACITY OF THE ANIMALS—THE WILD MAN
OF AFGHANISTAN.

HE editor of our daily paper, The Morning Argus, is Col.
Bangs—Colonel Mortimer J. Bangs. The colonel is an
exceedingly important personage in the village, and he bears
about him the air of a man who is acutely conscious of the
fact. The gait of the colonel, the peculiar way in which he
carries his head, the manner in which he swings his cane, and
the art he has of impressing any one he happens to address
with a feeling that he is performing an act of sublime
condescension in permitting himself to hold communication
with an inferior being, combine to excite in the vulgar mind
a sentiment of awe. The eminent journalist manifests in his
entire bearing his confidence in the theory that upon him
devolves the responsibility of forming the public opinion of
the place; and there is a certain grandeur in the manner in
which he conveys to the public mind, through the public eye,
the fact that while he appreciates the difficulties of what
seemed to be an almost superhuman task, which would surely
overwhelm men of smaller intellectual calibre, the work
presents itself to his mind as something not much more
formidable than pastime.

The appearance of Colonel Bangs is not only imposing,
but sometimes it inclines to be almost ferocious. The form in
which he wears his whiskers, added to the military nature of
his title, would be likely to give to timid strangers an idea
not only that the colonel has a raging and insatiable thirst
for blood and an almost irresistible appetite for the horrors
of war, but that upon very slight provocation he would
suddenly grasp his sword, fling away the scabbard, and then
proceed to wade through slaughter to a throne and shut the
gates of mercy on mankind. But I rejoice to say that the
colonel has not really such murderous and revolutionary
inclinations. His title was obtained in those early years of
peace when he led the inoffensive forces of the militia upon
parade, and marshaled them as they braved the perils of the
target-shooting excursion.

I think I am warranted in saying that Colonel Bangs would
never voluntarily stand in the imminent deadly breach if
there happened to be a man there with a gun who wanted him to
leave, and that he will never seek the bubble reputation at
the cannon's mouth unless the cannon happens to be unloaded.
Place Colonel Bangs in front of an empty cannon, and for a
proper consideration he would remain there for years without
the quiver of a muscle:

Charge that piece of ordnance with powder and ball, and not
all the wealth of the world would induce him to stand
anywhere but in the rear of the artillery.

The Argus has never appeared to me to be an especially
brilliant journal. To the intelligent and critical reader,
indeed, the controlling purpose of the colonel seems to be to
endeavor to ascertain how near he can bring the paper to
imbecility without actually reaching that condition; and it
is surprising how close a shave he makes of it. When we first
came to the village, a gleam of intelligence now and then
appeared in the editorial columns of the Argus, and this
phenomenon was generally attributed to the circumstance that
Colonel Bangs had permitted his assistant editor to spread
his views before the public. On such occasions it was
entertaining to observe in what manner the colonel would
assume the honors of the authorship of his assistant's
articles. Cooley, for instance, meeting him upon the street
would observe:

"That was an uncommonly good thing, colonel, which appeared
in the Argus this morning on The Impending Struggle; whose
was it?"

COLONEL BANGS (with an air of mingled surprise and
indignation). Whose was it? Whose was that article? I suppose
you are aware, sir, that I am the editor of The Morning
Argus."

COOLEY. "Yes; but I thought perhaps—"

COLONEL (with grandeur). "No matter, sir, what you thought.
When an article appears in my own paper, Mr. Cooley, there is
but a single inference to be drawn. When I find myself unable
to edit the Argus, I will sell out, sir—I will sell out!"

COOLEY (calmly). "Well, but Murphy, your assistant, told me
distinctly that he wrote that editorial himself."

COLONEL (coming down). "Ah! yes, yes! that is partly true,
now I remember. I believe Murphy did scratch off the body of
the article, but I overhauled it; it was necessary for me to
revise it, to touch it up, to throw it into shape, as it
were, before it went into type. Murphy means well, and with a
little guidance—just a l-e-e-t-l-e careful training—he will
do."



But Murphy did not remain long. One of the colonel's little
nephews died, and a man who kept a marble-yard in Wilmington
thought he might obtain a gratuitous advertisement by giving
to the afflicted uncle a substantial expression of his
sympathy. So he got up a gravestone for the departed child.
The design, cut upon the stone in bas-relief, represented an
angel carrying the little one in arms and flying away with
it, while a woman sat weeping upon the ground. It was
executed in a most dreadful manner. The tombstone was sent to
the colonel, with a simple request that he would accept it.
As he was absent, Mr. Murphy determined to acknowledge the
gift, although he had not the slightest idea what it meant.
So the next morning he burst out in the Argus with the
following remarks:

"ART NEWS.

"We have received from the eminent sculptor, Mr. Felix
Mullins of Wilmington, a comic bas-relief designed for an
ornamental fireboard. It represents an Irishman in his night-
shirt running away with the little god Cupid, while the
Irishman's sweetheart demurely hangs her head in the corner.
Every true work of art tells its own story; and we
understand, as soon as we glance at this, that our Irish
friend has been coqueted with by the fair one, and is
pretending to transfer his love to other quarters. There is a
lurking smile on the Irishman's lips which expresses his
mischievous intentions perfectly. We think it would have been
better, however, to have clothed him in something else than a
night-shirt, and to have smoothed down his hair. We have
placed this chef d'oeuvre upon a shelf in our office, where
it will undoubtedly be admired by our friends when they call.
We are glad to encourage such progress in Delaware art."



This was painful. When the colonel returned next day,
Mr. Mullins called on him and explained the tombstone to him,
and that very night Mr. Murphy retired from the Morning
Argus, and began to seek fresh fields for the exercise of his
talents.

Colonel Bangs affords me most entertainment in the Argus when
an election is approaching.

Your city editor often displays a certain amount of vehemence
at such times, but his wildest frenzy is calmness, is
absolute slumberous repose itself, when compared with the
frantic enthusiasm manifested by Colonel Bangs. The latter
succeeds in getting up as much fury over a candidate for
constable as a city editor does over an aspirant for the
Presidency. He will turn out column after column of double-
leaded type, in which he will demonstrate with a marvelous
profusion of adjectives that if you should roll all the
prophets, saints and martyrs into one, you would have a much
smaller amount of virtue than can be found in that one humble
man who wants to be constable. He will prove to you that
unless that particular person is elected, the entire fabric
of American institutions will totter to its base and become a
bewildering and hopeless ruin, while the merciless despots
who grind enslaved millions beneath their iron heels will
greet the hideous and irreclaimable chaos with fiendish
laughter, and amid the remnants of a once proud republic they
will erect bastiles which they will forge chains to fetter
the wrists of dismayed and heart-broken patriots. He will ask
you to take your choice between electing that man constable
and witnessing the annihilation of the proud work for which
the Revolutionary patriots bled and died.

The man who runs against the candidate of the Argus will be
proved to be a moral and intellectual wreck, and it will be
shown that all the vices which have corrupted the race since
the fall of man are concentrated in that one individual. The
day after election, if his man wins, Colonel Bangs will
decorate his paper with a whole array of roosters and a
menagerie of 'coons, and inform a breathless world that the
nation is once more saved. If he loses, he will omit any
reference to the frightful prophecies uttered during the
campaign, keep his roosters in the closet, and mildly assert
that the opposition man is not so bad, after all, and that
the right party must triumph next time for certain. Then
Colonel Bangs will keep his enthusiasm cool for a year, and
during that period will rest his overwrought brain, while he
edits his paper with a pair of predatory shears and a
dishonest paste-pot.

It is extremely probable that we shall lose our servant-girl.
She was the victim of a very singular catastrophe a night or
two since, in consequence of which she has acquired a
prejudice against the house of Adeler. We were troubled with
dampness in our cellar, and in order to remove the difficulty
we got a couple of men to come and dig the earth out to the
depth of twelve or fifteen inches and fill it in with a
cement-and-mortar floor. The material was, of course, very
soft, and the workmen laid boards upon the surface, so that
access to the furnace and the coal-bin was possible. That
night, just after retiring, we heard a woman screaming for
help, but after listening at the open window, we concluded
that Cooley and his wife were engaged in an altercation, and
so we paid no more attention to the noise.

Half an hour afterward there was a violent ring at the front-
door bell, and upon going to the window again, I found Pitman
standing upon the door-step below. When I spoke to him, he
said:

"Max" (the judge is inclined sometimes, especially during
periods of excitement, to be unnecessarily familiar),
"there's somethin' wrong in your cellar. There's a woman down
there screechin' and carryin' on like mad. Sounds 's if
somebody's a-murderin' her."

I dressed and descended; and securing the assistance of
Pitman, so that I would be better prepared in the event of
burglars being discovered, I lighted a lamp and we went into
the cellar.

There we found the maid-servant standing by the
refrigerator, knee-deep in the cement, and supporting herself
with the handle of a broom, which was also half submerged. In
several places about her were air-holes marking the spot
where the milk-jug, the cold veal, the lima beans and the
silver-plated butter-dish had gone down. We procured some
additional boards, and while Pitman seized the sufferer by
one arm I grasped the other. It was for some time doubtful if
she would come to the surface without the use of more violent
means, and I confess that I was half inclined to regard with
satisfaction the prospect that we would have to blast her
loose with gunpowder. After a desperate struggle, during
which the girl declared that she would be torn in pieces,
Pitman and I succeeded in getting her safely out, and she
went up stairs with half a barrel of cement on each leg,
declaring that she would leave the house in the morning.



The cold veal is in there yet. Centuries hence some
antiquarian will perhaps grub about the spot whereon my
cottage once stood, and will blow that cold veal out in a
petrified condition, and then present it to a museum as the
fossil remains of some unknown animal. Perhaps, too, he will
excavate the milk-jug and the butter-dish, and go about
lecturing upon them as utensils employed in bygone ages by a
race of savages called "the Adelers." I should like to be
alive at the time to hear that lecture. And I cannot avoid
the thought that if our servant had been completely buried in
the cement, and thus carefully preserved until the coming of
that antiquarian, the lecture would be more interesting, and
the girl more useful than she is now. A fossilized domestic
servant of the present era would probably astonish the people
of the twenty-eighth century.

"I see," said Mrs. Adeler, who was looking over the evening
paper upon the day following the accident, "that. Mlle.
Willson, the opera-singer, has been robbed of ten thousand
dollars' worth of diamonds in St. Louis. What a dreadful
loss!"

"Dreadful, indeed, Mrs. A. These singing women are very
unfortunate. They are constantly being robbed, or rolled over
embankments in railway cars, or subjected to deadly perils in
some other form; and the astonishing thing about it all is
that these frightful things invariably occur precisely at the
times when public interest in the victims begins to flag a
little, and the accounts always appear in the papers of a
certain city just before the singers begin an engagement in
that place. It is very remarkable."

"You don't think this story is false, do you, and that all
such statements are untrue?"

"Certainly not. I only refer to the fact because it shows how
very wonderful coincidences often are. I have observed
precisely the same thing in connection with other
contributors to popular entertainment. But in these cases
sometimes we may trace the effects directly to the cause.
Take menageries, for example. The peculiar manifestations
which frequently attend the movements of these collections of
wild animals through the land can be attributed only to the
wonderful instinct of the beasts. If I am to judge from the
reports that appear occasionally in the provincial
newspapers, it invariably happens that the animals come to
the rescue of the menagerie people when the latter begin
their campaigns and are badly in want of advertisements for
which they are disinclined to pay.

"Regularly every season these ferocious beasts proceed to do
something to secure sensational allusions to themselves in
the papers. If the rhinoceros does not plunge through the
side of the tent and prowl about until he comes home with an
entire Sunday-school class of small boys impaled on his horn,
the Nubian lion is perfectly certain to bite its keeper in
half and lunch upon his legs. If the elephant should neglect
to seize his attendant and fling him into the parquet circle,
while at the same time it crushes the hyena into jelly, the
Bengal tiger is very sure not to forget to tear half a dozen
ribs out of the ticket agent, and then to assimilate ten or
twelve village children who are trying to peep under the
tent. Either the brass band, riding upon the den of lions,
finds the roof caving in, and at last is rescued with the
loss of the cymbal player and the operator upon the key
bugle, and of a lot of legs and arms snatched from the bass
drummer and the man with the triangle, or else there is a
railroad accident which empties the cars and permits
kangaroos, panthers, blue-nose baboons and boa-constrictors
to roam about the country reducing the majorities of the
afflicted sections previous to the election.

"You may find hundreds of accounts of such accidents in the
rural press during the summer season; and whenever I read
them, I am at a loss to determine which is more wonderful,
the remarkable sagacity and the self-sacrificing devotion of
these beasts, which perceive that something must be done and
straightway do it, or the childlike confidence, the bland
simplicity, of the editors who give gratuitous circulation to
these narratives."

"Talking about menageries," observed Mr. Bob Parker, "did I
ever tell you about Wylie and his love affair?" "No."

"Wylie, you know, was the brother of the porter in our store;
and when he had nothing to do, he used to come around and sit
in the cellar among the boxes and bales, and we fellows would
go down when we were at leisure and hear him relate his
adventures.

"One time, several years ago, he was awfully hard up, and he
accepted a situation in a traveling show. They dressed him up
in a fur shirt and put grizzly bears' claws on his feet and
daubed some stuff over his face, and advertised him as 'The
Wild Man of Afghanistan.' Then, when the show was open, he
would stand in a cage and scrouge up against the bars and
growl until he would scare the children nearly to death. The
fat woman used to sit near him during the exhibitions just
outside the cage, and by degrees he learned to love her. The
keeper of the concern himself, it appears, also cherished a
tender feeling for the corpulent young creature, and he
became jealous of the Wild Man of Afghanistan."

"And the professor of avoirdupois—whom did she affect?"

"Well, when the visitors came, the keeper would procure a
pole with a nail in the end, and he would stir up the Wild
Man and poke him. Then he would ridicule the Wild Man's legs
and deliver lectures upon the manner in which he turned in
his toes; and he sometimes read to the audience chapters out
of books of natural history to show that a being with a skull
of such a shape must necessarily be an idiot. Then he would
poke the Wild Man of Afghanistan a few more times with the
pole and pass on to the next cage with some remarks tending
to prove that the monkeys therein and the Wild Man were of
the same general type.



"And all the time the fat woman would sit there and smile a
cold and disdainful smile, as if she believed it all, and
hated such legs and despised toes that turned in. At last the
Wild Man of Afghanistan had his revenge. One day when all
hands were off duty, the keeper fell asleep on the settee in
the ticket-office adjoining the show-room. Then Mr. Wylie
threw a blanket over him and went for the fat woman. He led
her by the hand and asked her to be seated while he told her
about his love. Then she suddenly sat down on the keeper."



'And killed him, I suppose, of course?"



"Wylie informed me that you could have passed the
remains under a closed door without scraping the buttons of
the waistcoat. They merely slid him into a crack in the
ground when they buried him, and the fat woman pined away
until she became thin and valueless. Then the Wild Man
married her, and began life again on a new basis."

"Was Mr. Wylie what you might consider a man of veracity?"

"Certainly he was; and his story is undoubtedly true, because
his toes did turn in."

"That settles the matter. With such incontrovertible evidence
as that at hand, it would be folly to doubt the story. We
will go quietly and confidently to tea instead of discussing
it."






CHAPTER VII.
THE BATTERY AND ITS PECULIARITIES—A LOVELY SCENE—SWEDE AND
DUTCHMAN TWO HUNDRED YEARS AGO—OLD NAMES OF THE RIVER—INDIAN
NAMES GENERALLY—COOLEY'S BOY—HIS ADVENTURE IN CHURCH—THE LONG
AND THE SHORT OF IT—MR. COOLEY'S DOG AND OUR TROUBLES WITH
IT.



HE closing hours of the long summer afternoon can be spent in
no pleasanter place than by the water's side. And after tea I
like to take my little group of Adelers out from the hot
streets over the grassy way which leads to the river shore,
and to find a comfortable loitering-place upon the Battery.
That spot is adorned with a long row of rugged old trees
whose trunks are gashed and scarred by the penknives of
idlers. Their branches interlock overhead and form one great
mass of tender green foliage, here sweeping down almost to
the earth, and there hanging far out over the water,
trembling and rustling in the breeze. Beneath, there is a
succession of hewn logs, suggesting the existence of some
sort of a wharf in the remote past, but now serving nicely
for seats for those who come here to spend a quiet hour.

Around there is a sod which grows lush and verdant, excepting
where the tread of many feet has worn a pathway backward to
the village.

In front is as lovely a scene as any the eye can rest upon in
this portion of the world. Below us the rising and the ebbing
tides hurl the tiny ripples upon the pebbly beach, and the
perpetual wash of the waves makes that gentle and constant
music which is among the most grateful of the sounds of
nature.

Away to the southward sweeps the Delaware shore line in a
mighty curve which gives the river here the breadth and
magnificence of a great lake, and at the end of the chord of
the arc the steeples and the masts at Delaware City rise in
indistinct outline from the waves. To the left, farther in
the distance, old Fort Delaware lifts its battlements above
the surface of the stream. And see! A puff of white smoke
rises close by the flag-staff. And now a dull thud comes with
softened cadence across the wide interval. It is the sunset
gun. Far, far beyond, a sail glimmers with rosy light caught
from the brilliant hues of the clouds which make the western
heavens glorious with their crimson drapery; and while here
as we gaze straight out through the bay there is naught in
the perspective but water and sky, to the right the low-lying
land below the island fortress seems, somehow, to be queerly
suspended between river and heaven, until as it recedes it
grows more and more shadowy, and at last melts away into the
mist that creeps in from the ocean. It is pure happiness to
sit here beneath the trees and to look upon the scene while
the cool air pours in from the water and lifts into the upper
atmosphere the oppressive heat that has mantled the earth
during the day.

I do not know why the place is called "the Battery."
Perhaps a couple of centuries ago the Swedes may have built
here a breastwork with which to menace their hated Dutch
rivals who held the fort just below us there upon the river
bank. (We will walk over to the spot some day, Mrs. Adeler.)
And who can tell what strange old Northmen in jerkin and
helmet have marched up and down this very stretch of level
sward, carrying huge fire-lock muskets and swearing mighty
oaths as they watched the intruding Dutchman in his
stronghold, caring little for the placid loveliness of the
view which the rolling tide of the majestic river ever
offered to their eyes!

But some of those people could appreciate this beautiful
panorama. Some of them did not forget the grandeur of nature
while their little passions raged against the Dutchmen. It
was Jasper Dankers who came here from Sweden in 1676, and
looked out from this Battery; returning home, he wrote in his
diary in this fashion:

"The town is situated upon a point which extends out with a
sandy beach, affording a good landing-place. It lies a little
above the bay where the river bends and runs south from
there, so that you can see down the river southwardly. The
greater portion of it presents a beautiful view in
perspective, and enables you to see from a distance the ships
come out from the great bay and sail up the river."

The sandy beach is gone, and the ships which float upward
from the bay are not such craft as Dankers saw; but the
stream has its ancient majesty, and the wooded banks, I like
to think, present to our eyes nearly the same sweet picture
that touched the soul of that old Swede two long centuries
ago.

Another thing has changed—yes, it has changed many times. The
Indians, Mrs. A., called the bay Poutaxat and the river
Lenape Wihittuck. The stream, too, was named the Arasapha,
and also Mackerish Kitton—a title pretty enough in its way,
but oddly suggestive of mackerel and kittens. But the Swedes
came, and with that passion which burned in the bosoms of all
the early European immigrants for prefixing the word "new "to
the names of natural objects, they entitled the river New
Swedeland Stream. Then the Dutch obtained the mastery here,
and it became the South River, the Hudson being the North
River, and finally the English obtained possession, and
called it Delaware.

What a pity it is that they didn't suffer one of the original
titles to remain! The Lenape would have been a beautiful name
for the river—far better than the Gallic compound that it
bears now. The men who settled this country seem to have had
for Indian names the same intense dislike that they
entertained for the savages themselves, and as a rule they
rejected with scorn the soft, sweet syllables with which
mountain and forest and, stream were crowned, substituting
too often most barbarous words therefor. Even Penn and his
Quakers disdained the Indian names. How much better
Pennsylvania would have been treated if that grand old State
had been called Susquehanna or Juniata or Allegheny! And
would it not have been wiser if the city, instead of bringing
its name from Asia, had sought it among its own surroundings,
and had grown to greatness as Wissahickon or Wingohocking?
The Indian names that still remain here and there to
designate a stream, a district or a town are the few
distinctly American words in existence. We have thrown away
the others, although they were a very precious part of the
legacy which we received from the race we have supplanted.
One such word as Wyoming is worth an entire volume of such
names as New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Maryland and the
like; and I have always wondered at the blundering egotism of
the two men who, with such musical syllables at hand ready to
be used, dubbed the town of Wilkes Barre with their own
wretched names.

While we were sitting by the river discussing these and other
matters, Cooley's boy, a thoroughly disagreeable urchin, who
had been playing with some other boys upon the wharf near by,
tumbled into the water. There was a terrible screaming among
his companions, and a crowd quickly gathered upon the pier.
For a few moments it seemed as if the boy would drown, for no
one was disposed to leap in after him, and there was not a
boat within saving distance. But fortunately the current
swept him around to the front of the Battery, where the water
is shallow, and before he was seriously hurt he was safely
landed in the mud that stretches below the low-water mark.
Then the excitement, which had been so great as to attract
about half the population of the village, died away, and
people who had just been filled with horror at the prospect
of a tragedy began to feel a sense of disappointment because
their fears had not been realized. I cannot of course say
that I was sorry to see the youngster once more upon dry
land; but if fate had robbed us of him, we should have
accepted the dispensation without grievous complaint.

We did not leave all the nuisances behind us in the
city. Cooley's dog and his boy are two very sore afflictions
which make life even here very much sadder than it ought to
be in a place that pretends to be something in the nature of
an earthly paradise. The boy not only preys upon my melon-
patch and fruit trees and upon those of my neighbors, but he
has an extraordinary aptitude for creating a disturbance in
whatever spot he happens to be. Only last Sunday he caused
such a terrible commotion in church that the services had to
be suspended for several minutes until he could be removed.
The interior of the edifice was painted and varnished
recently, and I suppose one of the workmen must have left a
clot of varnish upon the back of Cooley's pew, which is
directly across the aisle from mine. Cooley's boy was the
only representative of the family at church upon that day, 
and he amused himself during the earlier portions of the
service by kneeling upon the seat and communing with Dr.
Jones's boy, who occupied the pew immediately in the rear.
Sometimes, when young Cooley would resume a proper position,
Jones's boy would stir him up afresh by slyly pulling his
hair, whereupon Cooley would wheel about and menace Jones
with his fist is a manner which betrayed utter indifference
to the proprieties of the place and the occasion, as well as
to the presence of the congregation. When Cooley finally sank
into a condition of repose, he placed his head, most
unfortunately, directly against the lump of undried varnish,
while he amused himself by reading the commandments and the
other scriptural texts upon the wall behind the pulpit.



In a few moments he attempted to move, but the varnish had
mingled with his hair, and it held him securely. After making
one or two desperate but ineffectual efforts to release
himself, he became very angry; and supposing that Jones's boy
was holding him, he shouted:

"Leg go o' my hair! Leg go o' my hair, I tell you!"

The clergyman paused just as he was entering upon
consideration of "secondly," and the congregation looked
around in amazement, in time to perceive young Cooley, with
his head against the back of the pew, aiming dreadful blows
over his shoulder with his fist at some unseen person behind
him. And with every thrust he exclaimed:

"I'll smash yer nose after church! I'll go for you, Bill
Jones, when I ketch you alone! Leg go o' my hair, I tell you,
or I'll knock the stuffin' out o' yer," etc., etc.

Meanwhile, Jones's boy sat up at the very end of his
pew, far away from Cooley, and looked as solemn as if the
sermon had made a deep impression upon him. Then the sexton
came running up, with the idea that the boy had fallen asleep
and had nightmare, while Mrs. Dr. Magruder sallied out from
her pew an over to Cooley's, convinced that he had a fit.
When the cause of the disturbance was ascertained, the sexton
took out his knife, and after sawing off enough of Cooley's
hair to release him, dragged him out of church. The victim
retreated unwillingly, glancing around at Jones's boy and
shaking his fist at that urchin as if to indicate that he
cherished a deadly purpose against Jones.

Then the sermon proceeded. I suppose a contest between the
two boys has been averted, for only yesterday I saw Jones and
Cooley, the younger, playing hop-scotch together in the
street in apparent forgetfulness of the sorrows of the
sanctuary.



Judge Pitman tells me that one of the reasons why Cooley and
his wife disagree is that there is such a difference in their
height. Cooley is tall, and Mrs. Cooley is small. Mrs. Cooley
told Mrs. Pitman, if the judge is to be believed, that Cooley
continually growled because she could not keep step with him.
They always start wrong, somehow, when they go out together,
and then, while he tries to catch step with her, she
endeavors to get in with him. After both have been shuffling
about over the pavement for several minutes in a perfectly
absurd manner, they go ahead out of step just as before.

When Cooley tried to take short steps like hers, his
gait was so ridiculous as to excite remark; while if she
tried to make such long strides as his, people stopped and
looked at her as if they thought she was insane. Then she
would strive to take two steps to his one, but she found that
two and a half of hers were equal to one of his; and when she
undertook to make that fractional number in order to keep up
with him, he would frown at her and say,

"Mrs. Cooley, if you are going to dance the polka mazourka
upon the public highway, I'm going home."

I do not receive this statement with implicit
confidence in its truthfulness. Pitman's imagination
sometimes glows with unnatural heat, and he may have
embellished the original narrative of Mrs. Cooley.

I shall probably never receive from any member of the Cooley
family a correct account of the causes of the unpleasant
differences existing therein, for we are on worse terms than
ever with Cooley. His dog became such an intolerable nuisance
because of his nocturnal vociferation that some practical
humanitarian in the neighborhood poisoned him.



Cooley apparently cherished the conviction that I had
killed the animal, and he flung the carcass over the fence
into my yard. I threw it back. Cooley returned it. Both of us
remained at home that day, and spent the morning handing the
inanimate brute to each other across the fence. At noon I
called my man to take my place, and Cooley hired a colored
person to relieve him. They kept it up until nightfall, by
which time I suppose the corpse must have worn away to a
great extent, for at sundown my man buried the tail by my
rose-bush and came in the house, while Cooley's
representative resigned and went home.



The departed brute left behind him but one pleasant
recollection; and when I recall it, I feel that he fully
avenged my wrongs upon his master. Cooley went out a week or
two ago to swim in the creek, and he took the dog with him to
watch his clothing. While Cooley bathed the dog slept; but
when Cooley emerged from the water, the dog did not recognize
him in his nude condition, and it refused to let him come
near his garments. Whenever Cooley would attempt to seize a
boot or a stocking or a shirt, the dog flew at him with such
ferocity that he dared not attempt to dress himself. So he
stood in the sun until he was almost broiled; then he went
into the water and remained there, dodging up and down for
the purpose of avoiding the people who passed occasionally
along the road. At last the dog went to sleep again, and
Cooley, creeping softly behind the brute, caught it suddenly
by the tail and flung it across the stream. Before the dog
could recover its senses and swim back, Cooley succeeded in
getting some of his clothing on him, and then the dog came
sidling up to him looking as if it expected to be rewarded
for its extraordinary vigilance. The manner in which Cooley
kicked the faithful animal is said to have been simply
dreadful. I should have entertained a positive affection for
that dog if it had not barked at night. But I am glad it is
gone. We came here to have quietness, and that was
unattainable while Cooley's dog remained within view of the
moon.






CHAPTER VIII.
THE MORNING ARGUS CREATES A SENSATION—A NEW EDITOR;  MR.
SLIMMER THE POET—AN OBITUARY DEPARTMENT—MR. SLIMMER ON DEATH—
EXTRAORDINARY SCENE IN THE SANCTUM OF COLONEL BANGS—INDIGNANT
ADVERTISERS—THE COLONEL VIOLENTLY ASSAILED—OBSERVATIONS OF
THE POET—THE FINAL CATASTROPHE—MYSTERIOUS CONDUCT OF BOB
PARKER—THE ACCIDENT ON MAGRUDER'S PORCH—MRS. ADELER ON THE
SUBJECT OF OBITUARY POETRY IN GENERAL.

 RATHER unusual sensation has been excited in the village by
The Morning Argus within a day or two; and while most of the
readers of that wonderful sheet have thus been supplied with
amusement, the soul of the editor has been filled with gloom
and wrath and despair. Colonel Bangs recently determined to
engage an assistant to take the place made vacant by the
retirement of the eminent art-critic, Mr. Murphy, and he
found in one of the lower counties of the State a person who
appeared to him to be suitable. The name of the new man is
Slimmer. He has often contributed to the Argus verses of a
distressing character, and I suppose Bangs must have become
acquainted with him through the medium of the correspondence
thus begun. No one in the world but Bangs would ever have
selected such a poet for an editorial position. But Bangs is
singular—he is exceptional. He never operates in accordance
with any known laws, and he is more than likely to do any
given thing in such a fashion as no other person could
possibly have adopted for the purpose. As the Argus is also
sui generis, perhaps Bangs does right to conduct it in a
peculiar manner. But he made a mistake when he employed Mr.
Slimmer.

The colonel, in his own small way, is tolerably shrewd. He
had observed the disposition of persons who have been
bereaved of their relatives to give expression to their
feelings in verse, and it occurred to him that it might be
profitable to use Slimmer's poetical talent in such a way as
to make the Argus a very popular vehicle for the conveyance
to the public of notices of deaths. That kind of
intelligence, he well knew, is especially interesting to a
very large class of readers, and he believed that if he could
offer to each advertiser a gratuitous verse to accompany the
obituary paragraph, the Argus would not only attract
advertisements of that description from the country round
about the village, but it would secure a much larger
circulation.

When Mr. Slimmer arrived, therefore, and entered upon the
performance of his duties, Colonel Bangs explained his theory
to the poet, and suggested that whenever a death-notice
reached the office, he should immediately write a rhyme or
two which should express the sentiments most suitable to the
occasion.



"You understand, Mr. Slimmer," said the colonel, "that when
the death of an individual is announced I want you, as it 
were, to cheer the members of the afflicted family with the
resources of your noble art. I wish you to throw yourself,
you may say, into their situation, and to give them, f'r
instance, a few lines about the deceased which will seem to
be the expression of the emotion which agitates the breasts
of the bereaved."

"To lighten the gloom in a certain sense," said Mr. Slimmer,
"and to—"

"Precisely," exclaimed Colonel Bangs. "Lighten the gloom. Do
not mourn over the departed, but rather take a joyous view of
death, which, after all, Mr. Slimmer, is, as it were, but the
entrance to a better life. Therefore, I wish you to touch the
heart-strings of the afflicted with a tender hand, and to
endeavor, f'r instance, to divert their minds from
contemplation of the horrors of the tomb."

"Refrain from despondency, I suppose, and lift their thoughts
to—"

"Just so! And at the same time combine elevating sentiment
with such practical information as you can obtain from the
advertisement. Throw a glamour of poesy, f'r instance, over
the commonplace details of the every-day life of the
deceased. People are fond of minute descriptions. Some facts
useful for this purpose may be obtained from the man who
brings the notice to the office; others you may perhaps be
able to supply from your imagination."

"I think I can do it first rate," said Mr. Slimmer.

"But, above all," continued the colonel, "try always to take
a bright view of the matter. Cause the sunshine of smiles, as
it were, to burst through the tempest of tears; and if we
don't make The Morning Argus hum around this town, it will be
queer."

Mr. Slimmer had charge of the editorial department the next
day during the absence of Colonel Bangs in Wilmington.
Throughout the afternoon  and evening death-notices arrived;
and when one would  reach Mr. Slimmer's desk, he would lock
the door, place the fingers of his left hand among his hair
and agonize until he succeeded in completing a verse that
seemed to him to accord with his instructions.

The next morning Mr. Slimmer proceeded calmly to the office
for the purpose of embalming in sympathetic verse the
memories of other departed ones. As he came near to the
establishment he observed a crowd of people in front of it,
struggling to get into the door. Ascending some steps upon
the other side of the street, he overlooked the crowd, and
could see within the office the clerks selling papers as fast
as they could handle them, while the mob pushed and yelled in
frantic efforts to obtain copies, the presses in the cellar
meanwhile clanging furiously. Standing upon the curbstone in
front of the office there was a long row of men, each of whom
was engaged in reading The Morning Argus with an earnestness
that Mr. Slimmer had never before seen displayed by the
patrons of that sheet. The bard concluded that either his
poetry had touched a sympathetic chord in the popular heart,
or that an appalling disaster had occurred in some quarter of 
the globe.



He went around to the back of the office and ascended to the
editorial rooms. As he approached the sanctum, loud voices
were heard within. Mr. Slimmer determined to ascertain the
cause before entering. He obtained a chair, and placing it by
the side door, he mounted and peeped over the door through
the transom. There sat Colonel Bangs, holding The Morning
Argus in both hands, while the fringe which grew in a
semicircle around the edge of his bald head stood straight
out, until he seemed to resemble a gigantic gun-swab. Two or
three persons stood in front of him in threatening attitudes.
Slimmer heard one of them say:

"My name is McGlue, sir!—William McGlue! I am a brother
of the late Alexander McGlue. I picked up your paper this
morning, and perceived in it an outrageous insult to my
deceased relative, and I have come around to demand, sir,
WHAT YOU MEAN by the following infamous language:

"'The death-angel smote Alexander McGlue,
And gave him protracted repose;
He wore a checked shirt and a Number Nine shoe,
And he had a pink wart on his nose.
No doubt he is happier dwelling in space
Over there on the evergreen shore.
His friends are informed that his funeral takes place
Precisely at quarter-past four.'

"This is simply diabolical! My late brother had no wart on
his nose, sir. He had upon his nose neither a pink wart nor a
green wart, nor a cream-colored wart, nor a wart of any other
color. It is a slander! It is a gratuitous insult to my
family, and I distinctly want you to say what do you mean by
such conduct?"



"Really, sir," said Bangs, "it is a mistake. This is the
horrible work of a miscreant in whom I reposed perfect
confidence. He shall be punished by my own hand for this
outrage. A pink wart! Awful! sir—awful! The miserable
scoundrel shall suffer for this—he shall, indeed!"

"How could I know," murmured Mr. Slimmer to the foreman, who
with him was listening, "that the corpse hadn't a pink wart?
I used to know a man named McGlue, and he had one, and I
thought all the McGlues had. This comes of irregularities in
families."

"And who," said another man, addressing the editor,
"authorized you to print this hideous stuff about my deceased
son? Do you mean to say, Bangs, that it was not with your
authority that your low comedian inserted with my
advertisement the following scandalous burlesque? Listen to
this:

"'Willie had a purple monkey climbing on a yellow stick,
And when he sucked the paint all off it made him deathly
sick;
And in his latest hours he clasped that monkey in his hand,
And bade good-bye to earth and went into a better land.

'Oh! no more he'll shoot his sister with his little wooden
gun;
And no more he'll twist the pussy's tail and make her yowl,
for fun.
The pussy's tail now stands out straight; the gun is laid
aside;
The monkey doesn't jump around since little Willie died.'

"The atrocious character of this libel will appear when I say
that my son was twenty years old, and that he died of liver
complaint."

"Infamous!—utterly infamous!" groaned the editor as he cast
his eyes over the lines. "And the wretch who did this still
remains unpunished! It is too much!"

"And yet," whispered Slimmer to the foreman, "he told me to
lighten the gloom and to cheer the afflicted family with the
resources of my art; and I certainly thought that idea about
the monkey would have that effect, somehow. Bangs is
ungrateful!"

Just then there was a knock at the door, and a woman entered,
crying.

"Are you the editor?" she inquired of Colonel Bangs, Bangs
said he was.



"W-w-well!" she said, in a voice broken by sobs, "wh-what
d'you mean by publishing this kind of poetry about m-my
child? M-my name is Sm-Smith; and wh-when I looked this m-
morning for the notice of Johnny's d-death in your paper, I
saw this scandalous verse:

"'Four doctors tackled Johnny Smith—
They blistered and they bled him;
With squills and anti-bilious pills
And ipecac. they fed him.
They stirred him up with calomel,
And tried to move his liver;
But all in vain—his little soul
Was wafted o'er The River.'

It's false! false! and mean! Johnny only had one doctor. And
they d-didn't bl-bleed him and b-blister him. It's a wicked
falsehood, and you're a hard-hearted brute f-f-for printing
it!"

"Madam, I shall go crazy!" exclaimed Bangs. "This is not my
work. It is the work of a villain whom I will slay with my
own hand as soon as he comes in. Madam, the miserable outcast
shall die!"

"Strange! strange!" said Slimmer. "And this man told me to
combine elevating sentiment with practical information. If
the information concerning the squills and ipecac. is not
practical, I have misunderstood the use of that word. And if
young Smith didn't have four doctors, it was an outrage. He
ought to have had them, and they ought to have excited his
liver. Thus it is that human life is sacrificed to
carelessness."

At this juncture the sheriff entered, his brow clothed with
thunder. He had a copy of The Morning Argus in his hand, He
approached the editor, and pointing to a death-notice, said,

"Read that outrageous burlesque, and tell me the name of the
writer, so that I can chastise him."

The editor read as follows:

"We have lost our little Hanner in a very painful manner,
And we often asked, How can her harsh sufferings be borne?
When her death was first reported, her aunt got up and
snorted
With the grief that she supported, for it made her feel
forlorn.

"She was such a little seraph that her father, who is
sheriff,
Really doesn't seem to care if he ne'er smiles in life again.
She has gone, we hope, to heaven, at the early age of seven
(Funeral starts off at eleven), where she'll nevermore have
pain."

"As a consequence of this, I withdraw all the county
advertising from your paper. A man who could trifle in this
manner with the feelings of a parent is a savage and a
scoundrel!"

As the sheriff went out, Colonel Bangs placed his head upon
the table and groaned.

"Really," Mr. Slimmer said, "that person must be deranged. I
tried, in his case, to put myself in his place, and to write
as if I was one of the family, according to instructions. The
verses are beautiful. That allusion to the grief of the aunt,
particularly, seemed to me to be very happy. It expresses
violent emotion with a felicitous combination of sweetness
and force. These people have no soul—no appreciation of the
beautiful in art."

While the poet mused, hurried steps were heard upon the
stairs, and in a moment a middle-aged man dashed in abruptly,
and seizing the colonel's scattered hair, bumped his
prostrate head against the table three or four times with
considerable force. Having expended the violence of his
emotion in this manner, he held the editor's head down with
one hand, shaking it occasionally by way of emphasis, and
with the other hand seized the paper and said,

"You disgraceful old reprobate! You disgusting vampire! You
hoary-headed old ghoul! What d'you mean by putting such stuff
as this in your paper about my deceased son? What d'you mean
by printing such awful doggerel as this, you depraved and
dissolute ink-slinger—you imbecile quill-driver, you!



"’Oh! bury Bartholomew out in the woods,
In a beautiful hole in the ground,
Where the bumble-bees buzz and the woodpeckers sing,
And the straddle-bugs tumble around;
So that, in winter, when the snow and the slush
Have covered his last little bed,
His brother Artemas can go out with Jane
And visit the place with his sled'

"I'll teach you to talk about straddle-bugs! I'll instruct
you about slush! I'll enlighten your insane old intellect on
the subject of singing woodpeckers! What do you know about
Jane and Artemas, you wretched buccaneer, you despicable
butcher of the English language? Go out with a sled! I'll
carry you out in a hearse before I'm done with you, you
deplorable lunatic!"

At the end of every phrase the visitor gave the editor's head
a fresh knock against the table. When the exercise was ended,
Colonel Bangs explained and apologized in the humblest
manner, promising at the same time to give his assailant a
chance to flog Mr. Slimmer, who was expected to arrive in a
few moments.

"The treachery of this man," murmured the poet to the
foreman, "is dreadful. Didn't he desire me to throw a glamour
of poesy over commonplace details? But for that I should
never have thought of alluding to woodpeckers and bugs, and
other children of Nature. The man objects to the remarks
about the sled. Can the idiot know that it was necessary to
have a rhyme for 'bed'? Can he suppose that I could write
poetry without rhymes? The man is a lunatic! He ought not to
be at large!"

Hardly had the indignant and energetic parent of Bartholomew
departed when a man with red hair and a ferocious glare in
his eyes entered, carrying a club and accompanied by a
savage-looking dog.

"I want to see the editor," he shouted.

A ghastly pallor overspread the colonel's face, and he said,

"The editor is not in."

"Well, when will he be in, then?"

"Not for a week—for a month—for a year—for ever! He will
never come in any more!" screamed Bangs. "He has gone to
South America, with the intention to remain there during the
rest of his life. He has departed. He has fled. If you want
to see him, you had better follow him to the equator. He will
be glad to see you. I would advise you, as a friend, to take
the next boat—to start at once."

"That is unfortunate," said the man; "I came all the way from
Delaware City for the purpose of battering him up a lot with
this club."

"He will be sorry," said Bangs, sarcastically. "He will
regret missing you. I will write to him, and mention that you
dropped in.

"My name is McFadden," said the man. "I came to break the
head of the man who wrote that obituary poetry about my wife.
If you don't tell me who perpetrated the following, I'll
break yours for you. Where's the man who wrote this? Pay
attention:

"'Mrs. McFadden has gone from this life;
She has left all its sorrows and cares;
She caught the rheumatics in both of her legs
While scrubbing the cellar and stairs.
They put mustard-plasters upon her in vain;
They bathed her with whisky and rum;
But Thursday her spirit departed, and left
Her body entirely numb.'"

"The man who held the late Mrs. McFadden up to the scorn of
an unsympathetic world in that shocking manner," said the
editor, "is named James B. Slimmer. He boards in Blank
street, fourth door from the corner. I would advise you to
call on him and avenge Mrs. McFadden's wrongs with an
intermixture of club and dog-bites."

"And this," sighed the poet, outside the door, "is the man 
who told me to divert McFadden's mind from contemplation of
the horrors of the tomb. It was this monster who counseled me
to make the sunshine of McFadden's smiles burst through the
tempest of McFadden's tears. If that redheaded monster
couldn't smile over that allusion to whisky and rum, if those
remarks about the rheumatism in her legs could not divert his
mind from the horrors of the tomb, was it my fault? McFadden
grovels! He knows no more about poetry than a mule knows
about the Shorter Catechism."

The poet determined to leave before any more criticisms were
made upon his performances. He jumped down from his chair and
crept softly toward the back staircase.

The story told by the foreman relates that Colonel Bangs at
the same instant resolved to escape any further persecution,
and he moved off in the direction taken by the poet. The two
met upon the landing, and the colonel was about to begin his
quarrel with Slimmer, when an enraged old woman who had been
groping her way up stairs suddenly plunged her umbrella at
Bangs,  and held him in the corner while she handed a copy of
the Argus to Slimmer, and pointing to a certain stanza, asked
him to read it aloud. He did so in a somewhat tremulous voice
and with frightened glances at the enraged colonel. The verse
was as follows:

"Little Alexander's dead;
Jam him in a coffin;
Don't have as good a chance
For a fun'ral often.
Rush his body right around
To the cemetery;
Drop him in the sepulcher
With his Uncle Jerry."



The colonel's assailant accompanied the recitation with such
energetic remarks as these:

"Oh, you willin! D'you hear that, you wretch? What d'you mean
by writin' of my grandson in that way? Take that, you
serpint! Oh, you wiper, you! tryin' to break a lone widder's
heart with such scand'lus lies as them! There, you willin! I
kemmere to hammer you well with this here umbreller, you
owdacious wiper, you! Take that, and that, you wile,
indecent, disgustin' wagabone! When you know well enough that
Aleck never had no Uncle Jerry, and never had no uncle in no
sepulchre anyhow, you wile wretch, you!"

When Mr. Slimmer had concluded his portion of the
entertainment, he left the colonel in the hands of the enemy
and fled. He has not been seen in New Castle since that day,
and it is supposed that he has returned to Sussex county for
the purpose of continuing in private his dalliance with the
Muses. Colonel Bangs appears to have abandoned the idea of
establishing a department of obituary poetry, and the Argus
has resumed its accustomed aspect of dreariness.

It may fairly boast, however, that once during its career it
has produced a profound impression upon the community.



Mr. Bob Parker came home at a very late hour last night; and
when I opened the front door to let him in, he muttered
something to the effect that he was "sorry for being out so
late." Then he pushed by me suddenly and went up stairs in a
very odd fashion, keeping his face as much as possible toward
the door, where I remained standing, astonished at his very
strange behavior. When I closed the door and went to my room,
it occurred to me that something of a serious nature might
have happened; and impelled partly by curiosity and partly by
a desire to be of service, I knocked at Bob's door.

"Anything the matter?" I inquired.

"Oh no. I was detained down town," replied Bob.

"I can't do anything for you, then?"

"No; I'll be in bed in a couple of minutes."

"You acted so peculiarly when you came in that I thought you
might be ill."

"I was never better in my life. I went up stairs that way
because I was tired."

"A very extraordinary effect of fatigue," I said.

"I say!" cried Bob, "don't say anything to your wife about
it. There's no use of getting up an excitement about
nothing."

I went to bed convinced that something was wrong, and
determined to compel Bob to confess on the morrow what it
was. After breakfast we sat smoking together on the porch,
and then I remarked:

“Bob, I wish you to tell me plainly what you meant by that
extraordinary caper on the stairs last night. I think I ought
to know. I don't want to meddle with your private affairs,
but it seems to me only the proper thing for you to give me a
chance to advise you if you are in trouble of any kind. And
then you know I am occupying just now a sort of a parental
relation to you, and I want to overhaul you if you have been
doing anything wrong."

"I don't mind explaining the matter to you," replied Bob. "It
don't amount to much, anyhow, but it's a little rough on a
fellow, and I'd rather not have the whole town discussing
it."

"Well?"

"You know old Magruder's? Well, I went around there last
night to see Bessie; and as it was a pleasant evening, we
thought we would remain out on the porch. She sat in a chair
near the edge, and I placed myself at her feet on one of the
low wooden steps in front. We stayed there talking about
various things and having a pretty fair time, as a matter of
course, until about nine o'clock, when I said I thought I'd
have to go."

"You came home later, I think."

"Well, you know, some mutton-headed carpenter had been there
during the day mending the rustic chairs on the porch, and he
must have put his glue-pot down on the spot where I sat, for
when I tried to rise I found I couldn't budge."

"You and Cooley's boy seem to have a fondness for that
particular kind of adventure."

"Just so. And when I made an effort to get upon my feet,
Bessie said; 'Don't be in a hurry; it's early yet,' and I
told her I believed I would stay a little while longer. So I
sat there for about two hours, and during the frightful gaps
in the conversation I busied myself thinking how I could get
away without appearing ridiculous. It hurts a man's chances
if he makes himself ridiculous before a woman he is fond of.
So you see I didn't know whether to ask Bessie to go in the
house while I partially disrobed and went home in Highland
costume, or whether to give one terrific wrench and then
proceed down the yard backward. I couldn't make up my mind;
and as midnight approached, Bessie, who was dreadfully
sleepy, said, at last, in utter despair, she would have to
excuse herself for the rest of the evening.



"Then, you understand, I was nearly frantic, and I
asked her suddenly if she thought her father would lend me
his front steps for a few days. She looked sort of scared,
and went in after old Magruder. When he came out, I made him
stoop down while I explained the situation to him. He laughed
and hunted up a hatchet and saw, and cut away the surrounding
timber, so that I came home with only about a square foot of
wood on my trousers. Very good of the old man, wasn't it, to
smash up his steps in that manner? And the reason why I kind
of sidled up stairs was that I feared you'd see that wooden
patch and want to know about it. That's all. Queer sort of an
affair, wasn't it?"

Then Mr. Parker darted off for the purpose of overtaking Miss
Magruder, who at that moment happened to pass upon the other
side of the street.

As Mr. Parker disappeared, Mrs. Adeler came out upon the
porch from the hall, and placing her hand upon my shoulder,
said,

"You are not going to publish that story of the attempt of
the Argus to establish a department of obituary poetry, are
you?"

"Of course I am. Why shouldn't I?"

"Don't you fear it might perhaps give offence? There are some
people, you know, who think it right to accompany a notice of
death with verses. Besides, does it seem precisely proper to
treat such a solemn subject as death with so much levity?"

"My dear, the persons who use those ridiculous rhymes which
sometimes appear in the papers for the purpose of parading
their grief before the public cannot have very nice
sensibilities."

"Are you sure of that? At any rate, is it not possible that a
verse which appears to you and me very silly may be the
attempt of some bereaved mother to give in that forlorn
fashion expression to her great agony? I shouldn't like to
ridicule even so wretched a cry from a suffering heart."



"The suggestion is creditable to your goodness. But I would
like to retain the story of Slimmer's folly, and I'll tell
you what I will do: I will publish your opinions upon the
subject, so that those who read the narrative may understand
that the family of Adeler is not wholly careless of
propriety." So here are the story and the protest; and those
to whom the former is offensive may find what consolation can
be obtained from the fact that the latter has been offered in
advance of any expression of opinion by indignant readers
whose grief for the departed tends to run into rhyme.






CHAPTER IX.
THE REASON WHY I PURCHASED A HORSE—A PECULIAR CHARACTERISTIC—
DRIVING BY THE RIVER—OUR HORSE AS A PERSECUTOR—HE BECOMES A
GENUINE NIGHTMARE—EXPERIMENTING WITH HIS TAIL—HOW OUR HORSE
DIED—IN RELATION TO PIRATES—MRS. JONES'S BOLD CORSAIR—A
LAMENTABLE TALE.

T is probable that I should never have bought a horse if I
had not been strongly urged to do so by other persons. I do
not care a great deal for riding and driving; and if it ever
did occur to me that it would, perhaps, be a nice thing to
have a horse of my own, I regarded the necessary expense as
much too great for the small amount of enjoyment that could
be obtained from the investment. It always seemed to me to be
much cheaper to hire a horse at a livery-stable if only an
occasional drive was desired; and I cling to that theory yet.
But everybody else seemed to think I ought to own a horse.
Mrs. Adeler was especially anxious about it. She insisted
that we were doing very well in the world, and she could not
see the use of having means if we were to live always as we
did when we were poor. She said she often wanted to take a
little drive along the river-road in the evening with the
children, and she frequently wished to visit her friends in 
the country, but she couldn't bear to go with a strange horse
of which she knew nothing.

My friends used to say, "Adeler, I wonder you don't keep a
horse and take your family out sometimes;" and they hammered
away at the theme until I actually began to feel us if the
public suspected me of being a niggardly and cruel tyrant,
who hugged my gold to my bosom and gloated over the misery of
my wife and children—gloated because they couldn't have a
horse. People used to come down from the city to see us, and
after examining the house and garden, they would remark,
"Very charming!—very charming, indeed! A little paradise, in
fact; but, Adeler, why don't you buy a horse?"

I gradually grew nervous upon the subject, and was tolerably
well convinced that there would never be perfect happiness in
my family until I purchased a steed of some kind. At last,
one day Cooley had a yellow horse knocked down to him at one
of those auction-sales which are known in the rural districts
as "Vandues." And when I saw Cooley drive past the house,
every afternoon, with that saffron brute, and his family in a
dearborn wagon, and observed how he looked in at us and
smiled superciliously, as if he was thinking, "There lives a
miserable outcast who has no horse and can't get one," I
determined to purchase at once.

I have not had much experience with horses, but I found one
whose appearance and gait were fairly good, and I was
particularly drawn toward him because the man recommended him
as being "urbane." I had heard many descriptions of the
points of a good horse, but this was the first time I had
ever met a horse whose most prominent characteristic was
urbanity. It seemed to me that the quality was an excellent
one, and I made a bargain on the spot and drove home.



"Mrs. Adeler," I said, as I exhibited the purchase to her, "I
do not think this horse is very fast; I do not regard him as
in the highest sense beautiful; he may even be deficient in
wind; his tail certainly is short; and I think I can detect
in his forelegs a tendency to spring too far forward at the
knees; but, Mrs. Adeler, the horse is urbane. The man said
that his urbanity amounted to a positive weakness, and that
is why I bought him. If a horse is not urbane, my dear, it is
useless, no matter what its merit in other respects."

She said that had been her opinion from early childhood.

"I do not care greatly, Mrs. Adeler, for excessive speed.
Give me a horse that can proceed with merely a tolerable
degree of celerity and I am content. I never could comprehend
why a man whose horse can trot a mile in two minutes and
forty seconds should be made unhappy because another man's
horse trots the same distance one second sooner—that is, of
course, supposing that they are not running for money. One
second of time never makes any especial difference to me,
even when I am in a hurry. What I want in a horse is not
swiftness, but urbanity. I would rather have a kindhearted
horse, like ours, than the most rapid trotter with a wicked
disposition."

For a while I enjoyed having a horse, and I felt glad I had
bought him. It seemed very good to drive down by the river-
bank upon a pleasant evening, with the cool breeze blowing in
from the water, and the country around beautiful with the
bright foliage of early autumn. There was a sufficient
compensation for the heat and wretchedness of the busy day in
that quiet journey over the level road and past the fragrant
fields in the early twilight; and as we came home amid the
deepening shadows, we could find pleasure in watching the
schooners far off in the channel flinging out their lights,
and we could see the rays streaming across the wide interval
of rippling surface, and moving weirdly and strangely with
the motion of the water.

Sometimes, upon going out, we would overtake Cooley in his
dearborn; and then it was felicitous to observe how, when I
touched my horse with the whip, the animal put his head down,
elevated his abbreviated tail to a horizontal position and
left Cooley far, far behind, flogging his tawny horse with
such fury as would surely have subjected him to the
reproaches of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals if that excellent organization had been present. My
horse could achieve a tolerably rapid gait when he desired to
do so. That fact made existence in this world of anguish and
tears seem even more sad to Cooley than it had done
previously. I feel sure that he would have given fabulous
sums if his horse could have trotted a mile in a minute just
once—when we were upon the road together. I began to think
that it was just as well, after all, to have a progressive
horse as a slow one.



But when the novelty of the thing had passed, my old
indisposition to amusement of that kind gradually returned. I
drove less frequently. One day my man said to me:

"Mr. Adeler, that hoss is a-eatin' his head off, sir. If you
don't take him out, he'll be so wild that he'll bu'st the
machine to flinders, sir."

The threatened catastrophe seemed so alarming that I took him
out, although I had important work to do at home. The next
day I wanted to stay up in the city to go to a lecture; but
that morning, early, the horse again displayed an alarming
amount of friskiness, and I felt as if I must go down and
exercise him. I drove him for three hours at a rapid gait,
and succeeded in working off at least the exuberance of his
spirits.

On the following Wednesday I came home in the
afternoon, exhausted with work, and intending to retire at an
early hour. At half-past six o'clock, Judge Pitman came in.
He remarked:

"Adeler, that horse of yourn'll certainly go crazy if you
don't move him around. Mind me. He kicks like a flintlock
musket now if you come within forty foot of the stable."

I went out and hitched up, and that night I drove twenty-four
miles at a frightful speed. Horses have, perhaps, gone
farther and faster, but few have been pushed forward with a
smaller regard for consequences. Nothing but a recollection
of the cost of the horse restrained me from driving him into
the river and leaving him there.

By degrees the despicable brute became the curse of my
existence. If I desired to go on a journey, the restlessness
of the horse had first to be overcome. If I received an
invitation to a party, the horse must be exercised
beforehand. If I had an important article to write, I must
roam around the country behind that horse for two or three
hours, holding him in with such force that my hands were made
too unsteady for penmanship. If I wanted to take a row on the
river—an exercise of which I am passionately fond—that
detestable animal had to be danced up and down the turnpike
in order to keep him from kicking the stable to pieces. And
he was recommended to me as "urbane"!

He made my life unhappy. I became depressed and morose.
Sometimes when, amid a circle of friends, there was a
provocation to laughter, and I participated in the general
hilarity, I would suddenly become conscious of the fact that
the horse was in active existence, and the mirth would be
extinguished in gloom. He mingled with my dreams. Visions of
a bob-tailed horse consuming spectral oats, and kicking with
millions of legs, disturbed my rest at night. I rushed with
him over countless leagues of shadowy road, and plunged with
him over incomprehensible precipices. He organized himself
into hideous nightmare shapes, and charged wildly over me as
I slept, and filled all the air of that mysterious slumber-
land with the noise of his demoniac neighing.



The reality was bad enough without the unreal nocturnal
horrors. I might have sold the brute, but my wife really
wanted to have a horse, and I wished to oblige her. But it
was very wearing to bear about constantly the feeling of
responsibility which the animal engendered. I had to choose
between driving him continually and having the lives of the
members of my family imperiled when they took him out; and
the consciousness that whether there was sickness or
business, storm or earthquake, calamity or death, the horse
must be driven, gradually placed me in the position of a man
who is haunted by some dreadful spectre that clings to him
and overshadows him for ever and for ever.

The perpetual nervous worry told upon me. I became thin. My
clothing hung loose upon me. I took up two inches in my
waistcoat strap. The appetite which enabled me to find
enjoyment at the table deserted me. The food seemed
tasteless; and if in the midst of a meal the neigh of the
horse came eddying up through the air from the stable, I
turned away with a feeling of disgust, and felt as if I
wanted to prod somebody with the carving-knife.

One day my wife said to me:

"Mr. Adeler, you know that I urged you strongly to buy that
horse, and I thought he would do, but—"

"But now you want to sell him! ha! ha!" I exclaimed, with
delight. "Very well, I'll send him to the auctioneer this
very day."

"I wasn't going to say that," she remarked. "What I wanted to
mention was that nearly everybody in good circumstances about
here drives a pair, and I think we ought to get another
horse; don't you, my dear? It's so much nicer than having
only one."

"Mrs. Adeler," I said, solemnly, "that one horse down there
in the stable has reduced me to a skeleton and made me
utterly miserable. I will do as you say if you insist upon
it, but I tell you plainly that if another horse is brought
upon these premises I shall go mad."

"Don't speak in that manner, my dear."

"I tell you, Mrs. Adeler, that I shall go stark, staring mad!
Take your choice: go without the other horse or have a maniac
husband."

She said, of course, she would do without the horse.

But the affliction was suddenly and unexpectedly removed. My
horse had a singularly brief tail, and I thought it might be
that some of his violent demonstrations in the stable were
induced by his inability to switch off the flies which
alighted upon sensitive portions of the body. It occurred to
me to get him up an artificial tail for home use, and I
procured a piece of thick rope for the purpose. There was,
too, a certain humorousness about the idea that pleased me;
and as the amount of jocularity which that horse had
occasioned had, thus far been particularly small, the notion
had peculiar attractiveness.

I unraveled about eighteen inches of the rope and fastened
the other end to the horse's tail. This, I estimated, would
enable him to switch a fly off the very end of his nose when
he had acquired a little practice. Unfortunately, I neglected
to speak to my man upon the subject; and when he came to the
stable that evening, he examined the rope and concluded that
I was trying experiments with some new kind of hitching-
strap; so he tied the horse to the stall by the artificial
continuation. By morning the feed-box was kicked into
kindling-wood, and the horse was standing on three legs, with
the other leg caught in the hay-rack, while he had chewed up
two of the best boards in the side of the stable in front of
him.

Subsequently I explained the theory to the man and readjusted
the rope. But the patent tail annoyed the hostler so much
while currying the horse that he tied a stone to it to hold
it still. The consequence was that in a moment of unusual
excitement the horse flung the stone around and inflicted a
severe wound upon the man's head. The man resigned next
morning.

I then concluded to introduce an improvement. I
purchased some horse-hair and spliced it upon the tail so
neatly that it had the appearance of a natural growth. When
the new man came, he attempted to comb out the horse's tail,
and the added portion came off in his hand. He had profound
confidence in his veterinary skill, and he imagined that the
occurrence indicated a diseased condition of the horse. So he
purchased some powders and gave the animal an enormous dose
in a bucket of warm "mash." In half an hour that pestilential
horse was seized with convulsions, during which he kicked out
the stable-door, shattered the stall to pieces, hammered four
more boards out of the partition, dislocated his off hind leg
and expired in frightful agony.

He was more urbane after death than he had been during his
life, and I contemplated his remains without shedding a tear.
He was sold to a glue-man for eight dollars; and when he had
departed, I felt that he would fulfill a wiser and better
purpose as a contributor to the national stock of glue than
as the unconscious persecutor of his former owner.

"Mrs. Adeler, do you feel any interest in the subject of
pirates?"

She said the question was somewhat abrupt, but she thought
she might safely say she did not.

"I make the inquiry for the reason that I have just written a
ballad which has for its hero a certain bold corsair. This is
the first consequence of the death of our horse. In the
exuberance of joy caused by that catastrophe, I felt as if I
would like to perpetrate something which should be purely
ridiculous, and accordingly I organized upon paper this
piratical narrative. You think the subject is an odd one? Not
so. I do not pretend to explain the fact, but it is true that
by this generation a pirate is regarded as a comic personage.
Perhaps the reason is that he has been so often presented to
us in such a perfectly absurd form in melodrama and in the
cheap and trashy novels of the day. At any rate, he is
susceptible of humorous treatment, as you will perceive.

"I have had a stronger impulse to write of buccaneers, too,
because I am in New Castle; for, somehow, I always associate
those freebooting individuals with this village. A certain
ancestor of mine sailed away from this town in 1813, in a
brig commissioned as a privateer, and played havoc with the
ships of the enemy upon the Atlantic. In my childhood I used
to hear of his brave deeds, and, somehow, I conceived the
idea that he was a genuine pirate with a black flag, skull
and cross-bones, and a disagreeable habit of compelling his
captives to walk the plank. I was much more proud of him
then, Mrs. Adeler, than I should be now had he really been
such a ruffian. But he was not. He was a gallant sailor and a
brave and honest gentleman, who served his country faithfully
on the ocean, and then held a post of honor as warden of the
port of Philadelphia until his death. But I never go to the
river's side in New Castle without involuntarily recalling
that fine old man in the character of an outlawed rover upon
the high seas.

"Here, my dear, is the ballad, When I have read it to you, I
will send it to the Argus. Since Mr. Slimmer's retirement
there has been a dearth of poetry in the columns of that
great organ."

MRS. JONES'S PIRATE.

A sanguinary pirate sailed upon the Spanish main
In a rakish-looking schooner which was called the "Mary
Jane."
She carried lots of howitzers and deadly rifled guns,
With shot and shell and powder and percussion caps in tons.

The pirate was a homely man, and short and grum and fat;
He wore a wild and awful scowl beneath his slouching hat.
Swords, pistols and stilettos were arranged around his
thighs,
And demoniacal glaring was quite common with his eyes.

His heavy black moustaches curled away beneath his nose,
And drooped in elegant festoons about his very toes.
He hardly ever spoke at all; but when such was the case,
His voice 'twas easy to perceive was quite a heavy bass.

He was not a serious pirate; and despite his anxious cares,
He rarely went to Sunday-school and seldom said his prayers.
He worshiped lovely women, and his hope in life was this:
To calm his wild, tumultuous soul with pure domestic bliss.

When conversing with his shipmates, he very often swore
That he longed to give up piracy and settle down on shore.
He tired of blood and plunder; of the joys that they could
bring;
He sighed to win the love of some affectionate young thing.

One morning as the "Mary Jane" went bounding o'er the sea
The pirate saw a merchant bark far off upon his lee.
He ordered a pursuit, and spread all sail that he could
spare,
And then went down, in hopeful mood, to shave and curl his
hair.

He blacked his boots and pared his nails and tied a fresh
cravat;
He cleansed his teeth, pulled down his cuffs and polished up
his hat;
He dimmed with flour the radiance of his fiery red nose,
For, hanging with that vessel's wash, he saw some ladies'
hose.

Once more on deck, the stranger's hull he riddled with a
ball,
And yelled, "I say! what bark is that?" In answer to his call
The skipper on the other boat replied in thunder tones:
"This here's the bark Matilda, and her captain's name is
Jones."

The pirate told his bold corsairs to man the jolly-boats,
To board the bark and seize the crew, and slit their tarry
throats,
And then to give his compliments to Captain Jones, and say
He wished that he and Mrs. Jones would come and spend the
day.

They reached the bark, they killed the crew, they threw them
in the sea,
And then they sought the captain, who was mad as he could be,
Because his wife—who saw the whole sad tragedy, it seems—
Made all the ship vociferous with her outrageous screams.

But when the pirate's message came, she dried her streaming
tears,
And said, although she'd like to come, she had unpleasant
fears
That, his social status being very evidently low,
She might meet some common people whom she wouldn't care to
know.



Her husband's aged father, she admitted, dealt in bones,
But the family descended from the famous Duke de Jones;
And such blue-blooded people, that the rabble might be
checked,
Had to make their social circle excessively select.

Before she visited his ship she wanted him to say
If the Smythes had recognized him in a social friendly way;
Did the Jonsons ever ask him 'round to their ancestral halls?
Was he noticed by the Thomsons? Was he asked to Simms's
balls?

The pirate wrote that Thomson was his best and oldest friend,
That he often stopped at Jonson's when he had a week to
spend;
As for the Smythes, they worried him with their incessant
calls;
His very legs were weary with the dance at Simms's balls.

(The scoundrel fibbed most shamelessly. In truth he only knew
A lot of Smiths without a y—a most plebeian crew.
His Johnsons used a vulgar h, his Thompsons spelled with p,
His Simses had one m, and they were common as could be.)

Then Mrs. Jones mussed up her hair and donned her best
delaine,
And went with Captain Jones aboard the schooner Mary Jane.
The pirate won her heart at once by saying, with a smile,
He never saw a woman dressed in such exquisite style.

The pirate's claim to status she was very sure was just
When she noticed how familiarly the Johnsons he discussed.
Her aristocratic scruples then were quickly laid aside,
And when the pirate sighed at her, reciproc'ly she sighed.

No sooner was the newer love within her bosom born
Than Jones was looked upon by her with hatred and with scorn,
She said 'twas true his ancestor was famous Duke de Jones,
But she shuddered to remember that his father dealt in bones.

So then they got at Captain Jones and hacked him with a
sword,
And chopped him into little bits and tossed him overboard.
The chaplain read the service, and the captain of the bark
Before his widow's weeping eyes was gobbled by a shark.

The chaplain turned the prayer-book o'er; the bride took off
her glove;
They swore to honor, to obey, to cherish and to love.
And, freighted full of happiness, across the ocean's foam
The schooner glided rapidly toward the pirate's home.

And when of ecstasy and joy their hearts could hold no more,
That pirate dropped his anchor down and rowed his love
ashore.
And as they sauntered up the street he gave his bride a poke,
And said, "In them there mansions live the friends of whom
spoke."

She glanced her eye along the plates of brass upon each door,
And then her anger rose as it had never done before.
She said, "That Johnson has an h! that Thompson has a p!
The Smith that spells without a y is not the Smith for me!"

And darkly scowled she then upon that rover of the wave;
"False! False!" she shrieked, and spoke of him as "Monster,
traitor, slave!"
And then she wept and tore her hair, and filled the air with
groans,
And cursed with bitterness the day she let them chop up
Jones.

And when she'd spent on him at last the venom of her tongue,
She seized her pongee parasol and stabbed him in the lung.
A few more energetic jabs were at his heart required,
And then this scand'lous buccaneer rolled over and expired.

Still brandishing her parasol she sought the pirate boat;
She loaded up a gun and jammed her head into its throat;
And fixing fast the trigger, with string tied to her toe,
She breathed "Mother!" through the touchhole, and kicked and
let her go.

A snap, a fizz, a rumble; some stupendous roaring tones—
And where upon earth's surface was the recent Mrs. Jones?
Go ask the moaning winds, the sky, the mists, the murmuring
sea;
Go ask the fish, the coroner, the clams—but don't ask me.




CHAPTER X.
A PICTURESQUE CHURCH—SOME REFLECTIONS UPON CHURCH MUSIC—BOB
PARKER IN THE CHOIR—OUR UNDERTAKER—A GLOOMY MAN—OUR
EXPERIENCE WITH THE HOT-AIR FURNACES—A SERIES OF ACCIDENTS—
MR. COLLAMER'S VOCALISM—AN EXTRAORDINARY MISTAKE.






HERE are but few old villages in the United States that
contain ancient churches so picturesque in situation and in
appearance as that which stands in the centre of our town,
the most conspicuous of its buildings. The churchyard is
filled with graves, for the people still cling to that kindly
usage which places the sacred dust of the departed in holy
ground. And so here, beneath the trees, and close to the
shadow of the sanctuary walls, villagers of all ages and
generations lie reposing in their final slumber, while from
among them the snow-white spire rises heavenward to point the
way their souls have gone. There are many of us who were not
born here, and who are, as it were, almost strangers in the
town, who can wander down the narrow paths of the yard, to
out-of-the-way corners, where the headstones are gray with
age and sometimes covered with a film of moss, and read in
the quaint characters with which the marble is inscribed our
own family names. Here lies the mortal part of men and women
who were dear to our grandsires; of little children too,
sometimes, whose departure brought sorrow to the hearts of
those who joined them in Paradise long, long before we began
to play our parts in the drama of existence. The lives that
ended in this quiet resting-place are full of deepest
interest to us; they have a controlling influence upon our
destiny, and yet they are very unreal to us. The figures
which move by us as we try to summon up the panorama of that
past are indistinct and obscure. They are shadows walking in
the dusk, and we strive in vain to vest them with a semblance
of the personality which once was theirs. They should seem
very near to us their kindred, and yet, as we attempt to come
closer to them, they appear so remote, so far away in the
dead years, that we hardly dare to claim fellowship with
them, or to speak of them as of our flesh and blood.

It makes no difference where the empty shell is cast when the
spiritual man is gone, but I reverence that human instinct
which induces a man to wish to be laid at the last by the
side of his ancestors and near to those whom he has loved in
life. It is at least a beautiful sentiment which demands that
those who are with each other in immortality should not be
separated here on earth, but together should await the
morning of the resurrection.

I like this old church for its simplicity; not only for the
absence of splendor in its adornment, but for the methods of
worship of which it approves. The choir, from its station in
the organ-loft, never hurls down upon the heads of the saints
and sinners beneath any of those surprising sounds which
rural choirs so often emit, with a conviction that they are
achieving wonderful feats of vocalism, and no profane fingers
compel the pipes of the microscopic organ to recall to the
mind of the listener the music of the stage and the concert-
room. From the instrument come only harmonies round, sweet
and full, melting in solemn cadences from key to key and
rolling down through the church, bringing the souls of the
worshipers into full accord with the spirit of the place and
the occasion, or else pouring forth some stately melody on
which the voices of the singers are upborne. The choir
fulfills its highest purpose by leading the people through
the measures of those grand old tunes, simple in construction
but sublime in spirit, which give to the language of the
spiritual songs of the sanctuary a more eloquent beauty than
their own. I would rather hear such music as may be found in
"Federal Street," in "Old Hundred," in "Hursley" and in the
"Adeste Fideles," sung by an entire assembly of people who
are in earnest in their religion, than to listen to the most
intricate fugue worked out by a city choir of hired singers,
or the most brilliant anthem sung by a congregation of
surpliced boys who quarrel with each other and play wicked
games during the prayers. Such tunes as these are filled with
solemn meaning which is revealed to him whose singing is
really an act of worship. There is more genuine religious
fervor in "Hursley" than in a library of ordinary oratorios.
A church which permits its choir to do all the singing might
as well adopt the Chinese fashion of employing a machine to
do its praying. A congregation which sits still while a
quartette of vocalists overhead utters all the praises, need
not hesitate to offer its supplications by turning a brass
wheel with a crank. Our people do their singing and their
praying for themselves, and the choir merely takes care that
the music is of a fitting kind.

Miss Magruder sits in the organ-loft now that she is at home,
and I doubt not she contributes much to the sweetness of the
strains which float from out that somewhat narrow enclosure.
Her presence, I observe, ensures the regular attendance of
young Mr. Parker at the church, and last Sunday he even
ventured to sit with the choir and to help with the singing.
I have never considered him a really good performer, although
he cherishes a conviction that he has an admirable voice, and
such acquaintance with the art of using it as would have
given him eminence if he had chosen the career of a public
singer. After service I had occasion to speak to the
clergyman for a moment, and as soon as he saw me he said:

"Mr. Adeler, did you notice anything about the organ or the
choir to-day that was peculiar?"

"No; I do not think I did."

"It is very odd; but it seemed to me when they were singing
the two last hymns that something must be the matter with one
of the pipes. There was a sort of a rough, buzzing, rasping
sound which I have never observed before. The instrument must
need repairing."



I think I know what it was," remarked Mr. Campbell, the
basso, who stepped up at that moment.

"The valves a little worn, I suppose?" said the minister.

"Well, no," replied Campbell; "the fact is that
extraordinary noise was produced by Mr. Parker, who was
making a strenuous effort to sing bass. He seemed to be
laboring under a strong conviction that the composers had
made some mistakes in the tunes, which he proposed to correct
as be went along. Parker's singing is like homoeopathic
medicine—a very little of it is enough."

Bob attributes the criticism of Campbell to professional
jealousy, but he will probably sit downstairs after this. He
prefers not to waste his talents upon provincial people who
cannot appreciate genuine art. He will content himself with
walking home with the fair Magruder after service.

There is one thing about the church with which I must
find fault. I have never been able to comprehend why it is
customary throughout this country, even in the large cities,
to permit undertakers to decorate the exteriors of churches
with their advertisements, as ours is decorated by our
undertaker. In old times, when the sexton was the grave-
digger and general public functionary, it was well enough to
give publicity to his residence by posting its whereabouts in
a public place. There were oftentimes little offices which he
had to perform for the congregation and for the neighborhood,
and it was necessary that he should be found quickly. But the
present fashion, which allows an undertaker—who has no other
connection with the church than that he sits in a pew
occasionally and goes to sleep during the sermon—to nail a
tin sign, bearing a picture of a gilt coffin, right by the
church door, so that no man, woman or child can enter that
sanctuary without thinking of the grave, is monstrous.

It is very proper that the minds of the people should be
turned to contemplation of the certainty of death whenever
they go to church. But it is hardly necessary to disturb a
man's reflections upon the necessity of preparing for the
grave by confronting him with an advertisement which compels
him to remember how much it is going to cost his relations to
put him there. Besides this, it makes the undertakers
covetous, and fills their gloomy souls with murderous wishes.



I have seen ours standing against the wall in the churchyard
on a Sunday morning with his hands in his pockets, glowering
at the congregation as they go in, eyeing and criticising the
members, and muttering to himself, "Splendid fit he'd make in
that mahogany coffin I've got at home!" "There goes a man who
ought to have died five years ago if I'd been treated right!"
"I'll souse that Thompson underground some of these fine
days!" "Those Mulligan girls certainly can't give the old man
anything less than a fourhundred-dollar funeral when he
dies!" "Healthiest looking congregation of its size I ever
saw!" etc., etc.

If I were in authority in the church, I would suppress that
gilded advertisement and try to convert the owner of it.

No man should be permitted to waste his Sabbaths in vain
longings for the interment of his fellow-men.

They are very busy now at the church putting in new furnaces
in order to be prepared for the cold weather. New ones were
introduced last winter, I am told, but they were not entirely
successful in operation. The first time the fire was put in
them was on Saturday morning, and on Sunday the smoke was so
dense in the church that nobody could see the clergyman. The
workman had put the stove-pipe into the hot-air flue. Next
Saturday night the fires were lighted, but on Sunday morning
only the air immediately under the roof was warm, and the
congregation nearly froze to death. The sexton was then
instructed to make the fire on Thursday, in order to give the
church a chance to become thoroughly heated. He did so, and
early Sunday morning the furnaces were so choked up with
ashes that the fires went out, and again the thermometer in
the front pew marked zero.

Then the sexton received orders to make that fire on
Thursday, and to watch it carefully until church-time on the
following Sabbath. He did so, and both furnaces were in full
blast at the appointed hour. That was the only warm Sunday we
had last winter. The mercury was up to eighty degrees out of
doors, while in the church everybody was in a profuse
perspiration, and the bellows-blower at the organ fainted
twice. The next Sunday the sexton tried to keep the fires low
by pushing in the dampers, and consequently the church was
filled with coal-gas, and the choir couldn't sing, nor could
the minister preach without coughing between his sentences.

Subsequently the sexton removed one of the cast-iron
registers in the floor for the purpose of examining the hot
air flue. He left the hole open while he went into the cellar
for a moment, and just then old Mr. Collamer came in to hunt
for his gloves, which he thought he had left in his pew. Of
course he walked directly into the opening, and was dragged
out in a condition of asphyxia. That very day one of the
furnaces burst and nearly fired the church. The demand for
heaters of another kind seemed to be imperative.

Old Collamer, by the way, is singularly unfortunate in his
experiences in the sanctuary. He is extremely deaf, and a few 
Sundays ago he made a fearful blunder during the sermon. The
clergyman had occasion to introduce a quotation, and as it
was quite long, he brought the volume with him; and when the
time came, he picked up the book and began to read from it.
We always sing the Old Hundred doxology after sermon at our
church, and Mr. Collamer, seeing the pastor with the book,
thought the time had come, so while the minister was reading
he opened his hymn-book at the place. Just as the clergyman
laid the volume down the man sitting next to Mr. Collamer
began to yawn, and Mr Collamer, thinking he was about to
sing, immediately broke out into Old Hundred, and roared it
at the top of his voice. As the clergyman was just beginning
"secondly," and as there was of course perfect silence in the
church, the effect of Mr. Collamer's vociferation was very
startling. But the good old man failed to notice that
anything was the matter, so he kept right on and sang the
verse through.

When he had finished, he observed that everybody else seemed
to be quiet, excepting a few who were laughing, so he leaned
over and said out loud to the man who yawned,

"What's the matter with this congregation, anyhow? Why don't
they go home?"

The man turned scarlet, and the perspiration broke out
all over him, for he felt that the eyes of the congregation
were upon him, and he knew that he would have to yell to make
Mr. Collamer hear. So he touched his lips with his fingers as
a sign for the old man to keep quiet. But Mr. Collamer
misunderstood the motion:

"Goin' to sing another hymn, hey? All right."

And he began to fumble his hymn-book again. Then the sexton
hurried up the aisle, and explained matters out loud to Mr.
Collamer, and that gentleman subsided, while the minister
proceeded with his discourse. The clergyman has written Mr.
Collamer a note requesting him in the future not to join in
the sacred harmony. The effect is too appalling upon the
ribald boys in the back pews.






CHAPTER XI.
A FISHING EXCURSION DOWN THE RIVER—DIFFICULTIES OF THE
VOYAGE—A SERIES OF UNFORTUNATE INCIDENTS—OUR RETURN HOME, AND
HOW WE WERE RECEIVED—A LETTER UPON THE GENERAL SUBJECT OF
ANGLING—THE SORROWS OF THE FISHERMAN—LIEUTENANT SMILEY—HIS
RECOLLECTIONS OF REV. MR. BLODGETT—A VERY REMARKABLE
MISSIONARY.

T is said that there is good fishing in this vicinity.
Several of my neighbors who have been out lately have brought
home large quantities of fish of various kinds, together with 
glowing reports of the delightful character of the sport. A
craving to indulge in this form of amusement was gradually
excited in the mind of Mr. Bob Parker by the stories of the
anglers and by the display of their trophies, and he
succeeded in persuading me to assist in the organization of
an expedition down the river to the fishing-grounds.
Yesterday was selected for the undertaking. I hired a boat
from a man at the wharf; and after packing a generous
luncheon in the fish-basket and securing a box full of bait,
we tossed our lines into the boat, together with a heavy
stone which was to serve as an anchor, and then we pushed out
into the stream.



It was early morning when we started, and to my dismay
I found that the tide was running up with remarkable
velocity. As we had to pull four miles down the river, this
was a consideration of very great importance. Mr. Parker is
not an especially skillful oarsman, and before he had fairly
seated himself and dipped his blade in the water we had
drifted two hundred yards in the wrong direction. After very
severe labor for half an hour, we succeeded in getting three-
quarters of a mile below the town, and then Bob informed me
that he thought he could row better with my oar. Accordingly,
I changed places with him, and during the time thus expended
the boat went back a third of the distance we had gained.
Another prolonged and terrible effort enabled us to proceed
two miles toward our destination, and then Parker observed
that he must stop and rest; he said he would die if he rowed
another stroke. So we lay upon our oars for a while, and
embraced the opportunity to wipe away the perspiration and to
cool our blistered hands in the river. Parker then asked me
if I would mind changing places with him again. He said be
was now convinced that he had made a mistake in leaving his
first position. We fell back half a mile during this period;
and when we finally reached the grounds, the morning was far
advanced. Bob was nearly worn out, and he proposed that we
give up the idea of catching fish and row ashore, where we
could lie down under the trees and begin operations upon the
luncheon.

But as we had come to fish, I informed Bob that I was
determined to do so. I should be ashamed to go home without
bringing any game. I should be afraid to look in the face of
the man who owned the boat when he asked me what luck I had.
So we tied a rope around the stone, and tossing the stone
overboard, we came to anchor. Our hooks were baited and the
lines were thrown out, and then Bob and I waited patiently
for bites.

It required a great deal of patience, for the  fish did
not take the bait with a remarkable degree of freedom. In
fact, we only had a nibble or two at first, and then even
this manifestation of the presence of the fish ceased. We
were sitting with our backs to the shore, watching the corks
in front of us, when Bob suddenly uttered an exclamation.
Upon looking around, I found that we had drifted half a mile
upstream and out into the middle of the river, which is here
nearly four miles wide. The stone had dropped from the knot
in the rope and released the boat.

Then we rowed back to shore and landed for the purpose of
obtaining another stone. We could not find one, so we pulled
out again; and sticking one of the oars in the mud, we
fastened the boat to that. Then Bob had a bite. He pulled up,
and dragged to the surface of the water a crab, which
instantly let go and sidled under the boat. Then we each
caught a small sunfish, and with this our enthusiasm began to
revive. Just then the oar came out of the mud, slipped
through the loop in the cable and floated off. The prospect
of having to take the boat home with one oar seemed so
appalling that I hastily threw off my coat and shoes and swam
after the fugitive oar. Meantime, the boat floated off, and I
reached it and was hauled in by Bob just as I had made up my
mind to give up and go to the bottom.

We then fastened the oar down again, and I held it with one
hand and my fishing-line with the other. Suddenly each of us
had a splendid bite, and we both pulled in vigorously. The
fish seemed to struggle violently all the way to the surface;
but when the hooks came into view, we found that our lines
were entangled, and that neither of us had a fish. The next
time Bob attempted to take in his line his hook caught upon
the bottom; and when, in a fit of exasperation, he tried to
jerk it loose, the cord snapped and the hopes of the
fisherman were blasted for that day. Then, as Bob tipped the
boat while he washed his hands, the bait-box fell overboard,
and so matters came to a definite conclusion, and we
determined to quit.

When we started for home, the tide had turned, and we
did not reach town until dark. The man who owned the craft
had just telegraphed to Delaware City for the purpose of
ascertaining if two suspicious men had landed there and
attempted to sell a boat. He compelled me to pay half a day's
hire extra for staying out so late, together with the cost of
the telegram.

I consider it beneath me to notice the unnecessary violence
of his language or the insolence of his criticisms upon our
skill as fishermen.

This I could have borne with patience, but it was hard, very,
very hard, upon arriving home, to have Mrs. Adeler come to
the door with a smile upon her face and ask, "Where are the
fish?" while she informed us that she had asked the Magruders 
over to tea, and had depended upon us to supply the principal
dish, so that now she had not a thing in the house that she
could cook.

"Mrs. Adeler, we return with two diminutive sunfish,
one demoralized ham-sandwich, two crimson noses and a
thorough, sincere, whole-souled and earnest disgust for the
wretched business which some men choose to regard in the
light of amusement. No, Mrs. Adeler, we have no fish that are
worthy of the name, and hereafter when we wish to have some,
we will purchase them from the unhappy beings who catch them.
A fisherman deserves all the money he can get, my dear. I
wouldn't be a professional piscator for the mines of Golconda
and the wealth of a nabob to boot."

Our unfortunate experiences upon the river tempt me to refer
in detail to the ills to which amateur fishermen, as a class,
are exposed. The pleasures of angling have been said and sung
by a vast multitude of sentimental people reaching all the
way from old Izaak Walton to Mr. Prime; but the story of the
suffering that too often accompanies the sport has not yet
been narrated with a sufficient amount of vigor. The martyr
fishermen have been too long kept in the background. The time
has come for them to have a hearing. I have chosen to present
their complaint in the somewhat singular form of a letter to
Mr. Benjamin F. Butler, because at the time of the
negotiation of the Washington treaty he manifested much
indignation at the wrongs heaped upon American fishermen by
that instrument, and because he is a very suitable person to
figure in a remonstrance which has about it perhaps a slight
flavor of burlesque, even though it is a narrative of real
misery.

THE SORROWS OF THE FISHERMAN.

DEAR GENERAL: I have given a great deal of reflection,
lately, to the fishery question, and I am convinced that your
opposition to the fishery clauses of the Washington treaty
had a basis of sound common sense. The treaty, in my opinion,
wholly fails to consider in a spirit of wise statesmanship
the causes which move the fisherman to complaint, and
supplies no adequate means for securing their removal. Permit
me to suggest to you the propriety of urging upon the
government the reassembling of the joint high commission for
the purpose of obtaining a reconsideration of the fishery
question with the new light which I propose to shed upon it.

My experience in fishing has convinced me that one of the
most serious of the primary obstacles to be overcome is the
difficulty of procuring worms. Perhaps you may have observed
an enthusiastic fisherman in pursuit of worms? The day is
always warm, and his performance upon the shovel conduces to
profuse perspiration. He seems never to strike precisely the
spot where the worms frolic. He labors with tremendous energy
until he has excavated a couple of cellars and a rifle-pit,
from which he rescues but two or three worms, while all
around him the earth is perforated with holes, into which
other vermicular creatures are perceived to disappear before
he can lay his hands on them. The alacrity with which a worm
draws himself into a hole in the ground, and dives down
apparently to the centre of the globe, when you want him, is
a constant source of aggravation to the fisherman. The
fishery interests suffer on account of it.

If a joint high commission would address itself in a
conciliatory spirit to the work of obtaining concerted action
from the civilized nations of the world upon the subject of
the reformation of worms, blessed results would undoubtedly
accrue. I know a fisherman who could make a speech in
Congress on the subject of worms which would make that body
weep the rotunda full of tears.

And even when bait has been secured, you are aware,
perhaps, that the fisherman will sit for hours upon the bank
of the stream watching his cork until he is nearly blinded,
and until his head swims. At last, when his patience is
exhausted and he is convinced that there are no fish about,
he pulls up for the purpose of trying another spot, and finds
that some disreputable fish has sucked the bait off the hook
an hour before without making a perceptible nibble.

Perhaps a clause in the treaty upon the general subject
of nibbles might be of service. I think a paragraph could be
constructed on nibbles which would create more amazement and
produce a greater sensational effect in diplomatic circles
than anything that ever appeared in a treaty. The
introduction of the subject of nibbles to international law
would, give that science refreshing variety and probably
prevent devastating wars.

It is another cause of suffering to the fisherman that when
he has thrown in again, and has waited an hour for a bite,
and waited in vain, he considers it safe to drop his rod for
a moment, so that he can light his pipe. It is a peculiar
circumstance, I say, that just as he has struck his last
match he always gets the most vigorous bite of the whole day.
The cork pulls under in the most exciting manner several
times, and only floats up again permanently at the moment
when the angler seizes his rod in eager haste and finds that
the fish is gone.

It is this kind of thing that makes the fisherman feel as if
he would be relieved by the use of violent language. The
British premier, I am sure, will consent to the negotiation
of another treaty if you will press this matter on him. He
must see at once that unless bites are arranged with a
greater regard for the feelings of the fisherman and for the
sanctity of the law against profane swearing, the fishery
interests will languish and the crop prove a humiliating
failure.

I have often remarked, too, that when the fisherman has
nearly landed a fish, which drops off the hook just as it
appears to be safe, he collects all his energies for the next
bite. He grasps the rod tightly with both hands, he rises and
plants his legs firmly upon the ground, he watches the cork
carefully, with his lips compressed and with fiery
determination gleaming from his eyes. The cork moves
slightly. It goes under; he has a good bite; he pulls up with
frightful energy, determined not to lose this one, and the
next instant his line hits the limb of the tree overhead, and
winds around it as closely as if it was put there on purpose
to splice that limb, so as to make it perfectly secure
throughout the unending ages of eternity.

I always excuse the man for taking a gloomy view of life, and
for saying over with ardor and vehemence his entire reserve
stock of objurgations as he shins up the tree. But has the
government no duty in the matter? What is the use of joint
high commissions if these things are to be allowed? We have
made the republic successful, we have fought mighty battles,
we have paid millions of indebtedness and we have given the
civilization of the world a tremendous impulse forward; now
let us do something for the disgusted fisherman who has to
fumble around out on that limb. Let us have a special treaty
on that particular branch of the subject.

If something could be done in relation to eels, I think the
government of our beloved country would rest upon a
foundation of greater stability and have a more permanent
hold upon popular affection. Perhaps you have fished for
eels? The eel gently pulls the cork under and lets go. You
pull up suddenly, and throw in again. The eel tenderly draws
the cork beneath the surface, and, wild with fury, you jerk
out your line a second time. This exhilarating exercise
continues for some moments, and you make up your mind that
existence will be a burden, the world a hollow sham, and
groceries and marketing useless baubles, unless you catch
that eel. Finally you do hook him and draw him out. He is
active, playful and vivacious. He wriggles; he forms himself
in quick succession into S's, C's and Q's. He points to all
the four quarters of the compass at once. He swallows himself
and spits himself out. He wraps himself around your boot and
shoots up your leg and covers your trowsers with slime, and
tangles your line into a mess by the side of which the
Gordian knot was the perfection of simplicity. When you get
your foot firmly on him, you find that he has swallowed the
hook, and you have completely open, from head to tail, to get
the hook out, and then, as likely as not, the eel will flip
back into the water and escape. I think eels rarely die.

A joint high commission which would devote itself with
philanthropic ardor and untiring energy to a dispassionate
consideration of the subject of the immortality of eels
might, perhaps, achieve important results. Any settlement of
the fishery question which overlooked the hideous wickedness
of eels would be a cruel mockery of human woe.

But for pure pathos, I can conceive of nothing that will
equal the anguish of the fisherman when he imagines he has a
catfish upon his hook. His cork is drawn slowly under the
surface, and it goes down, down, down, until it sinks 
completely out of sight. He is certain it is a catfish—they
always pull in this manner, he says; and he draws in his line
gently, while the fish tugs and pulls at the other end.
Gradually, v-e-r-y gradually, the fisherman pulls it in, in
order to be sure to keep the prey upon the hook. It is
evidently a very large fish, and he is determined to land it
through the shallow water, so that it cannot drop back and
escape. Slowly it comes up, and just as the hook nears the
surface the angler gives a sudden jerk, and out comes a
terrific snag with a dozen branches and covered with mud. And
meanwhile, during all the fisherman's troubles, there is that
infamous small boy sitting on the opposite bank of the creek
pulling up fish by the dozen with a pin-hook and some
wrapping twine.

It would gratify me if the new treaty would devote one clause
to a definite settlement of the question of the bearing of
snags upon the miseries of mankind, and about eight
stupendous clauses to a determination of the fate that is
deserved by that boy. My own humanitarian tendencies incline
me to urge that he should be summarily shot. If a boy with a
pin-hook is to be allowed thus to destroy the peace of older
American citizens, the sooner we ask some efficient and
reliable despot to come over here and break up the government
and trample on us, the happier we shall be.

I commend the subject to your enlightened consideration, and
ask for an earnest appeal to the next congress in behalf of
suffering fishermen. If we cannot obtain redress by peaceful
means, let us have it by force. I am ready to overturn the
government, massacre the people, burn the cities and carry
desolation, devastation and death into every home in the
land, rather than to permit these outrages against justice
longer to continue and these unhappy men to endure further
persecution.

There are indications that the course of Bob Parker's true
love will not run entirely smooth. The officers stationed at
Fort Delaware, below here, come up to the village constantly
upon social errands, and they are exceedingly popular with
the young ladies. Lieutenant Smiley is, I think, the
favorite; and as he has become a somewhat frequent visitor at
Magruder's, Bob's jealousy has been aroused. He hates Smiley
with a certain deadly hatred. Mr. Parker is not naturally
warlike in his tendencies, but I believe he would willingly
engage in hostilities with the lieutenant with an utterly
reckless disregard of the consequences.

Smiley comes to see us sometimes; and Bob, I fear, regards
even this family with gloom and suspicion because we receive
the lieutenant courteously. But he says very little upon the
subject; for when he begins to abuse Smiley, I always ask him
why he does not propose to Miss Magruder at once and thus
relieve himself from his agony of apprehension. Then he beats
a retreat. He would rather face a regiment of Smileys armed
with Dahlgren guns than to discuss the subject of his
cowardice respecting the beautiful Magruder.

We like the lieutenant well enough, and we should like him
better but for his propensity for telling incredible stories.
He was in the naval service for eight or ten years; and when
he undertakes to give accounts of his adventures, he is very
apt to introduce anecdotes of which Munchausen would have
been ashamed. It is one of Smiley's favorite theories that he
sojourned for a considerable period among the Fiji Islands,
and many of his narratives relate his experiences in that
region. There was a missionary meeting at the church a night
or two ago, and the lieutenant, having been defeated by Bob
in his attempt to escort Miss Magruder to her home, came to
our house; and very naturally he began the conversation with
a story of missionary enterprise with which he assumed to
have become familiar during his visit to the South Seas.

"Mr. Adeler," he said, "I was very much interested in the
proceedings at that meeting to-night, but it seems to me that
there is one defect in the system of preparing men for the
work of propagating the gospel among the heathen."

"What is that?"

"Why they ought to teach the science of mesmerism in the
divinity schools."

"I don't exactly understand the purpose of the—"

"Perhaps you never heard of the Rev. Mr. Blodgett, missionary
to the Fiji Islands? Well, he saved his life once merely by
practicing mesmerism. He has told me the story often."

"I should like to hear it"

"It seems that Blodgett in his sinful youth had been a
traveling professor of mesmerism; but he had abandoned the
business to go into the ministry and to preach to the heathen
in Fiji. Well, his church out there got up a day-school
picnic, it appears; and when the people all arrived upon the
ground, they learned that the provisions had been forgotten.
A meeting of the vestry was called, and after a brief
consultation it was decided that the only thing which could
be done to meet the emergency was to barbecue the minister.
The inducement to this course was all the stronger because
his salary was six months in arrears, and the church was
entirely out of funds. So they built a huge fire; and seizing
Blodgett, they began to strip him and to stick him with
forks.



"In order to save himself, he immediately mesmerized each
member of the vestry; and when they were all fixed, he called
up the Sunday-school scholars, class by class, and put them
comfortably to sleep. Having them all completely under his
influence, he gave an entire class to each one of the
vestrymen, and assured them that the innocent children were
the most luscious kind of missionary. Thereupon the
hypnotized vestry immediately ate up the somnambulistic
Sunday-school and picked the bones clean. Blodgett was a very
conscientious man in the performance of his. sacerdotal
functions, so he read the funeral service over each class as
it disappeared

"Rather an excessive meal, I should say."

"Yes, but they are large eaters, the Fijians. You might say
their appetites are, in a certain sense, robust."

"I should imagine that such was the case. But proceed."

"Well, when the little ones were gone, Blodgett whispered to
the magnetized wardens that their fellow-vestrymen were also
succulent propagators of Christianity; whereupon the
unconscious wardens fell upon their colleagues, and in a few
moments nearly the whole vestry was in the process of
assimilation. There remained now but the two wardens, and
Blodgett, having prevailed upon the younger and more vigorous
of the two to eat the other, then seized the body of his
converted but erring brother and stood it on its head in the
fire. The Rev. Mr. Blodgett went away alone from that picnic,
and he went with a heavy heart. When he got home, they asked
where the rest of the folks were, and he said they were
enjoying themselves up there in the woods in their own quiet,
innocent way, but that he had to come away in order to visit
a sick friend who stood in need of his ministrations. And
then he packed his trunk and borrowed a canoe and paddled
away to our ship, determined to seek some sunnier clime,
where the heathen rage less furiously, and where the popular
appetite for warm clergyman is not so intensely vivid."



"That is a very remarkable narrative, lieutenant—very
remarkable indeed!"

"Yes. But poor Mott was not so lucky."

"Who was Mott?"

"Why the Rev. Peter Mott—he was a missionary engaged upon one
of the other islands. He knew nothing of mesmerism; and when
his choir attacked him upon the way home from church one day,
he was unable to defend himself, and they ate him."

"How painful!"

"I had to carry the mournful news to Mrs. Mott, who lived in
San Francisco. When we reached that port, I called upon her
and performed the unpleasant duty. The manner in which she
received the intelligence was, I conceive, in every way
extraordinary. She cried, of course, and I offered her what
consolation I could under the circumstances I alluded to the
fact that all men must die at any rate, and dear Mott, let us
hope, had gone to a better world than this one of sorrow and
trouble and so forth.

"Mrs. Mott in reply said, with a voice broken with sobs:



"'It isn't that—oh, it isn't that. I know he is better off;
I'm sure he is happier; but you know what a very particular
man he was, and oh, Mr. Smiley, I fear that those brutal
savages boiled him with cabbage.' There was no use trying to
assuage her grief under such circumstances, so I shook hands
with her and left. But it was an odd idea. Mott with cabbage!
I thought as I came away that he would have tasted better
with the merest flavor of onion."

When Lieutenant Smiley bade us good-night, I said,

"Mrs. Adeler, what do you think of that young man?"

"I think," she said, "that he tells the most dreadful
falsehoods I ever listened to. It will be a burning shame if
he succeeds in cutting out Robert with Miss Magruder."

"Mrs. Adeler, he shall not do that. Bob shall have Miss
Magruder at all hazards. If he does not propose to her
shortly, I shall go down and broach the subject to her
myself. We must defeat Smiley even if we have to violate all
the rules of propriety to achieve that result."






CHAPTER XII.
HOW THE PLUMBER FIXED MY BOILER—A VEXATIOUS BUSINESS—HOW HE
DIDN'T COME TO TIME, AND WHAT THE ULTIMATE RESULT WAS—AN
ACCIDENT, AND THE PATHETIC STORY OF YOUNG CHUBB—REMINISCENCES
OF GENERAL CHUBB—THE ECCENTRICITIES OF AN ABSENT-MINDED MAN—
THE RIVALS—PARKER VERSUS SMILEY.

E have had a great deal of trouble recently with our kitchen
boiler, which is built into the wall over the range. It
sprang a leak a few weeks ago, and the assistance of a
plumber had to be invoked for the purpose of repairing it. I
sent for the plumber, and after examining the boiler, he
instructed the servant to let the fire go out that night, so
that he could begin operations early the next morning.

His order was obeyed, but in the morning the plumber failed
to appear. We had a cold and very uncomfortable breakfast,
and on my way to the depot I overtook the plumber going in
the same direction. He said he was sorry to disappoint me,
but he was called suddenly out of town on imperative
business, and he would have to ask me to wait until the next
morning, when he would be promptly on hand with his men.



 So we had no fire in the range upon that day, and the family
breakfasted again upon cool viand without being cheered with
a view of the plumber. Upon calling at the plumber's shop to
ascertain why he had not fulfilled his promise, I was
informed by the clerk that he had returned, but that he was
compelled to go over to Wilmington. The man seemed so
thoroughly in earnest in his assertion that the plumber
positively would attend to my boiler upon the following
morning that we permitted the range to remain untouched, and
for the third time we broke our fast with a frigid repast.
But the plumber and his assistants did not come.

As it seemed to be wholly impossible to depend upon these
faithless artisans, our cook was instructed to bring the
range into service again without waiting longer for repairs,
and to give the family a properly prepared meal in the
morning. While we were at breakfast there was a knock at the
gate, and presently we perceived the plumber and his men
coming up the yard with a general assortment of tools and
materials. The range at the moment of his entrance to the
kitchen was red hot; and when he realized the fact, he flung
his tools on the floor and expressed his indignation in the
most violent and improper language, while his attendant
fiends sat around in the chairs and growled in sympathy with
their chief. When I appeared upon the scene, the plumber
addressed me with the air of a man who had suffered a great
and irreparable wrong at my hands, and he really displayed so
much feeling that for a few moments I had an indistinct
consciousness that I had somehow been guilty of an act of
gross injustice to an unfortunate and persecuted fellow-
being. Before I could recover myself sufficiently to present
my side of the case with the force properly belonging to it,
the plumbers marched into the yard, where they tossed a
quantity of machinery and tools and lead pipe under the shed,
and then left.

We had no fire in the range the next morning, but the
plumbers did not come until four o'clock in the afternoon,
and then they merely dumped a cart load of lime-boxes and
hoes upon the asparagus bed and went home. An interval of
four days elapsed before we heard of them again; and
meanwhile the cook twice nearly killed herself by stumbling
over the tools while going out into the shed in the dark. One
morning, however, the gang arrived before I had risen; and
when I came down to breakfast, I found that they had made a
mortar bed on our best grass plot, and had closed up the
principal garden walk with a couple of wagon loads of sand. I
endured this patiently because it seemed to promise speedy
performance of the work. The plumbers, however, went away at
about nine o'clock, and the only reason we had for supposing
they had not forgotten us was that a man with a cart called
in the afternoon and shot a quantity of bricks down upon the
pavement in such a position that nobody could go in or out of
the front gate. Two days afterward the plumbers came and
began to make a genuine effort to reach the boiler. It was
buried in the wall in such a manner that it was wholly
inaccessible by any other method than by the removal of the
bricks from the outside.



The man who erected the house evidently was a party with the
plumber to a conspiracy to give the latter individual
something to do. They labored right valiantly at the wall,
and by supper-time they had removed at least twelve square
feet of it, making a hole large enough to have admitted a
locomotive. Then they took out the old boiler and went away,
leaving a most discouraging mass of rubbish lying about the
yard.



That was the last we saw of them for more than a week.
Whenever I went after the plumber for the purpose of
persuading him to hasten the work, I learned that he had been
summoned to Philadelphia as a witness in a court case, or
that he had gone to his aunt's funeral, or that he was taking
a holiday because it was his wife's birthday, or that he had
a sore eye.

I have never been able to understand why the house was not
robbed. An entire brigade of burglars might have entered the
cottage and frolicked among its treasures without any
difficulty. I did propose at first that Bob and I should
procure revolvers and take watch and watch every night until
the breach in the wall should be repaired; but Mr. Parker did
not regard the plan with enthusiasm, and it was abandoned. We
had to content ourselves with fastening the inner door of the
kitchen as securely as possible, and we were not molested.
But we were nervous. Mrs Adeler, I think, assured me
positively at least twice every night that she heard robbers
on the stairs, and entreated me not to go out after them; and
I never did.

Finally the men came and began to fill the hole with new
bricks. That evening the plumber walked into my parlor with
mud and mortar on his boots, and informed me that by an
unfortunate mistake the hole left for the boiler by the
bricklayers was far too small, and he could not insert the
boiler without taking the wall down again.



"Mr. Nippers," I said, "don't you think it would be a good
idea for me to engage you permanently to labor upon that
boiler? From the manner in which this, business has been
conducted, I infer that I can finally be rid of annoyance
about such matters by employing a perennial plumber to live
for ever in my back yard, and to spend the unending cycles of
eternity banging boilers and demolishing walls."

Mr. Nippers said, with apparent seriousness, that he thought
it would be a first-rate thing.

"Mr. Nippers, I am going to ask a favor of you. I do not
insist upon compliance with my request. I know that I am at
your mercy. Nippers, you have me, and I submit patiently to
my fate. But my family is suffering from cold, we are exposed
to the ravages of thieves, we are deprived of the means of
cooking our food properly, and we are made generally
uncomfortable by the condition of our kitchen. I ask you,
therefore, as a personal favor to a man who wishes you
prosperity here and felicity hereafter, and who means to
settle your bill promptly, to fix that boiler at once."



Mr. Nippers thereupon said that he always liked me, and he
swore a solemn oath that he would complete the job next day
without fail. That was on Tuesday. Neither Nippers nor his
men came again until Saturday, and then they put the boiler
in its place and went away, leaving four or five cart loads
of ruins in the yard. On Sunday the boiler began to leak as
badly as ever, and I feel sure Nippers must have set the old
one in again, although when he called early Monday morning
with a bill for $237.84, which he wanted at once because he
had a note to meet, he declared upon his honor that the
boiler was a new one, and that it would not leak under a
pressure of one thousand pounds to the square inch.

I am going to buy a cooking stove, and defy Nippers and the
entire plumbing fraternity.

Cooley's boy has been in trouble again. Yesterday
morning Mrs. Adeler heard loud screaming in Cooley's yard,
and in a few moments a servant came to say that Mrs. Cooley
wished to see Mrs. Adeler at once. Mrs A. hurried over there,
supposing that something terrible had happened. She found
Mrs. Cooley shaking her boy and crying, while the lad stood, 
the picture of misery and fright, his eyes protruding from
his head and his hands holding his stomach. Mrs. Cooley
explained in a voice broken with sobs that Henry had been
playing with a small "mouth organ," and had accidentally
swallowed it. The case was somewhat peculiar; and as Mrs.
Adeler was not familiar with the professional methods which
are adopted in such emergencies, she recommended simply a
liberal use of mustard and warm water. The application was
ultimately successful, and the missing musical instrument was
surrendered by the boy. The incident is neither interesting
nor remarkable, and I certainly should not have mentioned it
but for the fact that it had a result which is perhaps worth
chronicling here.

Last evening Bob came into the sitting-room and behaved in a
manner which led me to believe that he had something on his
mind. I asked him if ally thing was the matter. He said,

"Well, no; not exactly. The fact is I've been thinking about
that accident to Cooley's boy, and it kind of suggested
something to me."

"What was the nature of the suggestion?"

"I've jotted it down on paper. I've half a notion to send it
to the Argus if you think it's good enough, and that's what I
want to find out. I want to hear your opinion of the story. I
don't do much of this sort of thing, and I'm kind of shy
about it. Shall I read it?"

"Of course; let us hear i"

"I'm going to call it 'The Fate of Young Chubb' I expect
it'll make old Cooley mad as fury when he sees it. It is
founded upon the catastrophe of which his boy was the
victim."

THE FATE OF YOUNG CHUBB.

When Mr. Chubb, the elder, returned from Europe, he
brought with him from Geneva a miniature musical box, long
and very narrow, and altogether of hardly greater dimensions,
say, than a large pocket-knife. The instrument played four
cheerful little tunes for the benefit of the Chubb family,
and they enjoyed it. Young Henry Chubb enjoyed it to such an
extent that, one day, just after the machine had been wound
up ready for action, he got to sucking the end of it, and in
a moment of inadvertence it slipped, and he swallowed it. The
only immediate consequence of the accident was that a
harmonic stomach-ache was organized upon the interior of
Henry Chubb, and he experienced a restlessness which he well
knew would defy peppermint and paregoric.

Henry Chubb kept his secret in his own soul, and in his
stomach also, determined to hide his misery from his father,
and to spare the rod to the spoiled child—spoiled, at any
rate, as far as his digestive apparatus was concerned.

But that evening, at the supper-table, Henry had eaten but
one mouthful of bread when strains of wild, mysterious music
were suddenly wafted from under the table. The family
immediately made an effort to discover whence the sounds
came, although Henry Chubb at there filled with agony and
remorse and bread and tunes, and desperately asserted his
belief that the music came from the cellar, where the
servant-girl was concealed with a harp. He well knew that
Mary Ann was unfamiliar with the harp. But he was frantic
with anxiety to hide his guilt. Thus it is that one crime
leads to another.



But he could not disguise the truth for ever, and that very
night, while the family was at prayers, Henry all at once
began to hiccough, and the music box started off without
warning with "Way down upon the Suwanee River," with
variations. Whereupon the paternal Chubb arose from his knees
and grasped Henry kindly but firmly by his hair and shook him
up and inquired what he meant by such conduct. And Henry
asserted that he was practicing something for a Sunday-school
celebration, which old Chubb intimated was a singularly thin
explanation. Then they tried to get up that music box, and
every time they would seize Henry by the legs and shake him
over the sofa cushion, or would pour some fresh variety of
emetic down his throat, the instrument within would give a
fresh spurt, and joyously grind out "Listen to the Mocking
Bird" or "Thou'lt Never Cease to Love."

At last they were compelled to permit that musical box to
remain within the sepulchral recesses of young Chubb. To say
that the unfortunate victim of the disaster was made
miserable by his condition would be to express in the
feeblest manner the state of his mind. The more music there
was in his stomach, the wilder and more completely chaotic
became the discord in his soul. As likely as not it would
occur that while he lay asleep in the middle of the night the
works would begin to revolve, and would play "Home, Sweet
Home" for two or three hours, unless the peg happened to
slip, when the cylinder would switch back again to "Way down
upon the Suwanee River," and would rattle out that tune with
variations and fragments of the scales until Henry's brother
would kick him out of bed in wild despair, and sit on him in
a vain effort to subdue the serenade, which, however,
invariably proceeded with fresh vigor when subjected to
unusual pressure.

And when Henry Chubb went to church, it frequently occurred
that, in the very midst of the most solemn portion of the
sermon, he would feel a gentle disturbance under the lower
button of his jacket; and presently, when everything was
hushed, the undigested engine would give a preliminary buzz
and then reel off "Listen to the Mocking Bird" and "Thou'lt
Never Cease to Love," and scales and exercises, until the
clergyman would stop and glare at Henry over his spectacles
and whisper to one of the deacons. Then the sexton would
suddenly tack up the aisle and clutch the unhappy Mr. Chubb
by the collar and scud down the aisle again to the
accompaniment of "Home, Sweet Home," and then incarcerate
Henry in the upper portion of the steeple until after church.

But the end came at last, and the miserable boy found peace.
One day while he was sitting in school endeavoring to learn
his multiplication table to the tune of "Thou'lt Never Cease
to Love," his gastric juice triumphed. Something or other in
the music box gave way all at once, the springs were unrolled
with alarming force, and Henry Chubb, as he felt the
fragments of the instrument hurled right and left among his
vitals, tumbled over on the floor and expired.

At the post mortem examination they found several pieces of
"Home, Sweet Home" in his liver, while one of his lungs was
severely torn by a fragment of "Way down upon the Suwanee
River." Small particles of "Listen to the Mocking Bird" were
removed from his heart and breast-bone, and three brass pegs
of "Thou'lt Never Cease to Love" were found firmly driven
into his fifth rib.

They had no music at the funeral. They sifted the machinery
out of him and buried him quietly in the cemetery. Whenever
the Chubbs buy musical boxes now, they get them as large as a
piano and chain them to the wall.

While Bob was engaged in reading the account of the melodious
misery of the unhappy Chubb, Lieutenant Smiley came in, and
the result was that both became uneasy. Bob disliked to
subject himself to the criticism of a man whom he regarded as
an enemy, and the lieutenant was so jealous of Bob's success
that he began instantly to try to think of something that
would enable him at least to maintain his reputation as a
teller of stories.

"That is very good indeed, Bob," I said. "Bangs will be only
too glad to publish it. It is very creditable. Put your name
to it, however, if it goes into the Argus, or the colonel
will persuade the community that he is the author of it."

"He will have to get a new brain-pan set in before he can
write anything as good," said Bob.

"It is a very amusing story," remarked Mrs. Adeler. "I had no
idea that you ever attempted such things. It is quite good,
is it not, lieutenant?"

"Oh, very good indeed," said Smiley. "V-e-r-y good. Quite an
achievement, in fact. Ha! ha! do you know that name 'Chubb'
reminds me of a very comical incident."

"Indeed?"

"Ha! yes! Old General Chubb was the actor in it. Perhaps you
knew him, Parker?"

"No, I didn't," growled Bob.

"Well, he was a very eccentric old man. Deuced queer, you
know, and the most absent-minded person that ever lived. He
had a wooden leg late in his life, and I've often known him
to put that leg on backward with the toes pointing behind
him, and then he would come jolting down the street in the
most extraordinary manner, with his good knee bending north
and his timber knee doubling up southwardly; and when I would
meet him, he would stop and growl because the authorities
kept the pavements in such bad repair that a man could hardly
walk."

"I don't see anything very funny about that," said Bob,
impolitely and savagely.

"Well, one day a few months ago," continued Smiley,
without noticing Mr. Parker's ill-nature, "he sauntered into
the studio of the celebrated marine painter Hamilton, in
Philadelphia. The artist was out at the moment, but standing
upon the floor was a large and very superb picture of the
sea-beach, with the surf rolling in upon it. The general
stood looking at it for a while, until his mind wandered off
from the present, and under the influence of the picture he
was gradually impressed with a vague notion that he was at
the seashore.

So, still gazing at the painting, he slowly removed his
clothes, and finally stood in a revery without a stitch upon
him. Then he clasped his nose with his fingers, bent his neck
forward and plunged head foremost into the surf. The people
on the floor below thought there was an earthquake. The
artist came rushing in, and found General Chubb with his head
against the washboard, one leg hanging from the ragged surf
and the toes of his left foot struggling among the ruins of
the lighthouse. Hamilton has that torn picture yet. He says
that Chubb's dive is the highest tribute ever paid to his
genius."



As the lieutenant finished the narrative, Bob rose and left
the room with the suggestion, muttered as he passed me, that
the story was tough.

"Mr. Parker don't seem well," remarked the lieutenant when
Bob had gone.

"Oh yes, he is perfectly well. I imagine that he does not
regard you with precisely the same amount of enthusiastic
admiration that he might perhaps feel if you were not
treading on his toes a little."

"Oh," laughed the lieutenant, "you refer, of course, to our
relations with the Magruders? I don't like to talk much about
that matter, of course; it is delicate, and you may think I
am meddling with a business in which I have no concern. But
perhaps I may as well tell you frankly that Parker has no
earthly chance there—not the least in the world. The young
lady won't smile on him. I am as certain of that as I am of
death."

"You are positive of that, are you?"

"Yes, sir, you can rely upon my word. Parker might as well
give it up. By the way, I wonder if he has gone down there
now?"

"Very likely."

"Well, I must say good-night, then; I promised to call there
at half-past eight, and it is time to be off.".

So Lieutenant Smiley bade us adieu. Mrs. Adeler immediately
asked:

"Do you believe what that man says?"

"Certainly not, my dear. I have as much faith as a dozen
ordinary men, but it would require a grand army to believe
him. He is foolish enough to hope to frighten Bob away. But
Bob shall settle the matter to-morrow. If he doesn't, we will
disown him. The end of the campaign has come. Now for victory
or defeat!"






CHAPTER XIII.
AN EVIL DAY—FLOGGING-TIME IN NEW CASTLE—HOW THE PUNISHMENT IS
INFLICTED—A FEW REMARKS UPON THE GENERAL MERITS OF THE
SYSTEM—A SINGULAR JUDGE—HOW GEORGE WASHINGTON BUSBY WAS
SENTENCED—EMOTIONS OF THE PRISONER—A CRUEL INFLICTION, AND A
CODE THAT OUGHT TO BE REFORMED.

HIS is St. Pillory's Day. It is the day upon which humane and
liberal Delawarians hang their heads for shame at the insult
offered to civilization by the law of their State. That law
this morning placed half a dozen miserable creatures in the
stocks, and then flogged them upon their naked flesh with a
cat-o'-nine-tails. It was no slight thing to stand there
wearing that wooden collar in this bitter November weather,
with the north-east wind blowing in fierce gusts from the
broad expanse of the river; and one poor wretch who endured
that suffering was so benumbed with cold that he could hardly
climb down the ladder to ground. And when be had descended,
they lashed his back until it was covered with purple
stripes. He had stolen some provisions, and he looked as if
he needed them, for he seemed hungry and forlorn and utterly
desperate with misery. It would have been a kindlier act of
Christian charity if society, instead of mutilating his body,
had fed it and clothed it properly, and placed him in some
reformatory institution where his soul could have been taken
care of. But that is not the method that prevails here.

The gates of the prison yard were wide open when the
punishment was inflicted upon these offenders, and among the
spectators were at least two or three score children gathered
to look upon the barbarous spectacle. Nothing could induce me
to permit mine to witness it. The influence of such a scene
is wholly brutalizing.

The child that has seen that sacrifice has lost some of the
sweetness and tenderness of its better nature.

The whipping-post and pillory is a sturdy bit of timber
a foot square. Eight or nine feet from the ground it pierces
a small platform, and five feet above this there is a cross-
piece which contains in each of its two arms a hole for the
neck and two holes for the wrists of the man who is to be
pilloried. The upper half of the arm lifts to admit the
victim, and then closes upon him, sometimes very tightly. It
is fastened down with a wedge-shaped key, shot into the
centre-post. Beneath the platform hangs a pair of handcuffs
in which the wrists of those who are to be flogged are
placed. The whole machine looks like a gigantic cross. It is
black with age, covered with patches of green mold and moss,
and shrunken and split until the grain of the wood protrudes
in ridges.

There was a time in the past when it stood, an
instrument of cruel torture, upon the public street. It was
planted in the green just at the end of the old market house,
and there the criminals were lashed by the sheriff. Any of
the old men who have spent their lives in this place can tell
how, when they were boys, it was the custom for the urchins
and the loafers of the town to pelt any poor rogue who was
pilloried with whatever missiles happened to be at hand; and
often the creatures thus abused were taken down from the
stocks and tied up to the post, there to have their flesh
lacerated with the leather thongs. They used to flog women,
too. They flogged women in the open street, with their
garments torn away from their bodies above the waist, and the
gaping crowd gathered about and witnessed without shame that
dreadful spectacle.

But that was more than half a century ago. Who shall say that
we do not advance in civilization? Who can assert that these
people have not acquired a higher sense of decency, when
public opinion has compelled the removal of this abominable
relic of barbarism to the jail-yard, and the performance of
the penalty in another place than before the doors of the
temple where a God of mercy is worshiped? I hope that the day
is not far distant when the whipping-post and the infernal
system that sustains it will go down together, and when the
people of this State will learn that their first duty to a
criminal is to strive to make him a better man.

They say here, in apologizing for the institution, that the
punishment is not severe, because the sheriff never makes
savage use of the lash. But it is a terrible infliction, no
matter how lightly the blows are struck, for it is imposed in
the presence of a multitude, and the sufferer feels that he
is for ever to be known among men as a thief. The thongs do
not always fall gently; the force of the lash depends upon
the will of the sheriff, who may kill a man with the number
of blows which in another case give no pain. I say that any
law which places such discretionary power in the hands of an
executive officer who may be bribed or frightened, or who may
have some personal injury to avenge, defeats the true end of
justice. The court should fix the penalty absolutely. They
say here, also, that no man is ever flogged a second time.
That is untrue. The same men do return again and again. Some
do not; but where do they go; Why, to other communities,
where they perpetrate other crimes, and become a burden upon
other people. We have no right to breed criminals and then to
drive them into cities and towns that have already enough of
their own. We are under a sacred obligation to place them in
prisons supported by the money of the State, and there to
attempt to teach them arts by which they may earn their bread
if they will. In such a place a convict can be reached by
those philanthropists who realise what society owes to its
criminal classes. But as he is treated now, it is impossible
that he should ever lift himself or be lifted to a purer and
better life.

Fallen angels in Delaware never rise again. Law clips their
wings and stamps upon them with its heel, and society shakes
off the dust of its feet upon them and curses them in their
degradation. The gates of mercy are shut upon them hopelessly
and for ever, and they walk abroad with the story of their
shame blazoned upon them, as the women who wore the Scarlet
Letter in the old Puritan times in New England, that all the
world may read it. They know that their punishment has been
fierce and terrible and out of all proportion to their
offence, and they curse their oppressors and hate them with a
bitter, unrelenting hatred. They know they will not be
allowed to reform, and that the law which should have led
them to a better future has cut them off from fellowship with
their race, robbed them of their humanity and made pariahs
and outcasts of them. They are turned to stone, and they come
out of their prisons confirmed, hopeless criminals.

A certain judge who administered Delaware justice here once
upon a time (we will say it was a thousand years ago) was a
very peculiar man in certain of his methods. I do not know
whether he was merely fond of listening to the music of his
own voice, as too many less reverend and awful men are, or
whether he really loved to torture the prisoners in the dock,
when he sentenced them, by keeping them in suspense
respecting his intentions, and by exciting hopes which he
finally crushed. But he had a way of assuming a mild and
benevolent aspect as he addressed a convicted man which was
very reassuring to the unhappy wight, and then he usually
proceeded to deliver a few remarks which were so ingeniously
arranged, which expressed such tender and affectionate
sympathy, which were so highly charged with benevolence, so
expressive, as it were, of a passionate yearning for the
welfare of the victim, that the latter at last would be
convinced that the judge was about to give him an exceedingly
light sentence. Just as he had gotten himself into a frame of
mind suitable to the unexpected brightness of his prospects,
the judge's custom was to bring his observations suddenly to
an end, and to hurl at the head of the convict, still with
that philanthropic expression upon his countenance, the most
frightful penalty permitted by the law.

On a certain day, while a certain historian was in court, he
was engaged in exercising a youth named Busby in this
fashion. Busby, it appears, was accused of stealing seventy-
five cents' worth of old iron from somebody, and the jury had
found him guilty.

Busby was ordered to stand up, and the judge, permitting a
peculiarly bland smile to play upon his features, gazed
tenderly at the prisoner, while he placed a small pinch of
tobacco in his mouth; and then, drawing a long breath, he
began:



"George Washington Busby, you have been found guilty by a
jury of your fellow-countrymen of an offence against society
and against the peace and dignity of the commonwealth of
Delaware, and I have now to impose upon you the penalties
provided by the law. I am very, very sorry to see you here,
George, and it grieves my heart to be compelled to fulfill
the obligation devolving upon me as a judicial officer.
Pause, I entreat you, at this, the very outset of your
career, and reflect upon what you are casting from you. You
are a young man; you are, as it were, in the very morning of
your life; a bright and happy home is yours, and around you
are the kind parents and friends who have made you the child
of their prayers, who have guided your footsteps from
infancy, who have loved and cherished you and made for you
mighty sacrifices.

You have a mother"—and here the judge's voice faltered and he
wiped away a tear—"a mother at whose knee you were taught to
lisp your earliest devotions, and who has watched over you
and ministered to you with that tender and fervent love that
only a mother can feel. You have a father who looked upon you
with a heart swelling with pride, and who gave to you the
heritage of his honest name. Up to the time when, yielding to
the insidious wiles of the tempter, you committed this crime,
your character had been irreproachable, and it seemed as if
the brightest promises of your childhood were to have rich
and beneficent fulfillment. For you the vista of the future
appeared serene and beautiful; a pure and noble manhood
seemed to await you, and all the blessings which may be
gained by an unspotted reputation, by persistent energy and
by earnest devotion to the right were to be yours."

Here Busby began to feel considerably better. He was assured
that such a kind old man as that could not treat him with
severity, and he informed the tipstaff in a whisper that he
calculated now on about sixty days' imprisonment at the
furthest.

The judge shifted the quid in his cheek, blew his nose, and
resumed:

"How difficult it is, then, for me to determine the precise
measure of your punishment! Knowing that the quality of mercy
is not strained, and that as we forgive so shall we be
forgiven, how painful it is for me to draw the line between
undue leniency and the demands of outraged law! Considering,
I say, all these things, that are so much in your favor—your
youth, your happy home where the holiest influences are shed
upon your path, where parental love covers you with its most
gracious benediction, where your devoted mother lies stricken
with anguish at the sin of her idolized son, where your aged
father has his gray hairs brought down in sorrow to the
grave, where you have been nurtured and admonished and taught
to do right—"

"Certainly he can't intend to give me more than one month,"
said Busby to the tipstaff.

"Considering that this is your first offence; that your
conduct hitherto has been that of an honest young man, and
that the lesson you have learned from this bitter and
terrible experience will sink deeply into your heart; that
you have opening out to you in the possible future a life of
usefulness and honor, with a prospect of redeeming this
single error and winning for yourself a respected name—"

"He can't decently give me more than twenty days after that,"
suggested Busby.

The judge, after wiping the moisture from his eyes and
borrowing a morsel of tobacco from the prosecuting attorney
continued:

"In view of all these extenuating circumstances, in view of
the fact, fully recognized by this court, that justice is not
revengeful, but exercises its highest prerogative in leading
the fallen to reformation and moral improvement in view, I
say, of the fact that you are in the very spring-time of your
existence, with the vista of the future opening out with
alluring brightness before you and giving promise of higher
and better things—in view of those sorrowing parents the
child of whose prayers you are; of that mother who guided
your infant steps and cared for you with the yearning
tenderness of maternal love, of that venerable father who
looks upon you as the staff of his old age; considering, too,
that this is your first misstep from the path of duty—"

"Two weeks as sure as death!" exclaimed Mr. Busby, joyfully,
to the officer beside him.

"The path of duty," continued the judge, "and that up to the
moment of the commission of the deed you had been above
suspicion and above reproach—in view of all this," remarked
the judge, I have thought it my duty, minister of the law
though I am, and bound though I am by my oath to vindicate
the insulted majesty of that law—"

"If he gives me more than one week, I will never trust signs
again," murmured Busby.

"I say that although I am bound to administer justice with an
impartial hand, I feel it to be incumbent upon me in this
particular instance, in consequence of these extenuating
circumstances, to mete it out so that, while the law will be
vindicated, you may be taught that it is not cruel or unkind,
but rather is capable of giving the first generous impulse to
reformation."

"He certainly means to let me off altogether," exclaimed
Busby.

"In view, then, of these mitigating circumstances of your
youth, your previous good character, your happy prospects,
your afflicted parents and your own sincere repentance, the
sentence of the court is: That you, George Washington Busby,
the prisoner at the bar, do pay seventy-five cents
restitution money and the costs of this trial, and that on
Saturday next you be whipped with twenty lashes on the bare
back, well laid on; that you be imprisoned for six months in
the county jail, and that you wear a convict's jacket in
public for one year after your release. Sheriff, remove the
prisoner from the court."

Then the judge beamed a mournful but sympathetic smile upon
Busby, secured the loan of another atom of tobacco, spat on
the floor and called up the next case.

Mrs. Adeler, you laugh and say that I have indulged in gross
exaggeration in reproducing the sentence. Not so. I tell you
that I have known a boy of thirteen to have that
condemnation, couched in almost precisely those words, hurled
at him from the bench of the New Castle court-house because
he stole a bit of iron said to be worth\ seventy-five Dents.
And I was present among the spectators in the jail yard when
the sheriff lashed the lad until he writhed with pain. It was
infamous—utterly infamous. I cannot, perhaps, justly accuse
the judge who imposed the sentence upon the boy of indulging
in the lecture which has just been quoted. That, as I have
said, may be attributed to a magistrate who lived ten
centuries ago. But the sentence is genuine, and it was given
recently. I do not blame the judge. He acted under the
authority of statutes which were created by other hands. But
the law is savagery itself, and the humane men of this State
should sweep it from existence.






CHAPTER XIV.
A DELAWARE LEGEND—A STORY OF THE OLD TIME—THE CHRISTMAS PLAY—
A CRUEL ACCUSATION—THE FLIGHT IN THE DARKNESS ALONG THE RIVER
SHORE—THE TRIAL AND THE CONDEMNATION—ST. PILLORY'S DAY
SEVENTY YEARS AGO—FLOGGING A WOMAN—THE DELIVERANCE.

WHILE the scenes at the whipping-post on flogging-day are
fresh in my mind, I have written down the story of Mary
Engle. It is a Delaware legend, and the events of which it
speaks occurred, I will say, seventy-odd years ago, when they
were in the habit of lashing women in this very town of New
Castle.

It was on Christmas day that a little party had assembled in
the old Newton mansion to participate in the festivities for
which, at this season of the year, it was famous all the
country over. The house stood upon the river bank, three
miles and more from New Castle, and in that day it was
considered the greatest and handsomest building in the whole
neighborhood. A broad lawn swept away from it down to the
water's edge, and in summer-time this was covered with
bright-colored flowers and bounded by green hedges. Now the
grass was bleached with the cold; the hedges were brown and
sere, and the huge old trees, stripped of their foliage,
moaned and creaked and shivered in the wind, rattling their
branches together as if seeking sympathy with each other in
their desolation.

Inside the mansion the scene was as cheerful as life and fun
and high spirits could make it.

Old Major Newton, the lord and master of all the wide
estates, was one of the race of country gentlemen who
introduced to this continent the manners, habits and large
hospitality of the better class of English squires of his
day. He was a mighty fox-hunter, as many a brush hung in his
dining-hall could attest. A believer in the free use of the
good things of life, his sideboard always contained a dozen
decanters, from which the coming, the remaining and the
parting guests were expected to follow the major's example in
drinking deeply. His table was always profusely supplied with
good fare, and dining with him was the great duty and
pleasure of the day. He was a gentleman in education, and to
some extent in his tastes; but his manners partook of the
coarseness of his time, for he swore fierce oaths, and his
temper was quick, terrible and violent. His forty negro
slaves were treated with indulgent kindness while they obeyed
him implicitly, but any attempt at insubordination upon their
part called down upon their beads a volley of oaths and that
savage punishment which the major considered necessary to
discipline.

To-day the major had been out of spirits, and had not joined
heartily in the hilarity of the company, which, despite the
gloom of the master, made the old house ring with the
merriment and laughter due to the happiness of Christmas
time.

At five o'clock dinner was done; and the ladies having
withdrawn, the cloth was removed, the wine and whisky and
apple-toddy, and a half dozen other beverages, were brought
out, and the major, with his male guests, began the serious
work of the repast. The major sat at the head of the table;
Dr. Ricketts, a jolly bachelor of fifty, who neglected
medicine that he might better spend his fortune in a life of
ease and pleasure, presided at the lower end of the board,
upon the flanks of which sat a dozen gentlemen from the
neighboring estates, among them Tom Willitts, from the
adjoining farm, and Dick Newton, the major's only son.



The conversation languished somewhat. The major was as gloomy
as he had been earlier in the day. Dick seemed to sympathize
with his father. Tomn Willitts was impatient to have the
drinking bout over, that he might go to the parlor, where his
thoughts already wandered, and where his fiancee, Mary Engle,
the fair governess in the major's family, awaited him. The
guests at last began to be depressed by the want of spirits
in their host; and if it had not been for Doctor Ricketts,
there would have been a dull time indeed. But the doctor was
talkative, lively and wholly indifferent to the taciturnity
of his companions. His weakness was a fondness for
theorizing, and he rattled on from topic to topic, heedless
of anything but the portly goblet which he replenished time
and again from the decanter and the punch-bowl.

At last he exclaimed, in the hope of rousing his host from
his apparent despondency, "And now let's have a song from the
major. Give us the 'Tally Ho!' Newton."

"I can't sing it to-day, gentlemen," said the major; "the
fact is I am a good deal out of sorts. I have met with a
misfortune, and I—"

"Why, what's happened?" exclaimed the whole company.

"Why," said the major, with an oath, "I've lost my famous old
diamond brooch—a jewel, gentlemen, given to my father by
George II.—a jewel that I valued more than all the world
beside. It was the reward given to my father for a brave and
gallant deed at the battle of Dettingen, and its rare
intrinsic value was trifling beside that which it possessed
as the evidence of my father's valor."

"How did you lose it, major?" asked the doctor.

"I went to my desk this morning, and found that the lock had
been picked, the inside drawer broken open and the brooch
taken from its box."

"Who could have done it?"

"I can't imagine," replied the major; "I don't think any of
those niggers would have done such a thing. I've searched
them all, but it's of no use, sir—no use; it's gone. But if I
ever lay hands on the scoundrel, I'll flay him alive—I will,
indeed, even if it should be Dick there;" and the old man
gulped down a heavy draught of port, as if to drown his
grief.

"My theory about such crimes," said the doctor, "is that the
persons committing them are always more or less insane."

"Insane!" swore the major, fiercely. "If I catch the man who
did this, I'll fit him for a hospital!"

"We are all a little daft at times—when we are angry, in
love, in extreme want, or excited by intense passion of any
kind," said the doctor. "Extreme ignorance, being neglect of
one's intellectual faculties, is a kind of insanity, and so
is the perversion of the moral perceptions of those who are
educated to a life of crime from their childhood. My theory
is that punishment should be so inflicted as to restore
reason, not merely to wreak vengeance."

"And my theory is that every vagabond who breaks the laws
ought to be flogged and imprisoned, so that he may know that
society will not tolerate crime. Hang your fine-spun theories
about the beggars who prey upon the community!" said the
major, rising and kicking back his chair ill-naturedly.

The doctor had nothing more to say, and the company withdrew
to the parlor.

There, gathered around the great fireplace, sat Mrs.
Newton, her daughters—both children—Mary Engle, their tutor,
Mrs. Willitts and the wives of the gentlemen who had come
from the dinner-table.

They rose as the men entered the room, and greeted them
cordially. Tom Willitts went quickly to Mary's side; aid
while the others engaged in lively conversation he took her
hand gently and, as was their privilege, they walked slowly
up the room and sat by the window alone, Mary's face
brightening as she thanked Tom heartily for the beautiful
present he had sent her the day before.

"Why don't you wear it now, Mary?" asked Tom.

"Do you want me to? I will get it and put it on, then, when I
go to my room," said Mary.

Mary Engle was the daughter of a widow in humble
circumstances who lived in the village. Talented and well-
educated, she had determined no longer to be a burden upon
her mother, but to support herself. She had chosen to become
a governess in Major Newton's family. Young, beautiful and of
good social position, she was a valuable acquisition to that
household, and was a universal favorite, although the major
could never quite rid himself of the notion that, as she was
a dependant and an employee, he was conferring a favor upon
her by permitting such intimate relations to exist between
her and his family. But he treated her kindly, as all men
must a pretty woman. She was a girl with whom any man might
have fallen in love upon first acquaintance. Dick Newton
loved her passionately before she had been in his father's
house a month. But she had chosen rather to favor Tom
Willitts, a constant visitor at the Newton mansion, and as
fine a fellow as ever galloped across the country with the
hounds. Dick had not had time to propose before the game was
up and Tom called the prize his own. But Dick nursed his
passion and smothered his disappointment, while he swore that
he would possess the girl or involve her and her lover in
common ruin with himself. Tom had been engaged for three
months before this Christmas day. He was to be married in the
coming spring.

There was to be a theatrical exhibition in the Newton mansion
this Christmas evening, in which the young people were to
participate. A temporary stage had been erected at one end of
the long room, and at an early hour seats were placed in
front of the curtain, and the guests took their places,
conversing with much merriment and laughter until the bell
gave the signal for the performance to begin.

It was a little play—a brief comedy of only tolerable merit,
and it devolved upon Mary Engle to enter first.

She tripped in smiling, and began the recitation with a
vivacity and spirit that promised well for the excellence of
her performance throughout. Upon her throat she wore a
diamond brooch which blazed and flashed in the glare of the
foot-lights.

There was an exclamation of surprise on the part of the
gentlemen present, and the sound startled Mary. She paused
and looked around her inquiringly. Just then Major Newton
caught sight of the brooch. With an ugly word upon his lips,
he sprang from his seat and jumped upon the stage.

"Where did you get that?" he demanded, fiercely,
pointing at the diamonds, his hand trembling violently.

There was absolute silence in the room as Mary, pale and
calm, replied:

"Why do you ask, sir?"

"Where did you get that, I say? It was stolen from me. You
are a thief!"

In an instant she tore it from her dress and flung it upon
the floor.

The major leaped toward it and picked it up quickly. Mary
covered her face with her hands, and the crimson of her
cheeks shone through her fingers.

"Where did you get it?" again demanded the major.

"I will not tell you, sir," said she, dragging down her hands
with an effort and clasping them in front of her.

"Then leave this house this instant, and leave it for ever!"
said the major, wild with passion.

Tom Willitts entered just as the last words were uttered.
Mary seemed fainting. He flew to her side as if to defend her
against her enemy. He did not know the cause of her trouble,
but he glared at the major as if he could slay him.

But as he tried to place his arm around Mary, she shrank away
from him; and giving him one look of scorn and contempt and
hatred, she ran from the room.

From the room to the great door in the hall, which, with
frantic eagerness, she flung open, and then, without any
covering upon her fair head, hot with shame and disgrace, and
maddened with insult, she fled out into the cold and dark and
desolate winter's night.

Scarcely heeding the direction, she reached the river's
shore; and choosing the hard sand for a pathway, she hurried
along it. The tide swept up in ceaseless ripples at her feet,
the waves breaking upon the icy fringe of the shore, each
with a whisper that seemed to tell of her dishonor. The wind
rustled the sedges upon the banks and filled them with voices
that mocked her. The stars that lighted her upon her mad
journey twinkled through the frosty air with an intelligence
they had never before possessed. The lights, far out upon the
river and in the distant town, danced up and down in the
darkness as if beckoning her to come on to them and to
destruction.

Her brain was in a whirl. At first she felt an impulse to end
her misery in the river. One plunge, and all this anguish and
pain would be buried beneath those restless waters. Then the
hope of vindication flashed upon her mind, and the awful sin
and the cowardice of self-destruction rose vividly before
her. She would seek her home and the mother from whom she
should never have gone out. She would give up happiness and
humanity, and hide herself from the cold, heartless world for
ever. She would have no more to do with false friends and
false lovers, but would shut herself away from all this
deceit and treachery and unkindness, and nevermore trust any
human being but her own dear mother.



And so, over the sandy beach, through mire and mud, through
the high grass and the reeds of the water's edge, tangled and
dead, and full of peril in the darkness, with her hair
disheveled and tossed about by the riotous wind, but with not
a tear upon her white face, she struggled onward through the
night, until, exhausted with her journey, her wild passion
and her misery, she reached her mother's house, and entering,
clasped her arms about her mother's neck, and with a sob fell
fainting at her feet.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *

There was an end to merriment at the Newton mansion. When
Mary ran from the room, the company stood for a moment amazed
and bewildered, while the major, raging with passion, yet
half ashamed of his furious conduct, walked rapidly up and
down the stage, attempting to explain the theft to his guests
and to justify his conduct. But Tom Willitts, shocked at the
cruel. treatment he had received from Mary, yet filled with
righteous indignation at the major's violence, interrupted
his first utterance.

"You are a coward and a brute, sir; and old as you are, I
will make you answer for your infamous treatment of that
young girl."

And before the major could reply he dashed out to pursue Mary
and give her his protection. He sought her in vain upon the
highway; and filled with bitterness, and wondering why she
had so scorned him, he trudged on through the darkness,
peering about him vainly for the poor girl for whom he would
have sacrificed his life.

"Perhaps it was merely a jest," suggested Mrs. Willitts. "I
think Mary wholly incapable of theft. She never could have
intended seriously to keep the brooch."

"A pretty serious jest," said the major, "to break into my
desk three days ago. It's the kind of humor that puts people
in jail."

"My theory about the matter," said the doctor, "is this. She
either was made the victim of a pretty ugly practical joke,
or else some one stole the jewel from you and gave it to her
to get her into trouble."

"I don't believe anything of the kind," said the major.

"It must be so. If she had stolen it, she certainly would not
have worn it in your presence this evening. It is absurd to
suppose such a thing. Taking this theory—"

"Hang theorizing!" exclaimed the major, seeing the force of
this suggestion, but more angry that he was driven to admit
it to his own mind. "She is a thief, and as sure as I live
she shall either confess, tell how she got the jewel or go to
prison."

"And as sure as I live," said the doctor, grown indignant and
serious, "I will unravel this mystery and clear this innocent
girl of this most infamous and wicked imputation."

"Do it if you can!" said the major, and turned his back upon
him contemptuously.

The doctor left the house, and the company dispersed, eager
gossips, all of them, to tell the story far and wide
throughout the community before to-morrow's noon.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *

When Mary had revived and told, in broken words, the story of
her misery and disgrace, her mother soothed and comforted her
with the assurance that she should never leave her again; and
while she denounced Major Newton's conduct bitterly, mistake
he would find that he had made a mistake, and would clear her
of the charge.

"But he will not find it out, mother."

"Why? Where did you get the brooch, Mary?" "Do not ask me,
mother; I cannot, cannot tell you." "Had you merely picked it
up and put it on in jest?"

"No, no," said Mary, "it was given to me, I cannot tell by
whom, and I thought it was mine. It was cruel, cruel!" and
her tears came again.

"And who was it that did so vile a thing?" asked her mother.

"Mother, I cannot tell even you that."

"But, Mary, this is foolish. You must not, for your own sake,
for mine, hide the name of this criminal."

"I will never, never tell. I will die first."

"Was it Tom Willitts?"

"You must not question me, mother," said Mary, firmly. "If
the person who betrayed me is cowardly enough to place me in
such a position, and then to stand coldly by and witness my
shame, I am brave enough and true enough to bear the burden.
I would rather have this misery than his conscience."

Tom Willitts knocked at the door.

"If it is Tom Willitts, mother," said Mary, rising, "tell him
I will not see him. Tell him never to come to this house
again. Tell him," she said, her eyes glowing with excitement,
and stamping her foot upon the floor, "tell him I hate him—
hate him for a false, mean villain!" and she fell back upon
the chair in a wild passion of tears.

Mrs. Engle met Tom at the door. He was filled with anxiety
and terror, but he rejoiced that Mary was safe. Mrs. Engle
told him that Mary refused to see him. He was smitten with
anguish, and begged for a single word with her.

"Do you know anything about this wicked business, Mr.
Willitts?" asked Mrs. Engle, suspicious, because of Mary's
words, that Tom was the criminal.

"Upon my honor I do not. I heard Major Newton's language, and
saw the brooch upon the floor; and when Mary fled from me, I
pursued her, wondering what it all meant."

"She evidently suspects you of having been the cause of the
trouble. Prove that you were not. Until then she will not see
you. I beg you, for yourself and her, to tell the truth about
this, if you know it, or at least to persist till you
discover it.

Tom went away distressed and confounded. She suspected him.
No wonder, then, she had spurned him so rudely. He thought
the matter over, and could arrive at no solution of the
difficulty. He had sent her a bracelet which she had promised
to wear, but she had not worn it. It was impossible that this
brooch could have been substituted. No, his own servant had
given it to her, and brought her thanks in return. Besides,
who could be base enough to play such a dastardly trick upon
a pretty young girl? He could not master the situation; and
in his trouble he went the next morning to Dr. Ricketts.

The doctor was equally puzzled, but he was certain that there
was foul play somewhere. He had pledged himself to unravel
the mystery, and he began the work by visiting Mary. Alone,
he went to her house. He found it in strange commotion. Mrs.
Engle was sitting upon the sofa, crying bitterly; Mary, with
pale, sad face, but with an air of determination, confronted
an obsequious man, who, with many apologies and a manner that
proved that he was ashamed of his business, extended a paper
toward her, and requested her to accompany him.

It was a constable with a warrant for her arrest.

Nearly five weary months were to pass before the cruel time
of the trial. Dr. Ricketts busied himself examining every one
who could possibly have been connected with the affair of the
brooch, but with no result but a deeper mystery. Tom's
servant swore that he had given the bracelet into Mary's own
hand. Two of the house servants at Major Newton's were
present at the time, and they were certain the package was
not broken. Mary's thimble had been found under the broken
desk in which the brooch was kept, and the housemaid had
discovered a chisel secreted behind some books in the
bookcase in her room.

The evidence, slight though it was, pointed to Mary as the
criminal, despite the absurdity of the supposition, in view
of the manner in which she had worn he jewel. Mary herself
preserved an obstinate silence, refusing to tell how or where
or from whom she procured the fatal brooch. The doctor was
bewildered and confounded, and he at last gave up his
inquiries in despair, hoping for a gracious verdict from the
jury at the. trial.

Through all the weary time Mary kept closely at home,
secluded from friends and acquaintances. Indeed, visitors
were few in number now. She was in humble circumstances, and
she was in disgrace. Society always accounts its members
guilty until their innocence is proved. There were people in
the town who had been jealous of her beauty, her popularity,
her place in the affections of rich Tom Willitts, and these
did not hesitate to hint, with a sneer, that they had always
doubted the reported excellence of Mary Engle, and to assert
their belief in her guilt.

Tom Willitts was nearly crazed about her treatment of him and
the ignominy that was heaped upon her. With Dr. Ricketts and
Dick Newton, who professed intense anxiety to help solve the
matter, he strove valiantly to clear her of the charge, but
without avail.

The day of the trial came. The court-room was crowded. Able
lawyers on both sides sparred with each other, as able
lawyers do, but the heart of the prosecuting attorney was
evidently not with his work. His duty was clear, however, and
the evidence was overwhelming. The defence had nothing to
offer but Mary's good character and her appearance before the
company with the brooch upon her person.

The judge was compelled to instruct the jury against the
prisoner. An hour of anxious suspense, and they returned a
verdict of "guilty."

Mrs. Engle began to sob violently. Mary drew her veil aside
from a face that was ashen white, but not a muscle quivered
until the judge pronounced the sentence:

"Costs of prosecution, a fine of one hundred dollars, twenty
lashes upon the bare back on the Saturday following, and
imprisonment for one year."

Mary fell to the floor insensible, and Dr. Ricketts, raising
her in his arms, applied restoratives. She was removed to the
jail to await her punishment.

The doctor mounted his horse and sped away in hot haste forty
miles to Dover. He had influence with the governor. He would
procure a pardon, and then have Mary taken away from the
scene of her tribulation—where her suffering and disgrace
would be forgotten, and she would be at peace He was
unsuccessful. The governor was a just, not a merciful, man.
The law had been outraged. Twelve good men and true had said
so. If people committed crimes, they must submit to the
penalty. Society must be protected. The intelligence and
social position of the criminal only made the demands of
justice more imperative. If he pardoned Mary Engle, men would
rightly say that the poor and friendless and weak were
punished, while the influential and rich escaped the law. He
must do his duty to Delaware and to her people. He could not
grant the pardon.

But there was to be another appeal to executive mercy. It was
the night before the punishment. The doctor sat in his
parlor, before the glowing fire in the grate, and with his
head resting upon his hand he thought sadly of the pitiful
scene he had witnessed in the jail from which he had just
come—of Mary, in the damp, narrow cell, bearing herself like
a heroine through all this terrible trial, and still keeping
a secret which the doctor felt certain would give her back
her freedom and her good name if it could be disclosed; of
Mrs. Engle, full of despair and terror, crying bitterly over
the shame and disgrace that had come upon her child, and
which would be increased beyond endurance on the morrow.

As the doctor's kind old heart grew heavy with these
thoughts, and from the bewildering maze of circumstances he
tried to evolve some theory that promised salvation, Dick
Newton entered.

He was haggard and pale, and his eyes were cast down to the
floor.

"Why, Dick, what's the matter?" asked the doctor.

"Dr. Ricketts, I have come to make a shameful confession. I—"

"Well?" said the doctor, suspiciously and impatiently, as
Dick's voice faltered.

"I will not hesitate about it," said Dick, hurriedly; "I am
afraid it is even now too late. I stole the diamond brooch."

"What?" exclaimed the doctor, jumping to his feet in a frenzy
of indignant excitement.

"I am the cause of all this trouble. It was my fault that
Mary Engle was accused and convicted, and it will be my fault
if she is punished. Oh, doctor, cannot something be done to
save her? I never intended it should go so far."

"You infamous scoundrel!" said the doctor, unable to restrain
his scorn and contempt; "why did you not say this before? Why
did you permit all this misery and shame to fall upon the
defenceless head of a woman for whom an honest man should
have sacrificed his very life? How was this villainy
consummated? Tell me, quickly!"

The poor wretch sank upon his knees, and with a trembling
voice exclaimed,

"I loved her. I hated Tom Willitts. He sent her a bracelet. I
knew it would come. I broke open father's cabinet and took
his brooch. With threats and money I induced Tom's servant to
lend me the box for a few moments before he entered the
house. I placed the brooch in it. She thought it came from
Tom, and she resolved to die rather than betray him, although
she thinks him the cause of her ruin. It was vile and mean
and wicked in me, but I thought Tom would be the victim, not
she; and when the trouble came, I could not endure the shame 
of exposure. But you will save her now, doctor, will you not?
I will fly—leave the country—kill myself—anything to prevent
this awful crime."

The miserable man burst into tears. Dr. Ricketts looked at
him a moment with eyes filled with pity and scorn, and then
said,

"So my theory was right, after all. Come, sir, you will go to
the governor with me, and we will see if he will grant a
pardon upon your confession."

"What, to-night?" asked Dick.

"Yes, to-night—now; and it will be well for you and your
victim if fleet horses carry us to Dover and back before ten
to-morrow morning."

In five minutes the pair were seated in a carriage, and
through the black night they sped onward, the one with his
heart swelling with hope, joy and humanity, the other
cowering in the darkness, full of misery and self-contempt,
and of horrible forebodings of the future.

Saturday morning—a cold, raw, gusty morning in May.

The town was in a small uproar. Men lounged on the porches of
the taverns, in front of which their horses were hitched,
talking politics, discussing crop prospects, the prices of
grain, the latest news by coach and schooner from
Philadelphia. Inside the bar-room men were reading newspapers
a month old, drinking, swearing and debating with loud
voices.

But the attraction that morning was in another quarter. In
the middle of the market street there was a common—a strip of
green sod twenty feet wide fringed on either side with a row
of trees. In the centre of this stood the whipping-post and
pillory.

The hour of ten tolled out from the steeple down the street.
It was the same bell that called the people together on
Sunday to worship God and to supplicate his mercy. It was a
bell of various uses. It summoned the saints to prayer and
the sinners to punishment.

At its earliest stroke the jailer issued from the prison with
a forlorn-looking white man in his clutches. He hurried his
prisoner up the ladder, and prepared to fasten him in the
pillory. The boys below collected in knots, and fingered the
missiles in their hands. The jailer descended. A boy lifted
his hand and flung a rotten egg at the pilloried wretch. It
hit him squarely in the face, and the feculent contents
streamed down to his chin. That was the signal. Eggs, dead
cats, mud, stones, tufts of sod and a multitude of filthy
things were showered upon the prisoner, until the platform
was covered with the débris. He yelled with pain, and strove
vainly to shake from his face the blood that streamed forth,
from the cut skin and the filth that besmeared it. The crowd
hooted at him and laughed at his efforts, and called him vile
names, and jested with him about his wooden collar and cuffs,
and no human heart in all that assembly had any pity for him.
For an hour he stood there, enduring inconceivable torture.
When the steeple clock struck eleven, he was taken out in
wretched plight, almost helpless and sorely wounded. No more
pillory that day. It was the turn of the whipping-post now.
There were two women to be whipped, one of them white, the
other black. We know who the white woman was.

The negro was to suffer first. She was dragged from the jail
wild with fright and apprehension. Around her legs a soiled
skirt of calico dangled. About her naked body, stripped for
the sacrifice, a fragment of carpet was hung. The jailer
brought, her by main force to the post through the jeering
crowd, and while she begged wildly, almost incoherently, for
mercy, promising vague, impossible things, the officer of the
law clasped the iron cuffs about her uplifted hands, so that
she was compelled to stand upon her toes to escape
unendurable agony. The blanket was torn from her shoulders,
and with dilated eyes glistening with terror, she turned her
head half around to where the sheriff stood, ready to execute
the law.

This virtuous officer felt the sharp thongs of his "cat"
complacently as he listened with dull ear to the incessant
prayers of the woman; and when the jailer said, "Forty
lashes, sheriff," the cat was swung slowly up, and the ends
of the lashes touched the victim's back, bringing blood at
the first blow.

The crowd laughed and applauded. The sheriff accepted the
applause with the calm indifference of a man who feels the
greatness of his office and has confidence in his own skill.

As the lashes came thick and fast, the skin swelled up into
thick purple ridges, and then the blood spurted out in
crimson streams, flowing down upon the wretched skirt and
staining it with a new and dreadful hue. The woman's piercing
screams rang out upon the air and filled some kind hearts
with tender pity. But as it was a "nigger," the tendency to
human kindness was smothered.

Beneath the blows she writhed and contorted and shrank
forward, until at last, faint with loss of blood, with
terrible pain and nervous exhaustion, she sank helplessly
down and hung by her arms alone. At first the sheriff thought
he would postpone the rest of the punishment until she
recovered. But there were only five more lashes to be given,
and he concluded that it would be as well to finish up the
job. They were inflicted upon the insensible form, and then
the jailer came forward with a pair of shears. The sheriff
took them coolly and clipped away a portion of the woman's
ears. Her hands were then unshackled; and bleeding,
mutilated, unconscious, she was carried into the prison.




Her agonized cries had penetrated those walls already
and brought a whiter hue to the pale cheeks of the woman who
by this ignominy had learned her sisterhood with the poor
black. There were two other women in the cell, Mrs. Engle and
Mrs. Willitts. The former controlled herself for her
daughter's sake, but dared speak no word to her. Mrs.
Willitts, through her tears, tried to comfort Mary as with
hesitating hands she disrobed her for her torture:

"The day will come, Mary dear, when you will be vindicated,
and these wicked men will hide their heads with bitter shame
and humiliation. But bear up bravely, dear. Have good courage
through it all. Perhaps it will not be so hard. 'Though there
be heaviness for a night, joy cometh in the morning.' We will
all be happy together yet some day."

Mary Engle stood there, speechless, statue-like, immovable,
as they took away her garments, and her fair white skin
glistened in the dim light.

It was almost time. The black woman was being dragged through
the door to the next cell. The murmur of the crowd came up
from the street. Mrs. Willitts placed the blanket upon those
ivory shoulders, and Mary, turning to her mother, flung her
arms about her and kissed her. In a whisper she said,

"I shall die, mother. I will not live through it. I will
never see you again."

But there was not a tear in her eye. Wrapping the blanket
tightly about her, with the calmness of despair she prepared
to step from the cell at the call of the impatient jailer.

A great commotion in the streets. The noise of horse's hoofs.
A din of voices; then a wild cheer.



Dr. Ricketts dashed in, flourishing a paper in his hand.

"She is pardoned! pardoned!" he shouted; "go back! take her
back!" he said as the jailer laid his hand upon Mary. "See
this!" and he flung the paper open in his face.

The long agony was over, and the reaction was so great that
Mary Engle, hardly conscious of the good thing that had
happened to her, and not fully realizing the events by which
her innocence was proved, stood stupefied and bewildered.
Then she felt faint, and laying her upon the low bed, they
told her all the story; and when the doctor said that Tom was
not a guilty man, she turned her face to the wall to hide the
blinding tears, and she muttered:

"Thank God! thank God for that!"

As she came out of the prison doors, leaning on the doctor's
aim, the crowd, now largely increased, hailed her with a
hurrah, but Mary drew her veil over her face and shuddered as
she thought how these very people had assembled to see her
flogged.

"It is my theory, my dear," said the doctor, "that human
beings are equally glad when their fellow-creatures get into
trouble and when they get out of it."

Back once again in her old home, Mary was besieged by friends
whose regard had suddenly assumed a violent form, and who
were now eager to congratulate her upon her vindication.

Tom Willitts came to the door and inquired for Mrs. Engle.

"Can I come in now?" he inquired, with a glow upon his face.

He did go in, and there, before them all, he clasped Mary in
his arms, while she begged him to forgive her for all the
suffering she had caused him.

But Tom wanted to be forgiven, too; and as both confessed
guilt, repentance and an earnest wish to be merciful, they
were soon better friends than ever.

"I used to love you," said Tom, "but now I worship you for
your heroism and your sacrifice for me."

There was another visitor. Old Major Newton entered the room,
hat in hand, and with bowed head. The lines in his face were
deeper and harder than usual, but he looked broken and sad.

He went up to Mary and said as he stood before her with
downcast eyes:

"I have come to ask pardon for my brutality and cruelty. The
injury I did to you I can never atone for. I shall carry my
remorse to the grave. But if you have any word of pity for an
old man whose son has fled from home a scoundrel and a
villain, and who stands before you broken-hearted, ready to
kiss your feet for your angelic goodness and your noble self-
sacrifice, say it, that I may at least have that comfort in
my desolation."

And Mary took the old man's hard hands in hers and spoke kind
and gentle words to him; and with tears coursing down his
rough cheeks, he kissed her dainty fingers and went out, and
back to his forlorn and wretched home.

There was another Christmas night a few months later, and
this time the merry-making was going on in the Willitts
mansion.

There were two brides there. Mary and Tom Willitts were busy
helping the children with their Christmas games, and keeping
up the excitement as if no sorrow had ever come across their
path; while seated at the upper end of the room, Dr. Ricketts
and his wife (Mrs. Engle that had been), looking upon the
younger pair with pride and pleasure, touched only now and
then with a sad memory of the troubled times that were gone
by for ever.

And when the games were all in full progress, Tom and his
wife watched them for a while, and then he drew her arm
through his, and they went to the porch and looked out upon
the river beating up against the ice-bound shore, just as it
did on that night one year ago. But it had a different
language to Mary's ears now. it was full of music, but music
that seemed in a minor key, as the remembrance of that wild
flight along the shore came up vividly in her mind.

Neither spoke for a while, but each knew that the thoughts of
the other went over all the misery and terror of the past,
only to rest satisfied with the calm, sweet happiness of the
present. Mary, clasping her husband's arm tighter in her
grasp, looked with unconscious eyes out over the broad river,
while her lips slowly repeated that grand old hymn of comfort
and hope:

"There is a day of peace and rest
For sorrow's dark and dreary night;
Though grief may bide an evening guest,
Yet joy shall come with morning light.

"The light of smiles shall beam again
From lids that now o'erflow with tears,
And weary days of woe and pain
Are earnests of serener years."






CHAPTER XV.
A VERY DISAGREEABLE PREDICAMENT—WILD EXULTATION OF PARKER—HE
MAKES AN IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT—AN INTERVIEW WITH THE OLD
MAN—THE EMBARRASSMENT OF MR. SPARKS, AND HOW HE OVERCAME IT—A
STORY OF BISHOP POTTS—THE MISERIES OF TOO MUCH MARRIAGE—HOW
POTTS SUFFERED, AND WHAT HIS END WAS.

AST evening, after waiting until eleven o'clock for Mr.
Parker to come home, I went to bed. I had hardly composed
myself for slumber when I thought I heard the door-bell ring;
and supposing Bob had forgotten his latch-key, I descended
for the purpose of letting him in. When I opened the door, no
one was upon the porch; and although I was dressed simply in
a night-shirt, I stepped out just beyond the doorway for the
purpose of ascertaining if I could see any one who might have
pulled the bell. Just as I did so the wind banged the door
shut, and as it closed it caught a portion of my raiment
which was fluttering about, and held it fast. I was somewhat
amused at first, and I laughed as I tried to pull the muslin
from the door; but after making very violent exertion for
that purpose, I discovered that he material would not slip
through. The garment was held so firmly that it could not
possibly be removed. Then I determined to reach over to the
other side of the doorway and pull the bell, in the hope that
some one would hear it and come to my assistance But to my
dismay I found that the doorway was so wide that even with
the most desperate effort I could not succeed in touching the
bell-knob with the tips of my fingers.

Meantime, I was beginning to freeze, for the night was very
cold, and my legs and feet were wholly unprotected.

At last a happy thought struck me. I might very easily creep
out of the shirt and leave it hanging in the door until I
rang the bell, and then I could slip back again and await the
result. Accordingly, I began to withdraw from the garment,
and I had just freed myself from it and was about to pull the
bell when I heard someone coming down the street. As the moon
was shining brightly, I became panic-stricken, and hurried
into the garment again. In my confusion I got it on backward,
and found myself with my face to the wall; and then the
person who was coming turned down the street just above my
house, and didn't pass, after all.

I was afraid to try the experiment again, and I
determined to shout for help. I uttered one cry, and waited
for a response. It was a desperately cold night. I think the
air must have been colder than it ever was before in the
history of this continent. I stamped my feet in order to keep
the blood in circulation, and then I shouted again for
assistance. The river lay white and glistening in the light
of the moon, and so clear was the atmosphere, so lustrous the
radiance of the orb above, that I could plainly distinguish
the dark line of the Jersey shore. It was a magnificent
spectacle, and I should have enjoyed it intensely if I had
had my clothing on. Then I began to think how very odd it was
that a man's appreciation of the glorious majesty of nature
should be dependent upon his trousers! How strange it was
that cold legs should prevent an immortal soul from having
felicity! Man is always prosaic when he is uncomfortable.
Even a slight indigestion is utterly destructive of
sentiment. I defy any man to enjoy the fruitiest poetry while
his corns hurt him, or to feel a genuine impulse of affection
while he has a severe cold in his head.

Then I cried aloud again for help, and an immediate response
came from Cooley's new dog, which leaped over the fence and
behaved as if it meditated an assault upon my defenceless
calves. I was relieved from this dreadful situation by Bob,
who came up the street whistling and singing in an especially
joyous manner. He was a little frightened, I think, when he
saw a figure in white upon the porch, and he paused for a
moment before opening the gate, but he entered when I called
to him; and unlocking the door with his key, he released me,
and went up stairs laughing heartily at my mishap.

I was about to retire when I heard a series of extraordinary
sounds in Bob's room overhead, and I thought it worth while
to go up and ascertain what was going on. Standing outside
the door, I could hear Bob chuckling and making use of such
exclamations as,

"Bul-l-e-e-e! Ha! ha! All right, my boy! All right! You've
fixed that, I guess! Bul-l-e-e-e-e-e!"

Then he seemed to be executing a hornpipe in his stockings
upon the carpet; and when this exercise was concluded, he
continued the conversation with himself in such tones as
these:

"How are YOU, Smiley! No chance, hadn't I? Couldn't make it,
couldn't I? I know a thing or two, I reckon. How are YOU,
Lieutenant Smil-e-e-e-e! Ha! ha! I've settled your case, I
guess, my boy! Bully for you, Parker! You've straightened
that out, anyhow. Yes, air! Ha! ha! Fol de rol de rol de
rol," etc., etc. (second performance of the hornpipe,
accompanied by whistling and new expressions of intense
satisfaction).

I went down stairs with a solemn conviction that Mr.Parker
had explained himself to Miss Magruder, and had received an
answer from her that was wholly satisfactory. I did not
reveal the secret to Mrs. Adeler, concluding that it would be
better to permit Bob to do that himself in the morning.

Parker rose about two hours earlier than usual, and I
entertain a suspicion that he expended a portion of the time
in going down the street to examine the exterior of Mr.
Magruder's house. It probably gave him some satisfaction
merely to view the tenement wherein his fair enslaver
reposed. He came to the breakfast-table with a radiant
countenance, and it was evident that he would be unable to
contain the news for many moments longer. In order to prepare
the way for him, I asked him:

"Why were you so late last night, Bob?"

"Oh, I had some important business on hand. Big things have
been happening; I have some news to tell you."

"Another railroad accident?" I asked, carelessly, "or a riot
in Philadelphia?"

"Riot? No! Thunder!" exclaimed Bob; "nothing of that kind.
It's something more important. You know old Smiley—Fiji
Island Smiley? Well, I've floored him; I've laid him out
flat; I've knocked him into diminutive smithereens."

"Had a personal encounter with the lieutenant?" I asked,
gravely.

"No, sir better than that. I've cut him out down at
Magruder's. Bessie and I are engaged! What do you think of
that, Max?"

"Think of it? Why, I congratulate you heartily. You have
secured a treasure."

"And I congratulate you, too," said Mrs. A. "Bessie is a very
fine girl, and will make you a good wife."

"That's what I think about it," observed Mr. Parker.

"I am very glad Lieutenant Smiley didn't succeed there," said
Mrs. A.

"Smiley! Smiley!" exclaimed Bob, scornfully. "Why, he never
had the ghost of a chance. Bessie told me last night she
despised him. She wouldn't look at such a man as he is."

"Not while such men as you are around, at any rate, I
suppose?"

"When are you going to speak to Bessie's father?" asked Mrs.
Adeler.

A cloud suddenly passed over Bob's face, and he said:

"I don't know. I have to do it, I s'pose, but I hate it worse
than I can tell you. I believe I'd rather propose to a woman
a dozen times than to broach the matter to a stern parent
once. It's all well enough to express your feelings to a
woman who loves you; but when you come to explain the matter
to a cold-blooded, matter-of-fact old man who is as prosy as
a boiled turnip, it seems kind of ridiculous."

"Why don't you speak to Mrs. Dr. Magruder, then? She is a
power in that family."

"No; I'll talk to Mr. Magruder. It's hard, but it has to be
done. And see here, Max, don't you poke fun at Mrs. Magruder.
She's a first-rate woman, and those things Dr. Jones told
about her are the most rascally kind of lies. If you'll
excuse me, I'll go down and see the old man now. I might as
well settle the thing at once."

This evening, while we were waiting for tea, Bob made a
report. The paternal Magruder, it seems, had already
considered the subject carefully, and was not by any means as
much surprised by Mr. Parker's statement as the latter
expected he would be. Bob was amazed to find that although
the old gentleman during the courtship had appeared wholly
unconscious of the fact that his daughter was particularly
intimate with the youth, yet somehow he seemed now to have
had all the time a very clear perception of the state of the
case.

"I thought he would get excited and, maybe, show a little
emotion," said Bob, "but blame me if he didn't sit there and
take it as coolly as if such things happened to him every
day. And you know, when I began to tell him how much I
thought of Bessie, he soused down on me and brought me back
to prose with a question about the size of my income. But
it's all right. He said he would be glad to have me a member
of his family, and then he called in Bessie, and gave us a
kind of a blessing and advised us not to be in a hurry about
getting married."

"Very good advice, too. There is no need of haste. You ought
to have plenty of time to think the matter over."

"Think it over!" exclaimed Bob, indignantly. "Why, I have
thought it over. You don't suppose I'd be such! a fool as to
engage myself to a girl without thinking seriously about it?"

"Certainly not; but marriage is a very solemn thing, and it
should be undertaken advisedly. It is probable, I suppose,
that you would never, under any circumstances, marry any
woman but Bessie Magruder?"

"Never; no, never!"

"You don't believe in second marriages, then?"

"Certainly not."

"They do get a man into trouble very often. Did I ever tell
you about old Sparks, of Pencadder Hundred?"

"I think not," said Bob.

“Well, old Sparks  was married four times; and several years
after the death of his last wife they started a new cemetery
up there at Pencadder. Sparks bought a lot, and determined to
remove his sacred dust from the old graveyard. Somehow or
other, in taking the remains over to the cemetery in the
wagon, they were hopelessly mixed together, so that it was
utterly impossible to tell which was which. Any other man
than Sparks would simply have taken the chances of having the
reinterments properly made. But he was an extremely
conscientious man; and when the sepulture was completed, he
had a lot of new headstones set in, bearing such inscriptions
as these: 'Here lies Jane (and probably part of Susan)
Sparks;' 'Sacred to the memory of Maria (to say nothing of
Jane and Hannah) Sparks.'

"'Stranger, pause and drop a tear,
For Susan Sparks lies buried here;
Mingled, in some perplexing manner,
With Jane, Maria and portions of Hannah:’"

“Don't it seem a little bit rough," said Bob, "to bring in
such a story as that in connection with my engagement? I
don't like it."

"Pardon me, Bob. Perhaps it was neither gracious nor in good
taste, but somehow I just happened to think of old Sparks at
that moment. I am sure, though, you won't object to another
narrative which I am going to read to you upon the subject of
too frequent marriage. It is the story of Bishop Potts. Do
you feel like hearing it?"

"Well, no," said Bob, gloomily, "to tell you the truth, I
don't; but I suppose I will have to hear it, so go ahead."

"Yes, I am going to inflict it upon you whether you want it
or not. A man who is meditating matrimony, and is in a hurry,
needs the influence of a few ‘awful examples' to induce him
to proceed slowly. Here is the story. The hero was a
dignitary in the Mormon Church, and his sufferings were the
result of excessive marriage. The tale is entitled

"BISHOP POTTS.

"Bishop Potts, of Salt Lake City, was the husband of three
wives and the father of fifteen interesting children. Early
in the winter the bishop determined that his little ones
should have a good time on Christmas, so he concluded to take
a trip down to San Francisco to see what he could find in the
shape of toys with which to gratify and amuse them. The good
bishop packed his carpet-bag, embraced Mrs. Potts one by one
and kissed each of her affectionately, and started upon his
journey.

"He was gone a little more than a week, when he came back
with fifteen brass trumpets in his valise for his darlings.
He got out of the train at Salt Lake, thinking how joyous it
would be at home on Christmas morning when the fifteen
trumpets should be in operation upon different tunes at the
same moment. But just as he entered the depot he saw a group
of women standing in the ladies' room apparently waiting for
him. As soon as he approached, the whole twenty of them
rushed up, threw their arms about his neck and kissed him,
exclaiming:

"'Oh, Theodore, we are so, so glad you have come back!
Welcome home! Welcome, dear Theodore, to the bosom of your
family!' and then the entire score of them fell upon his neck
and cried over his shirt front and mussed him.

"The bishop seemed surprised and embarrassed. Struggling to
disengage himself, he blushed and said:

"'Really, ladies, this kind of thing is well enough—it is 
interesting and all that; but there must be some kind of a—
that is, an awkward sort of a—excuse me, ladies, but there
seems to be, as it were, a slight misunderstanding about the—
I am Bishop Potts.'

"'We know it, we know it, dear,' they exclaimed, in chorus,
'and we are glad to see you safe at home. We have all been
very well while you were away, love.'

"'It gratifies me,' remarked the bishop, 'to learn that none
of you have been a prey to disease. I am filled with serenity
when I contemplate the fact; but really, I do not understand
why you should rush into this railway station and hug me
because your livers are active and your digestion good. The
precedent is bad; it is dangerous!'

"'Oh, but we didn't!' they exclaimed, in chorus. 'We came
here to welcome you because you are our husband.'

"Pardon me, but there must be some little—that is to say, as
it were, I should think not. Women, you have mistaken your
man!'

"Oh no they shouted; we were married to you while you were
away I'

"'What exclaimed the bishop,; you don't mean to say that—'

"Yes, love. Our husband, William Brown, died on Monday, and
on Thursday, Brigham had a vision in which he was directed to
seal us to you; and so he performed the ceremony at once by
proxy.'

"'Th-th-th-th-under!' observed the bishop.

"'And we are all living with you now—we and the dear
children.'

"'Children! children!' exclaimed Bishop Potts, turning pale;
you don't mean to say that there is a pack of children, too?'

"Yes, love, but only one hundred and twenty-five, not
counting the eight twins and the triplet.'

"'Wha-wha-wha-what d'you say?' gasped the bishop, in a cold
perspiration; 'one hundred and twenty-five! One hundred and
twenty-five children and twenty more wives! It is too much—it
is awful!' and the bishop sat down and groaned, while the
late Mrs. Brown, the bride, stood around in a semicircle and
fanned him with her bonnets, all except the red-haired one,
and she in her trepidation made a futile effort to fan him
with the coal-scuttle.

"But after a while the bishop became reconciled to his new
alliance, knowing well that protests would be unavailing, so
he walked home, holding several of the little hands of the
bride, while the red-haired woman carried his umbrella and
marched in front of the parade to remove obstructions and to
scare off small boys.



"When the bishop reached the house, he went around among the
cradles which filled the back parlor and the two second-story
rooms, and attempted with such earnestness to become
acquainted with his new sons and daughters that he set the
whole one hundred and twenty-five and the twins to crying,
while his own original fifteen stood around and swelled the
volume of sound. Then the bishop went out and sat on the
garden fence to whittle a stick and solemnly think, while
Mrs. Potts distributed herself around and soothed the
children. It occurred to the bishop while he mused, out there
on the fence, that he had not enough trumpets to go around
among the children as the family now stood; and so, rather
than seem to be partial, he determined to go back to San
Francisco for one hundred and forty-four more.

"So the bishop repacked his carpet-bag, and began again to
bid farewell to his family. He tenderly kissed all of the
Mrs. Potts who were at home, and started for the depot, while
Mrs. Potts stood at the various windows and waved her
handkerchiefs at him—all except the woman with the warm hair,
and she, in a fit of absent-mindedness, held one of the twins
by the leg and brandished it at Potts as he fled down the
street toward the railway station.

"The bishop reached San Francisco, completed his purchases,
and was just about to get on the train with his one hundred
and forty-four trumpets, when a telegram was handed him. It
contained in-formation to the effect that the auburn-haired
Mrs. Potts had just had a daughter. This induced the bishop
to return to the city for the purpose of purchasing an
additional trumpet.

"On the following Saturday he returned home. As he approached
his house a swarm of young children flew out of the, front
gate and ran toward him, shouting, 'There's pa! Here comes
pa! Oh, pa, but we're glad to see you! Hurrah for pa!' etc.,
etc.

"The bishop looked at the children as they flocked around him
and clung to his legs and coat, and was astonished to
perceive that they were neither his nor the late Brown's. He
said, 'You youngsters have made a mistake; I am not your
father;' and the bishop smiled good-naturedly.

"'Oh yes, you are, though!' screamed the little ones, in
chorus.

“'But I say I am not,' said the bishop, severely, and
frowning; you ought to be ashamed of yourselves. Don't you
know where little story-tellers go? It is scandalous for you
to violate the truth in this manner. My name is Potts.'

"'Yes, we know it is,' exclaimed the children—'we know it is,
and so is ours; that is our name now, too, since the
wedding.'

"'Since what wedding?' demanded the bishop, turning pale.

"'Why, ma's wedding, of course. She was married yesterday to
you by Mr. Young, and we are all living at your house now
with our new little brothers and sisters.'



"The bishop sat down on the nearest front-door step and wiped
away a tear. Then he asked,

"'Who was your father?'

"'Mr. Simpson,' said the crowd, 'and he died on Tuesday.'

"'And how many of his infernal old widows—I mean how many of
your mother—are there?'

"'Only twenty-seven,' replied the children, 'and there are
only sixty-four of us, and we are awful glad you have come
home.'

"'The bishop did not seem to be unusually glad; somehow, he
failed to share the enthusiasm of the occasion. There
appeared to be, in a certain sense, too much sameness about
these surprises; so he sat there with his hat pulled over his
eyes and considered the situation. Finally, seeing there was
no help for it, he went up to the house, and forty-eight of
Mrs. Potts rushed up to him and told him how the prophet had
another vision, in which he was commanded to seal Simpson's
widow to Potts.

"Then the bishop stumbled around among the cradles to his
writing-desk. He felt among the gum rings and rattles for his
letter-paper, and then he addressed a note to Brigham, asking
him as a personal favor to keep awake until after Christmas.
'The man must take me for a foundling hospital,' he said.
Then the bishop saw clearly enough that if he gave presents
to the other children, and not to the late Simpson's, the
bride would make things warm for him. So he started again for
San Francisco for sixty-four more trumpets, while Mrs. Potts
gradually took leave of him in the entry—all but the red-
haired woman, who was up stairs, and who had to be satisfied
with screeching good-bye at the top of her voice.

"On his way home, after his last visit to San Francisco, the
bishop sat in the car by the side of a man who had left Salt
Lake the day before. The stranger was communicative. In the
course of the conversation he remarked to the bishop:

"'That was a mighty pretty little affair up there at the city
on Monday.'

"'What affair?' asked Potts.

"'Why, that wedding; McGrath's widow, you know—married by
proxy.'

"'You don't say?' replied the bishop. 'I didn't know McGrath
was dead.'

"'Yes; died on Sunday, and that night Brigham had a vision in
which he was ordered to seal her to the bishop.'

"'Bishop!' exclaimed Potts. 'Bishop! What bishop?'

"'Well, you see, there were fifteen of Mrs. McGrath and
eighty-two children, and they shoved the whole lot off on old
Potts. Perhaps you don't know him?'

The bishop gave a wild shriek and writhed upon the floor as
if he had a fit. When he recovered, he leaped from the train
and walked back to San Francisco. He afterward took the first
steamer for Peru, where he entered a monastery and became a
celibate.

"His carpet-bag was sent on to his family. It contained the
balance of the trumpets. On Christmas morning they were
distributed, and in less than an hour the entire two hundred
and eight children were sick from sucking the brass upon
them. A doctor was called, and he seemed so much interested
in the family that Brigham divorced the whole concern from
old Potts and annexed it to the doctor, who immediately lost
his reason, and would have butchered the entire family if the
red-haired woman and the oldest boy had not marched him off
to a lunatic asylum where he spent his time trying to arrive
at an estimate of the number of his children by ciphering
with an impossible combination of the multiplication table
and algebra."

"And now that that's over," said Bob, as I folded up the
manuscript, "will you please to tell me what the suffering of
old Potts has to do with my engagement?"

"Well, to tell the truth, nothing in particular. I thought
perhaps you might feel a sort of general interest in the mere
subject of matrimony just now; and at any rate, I wanted your
opinion of the merit of the story."

"Well, I think it is a pretty poor story. The humor of the
Mormon business is stale, anyhow, and in your hands it
becomes absolutely dismal. I can write a better Mormon story
than that myself, and I don't even profess to be a
scribbler."

Then Mr. Parker swaggered out with the air of a man whose
opinions have the weight of a judicial decision. I think he
has acquired, since his engagement, a much greater notion of
his importance than he had before. It is remarkable how a
youth who has succeeded in a love affair immediately begins
to cherish the idea that his victory is attributable to the
fact that he possesses particularly brilliant qualities of
some kind. Bob was the humblest man in Delaware a week ago;
to-day he walks about with such an air as he might have had
if he had just won the battle of Waterloo.







CHAPTER XVI.
OLD FORT KASIMIR TWO CENTURIES AGO—THE GOBLINS OF THE LANE—AN
OUTRAGE UPON PITMAN'S COW—THE JUDGE DISCUSSES THE SUBJECT OF
BITTERS—HOW COOLEY CAME HOME—TURNING OFF THE GAS—A FRIGHTFUL
ACCIDENT IN THE ARGUS OFFICE—THE TERRIBLE FATE OF ARCHIBALD
WATSON—HOW MR. BERGNER TAUGHT SUNDAY-SCHOOL.




HEN the people of our village are in the mood to reflect upon
antiquity, when they feel as if they would like to meditate
upon the heroic deeds that have been achieved in this kindly
old place by the mighty men of valor who swaggered and swore
and fought here a hundred years before the war of the
Revolution was dreamed of, they turn from the street down the
gentle slope of the highway which runs by the river; and when
they have wandered on a brief distance beyond the present
confines of the town, they reach old Fort Lane. It is but a
little stretch of greensward, gashed by the wheels of
vehicles and trodden by the feet of wayfarers. It extends
from the road eastward for a hundred yards, and then it dip
downward and ends upon the sandy beach of the stream. Here,
right upon the edge of the water, once stood brave old Fort
Kasimir, with its guns threatening destruction not only to
unfriendly vessels which sailed up the bay, but absolutely
menacing the very town itself. The village then was called
New Stockholm. That was the name given to it by the Swedes,
who perceived what a superb site for a city lay here, and who
went to work and built a swarm of snug wooden houses. It has
had half a dozen other names since. When the Dutchmen
conquered it, they dubbed it Sandhoec then New Amstel and
then Fort Kasimir. Afterward it was known as Grape Wine
Point, then as Delaware-town and finally as New Castle. But
twenty years after the Swedes had settled here, the Dutchmen
at New York coveted the place and the command of the river;
and as an earnest of what they intended to do, they came
right here under the very noses of the villagers and built
Fort Kasimir.

I can imagine how the old Swedes in the village stood over
there on the Battery and glowered at the Dutchmen as they
labored upon the fort; and it is not difficult to conceive
the terror and dismay that filled those humble little homes,
in New Stockholm when the intruder placed his queer brass
cannon in the embrasures of the fort after its completion,
and when he would hurl a ball across the bows of a Swedish
ship coming up to the town, or would send a shot whistling
over the roofs of the village itself merely to gratify a grim
humor. I would give a great deal, Mrs. Adeler, to have but
one day of that distant past recalled; to see New Stockholm
and its people as they were; to watch the Dutch chieftain and
his handful of men parading about in the fort in the panoply
of war, and boasting of the prowess that dared thus to defy
the enemy upon his own threshold. But, alas! look! not one
vestige of the ancient battlements remains. The grass has
grown over the spot whereon they stood, and the rolling river
has long since buried beneath the sand of its shores whatever
timbers of the structure touched its waters.

It would have been forgotten, perhaps, but that Irving, with
the humorous pen which traced the history of the
Knickerbockers, has given it immortality in the lines that
tell how the exasperated Swedes seized the fort and held the
Dutchmen prisoners, and how, when the news came to Manhattan
island, the Dutch sent forth a valiant army, which not only
retook the fortress, but carried away nearly all the
villagers.

There was wild lamentation in the little community upon that
day as the unhappy people were torn from their homes and sent
into exile; and though the historian tells his tale
sportively, the story always seemed to me to be full of
pathos.

This place was thronged with strange figures, and it
witnessed some very sad scenes in that far-off time. And if
the traditions of the neighborhood may be believed, those
tough old warriors even yet have not bid farewell for ever to
the spot. There is no more fighting here, unless when some of
the village urchins come out to have a tussle upon the sward,
and the chimneys of the town are unmolested by hostile shot.
But they do say that sometimes we may look upon the shadowy
outline of the ancient Hollanders who made this their
battleground.

The venturesome wight who comes to old Fort Lane at certain
seasons after nightfall may see headless Dutchmen in strange
and ghostly attire marching up and down the shore, and he may
hear the cry of sentinels, uttered in an unknown tongue,
borne past him on the wind. There are those who have listened
to the noise of cannon balls rolling in the dusk over floors
which no mortal eye can ever see, and often, when there is a
tempest, the booming of guns will be heard above the roar of
the storm, and from spectral ships floating upon the bosom of
the river will come the wailing voices of women and children
who are still sorrowing for their lost homes.

I do not say that this is so, Mrs. Adeler; I merely. assert
the existence of a popular theory to that effect. I have
private doubts if the goblin Dutchmen ever have been seen,
and I know of no reason why, if a ghost of that kind really
comes back to earth, he should return without his head.

Judge Pitman has a field that is bounded upon one side by the
lane, and in this enclosure we found, upon our visit to the
historic spot, a meditative cow with a blind-board upon her
forehead. There was nothing especially remarkable about the
board, and yet it has caused a great deal of trouble. In a
recent interview with me, the judge sought to console himself
for the misery, created by that blind-board by relating the
story of his sorrow.

Adeler," he said, "you know I j'ined. the temp'rance society
a couple o' months ago, not because I was much afeared of
gittin' drunk often, but just to please the old woman. You
know how women are—kinder insane on the subject of drinkin'.
Well, my cow had a way o' jumpin' the fence, an' I couldn't
do nothin' to stop her. She was the ornariest critter that
way that I ever see. So at last I got a blind-board an' hung
it on haer horns. That stopped her. But you know she used to
come jam up agin' the fence an' stand there for hours; an'
one day one o' them vagabone advertisin' agents come along—
one o' them fellers that daubs signs all over the face of
natur'—an' as soon as he seen that blind-board he went for
it."



"A patent medicine man, I suppose?"

No, he was advertisin' some kind o' stomach bitters; and he
painted on that board the follerin': 'Take Brown's Bitters
for your Stomach's Sake. They make the Best Cocktails.'"

"The temperance society didn't like that, of course?"

"No, sir! The secretary happened to see it, and he brought
out the board of directors; and the fust thing I knowed, they
hauled me up an' wanted to expel me for circulatin'
scand'lous information respectin' bitters an' cocktails."



"That was very unjust."

"Well, sir, I had the hardest time to make them fellers
understand that I was innercent, an' to git 'em to let up on
me. But they did. Then I turned the blind-board over; and now
the first man I ketch placin' any revolutionary sentiments on
the frontispiece of that cow, why, down goes his house; I'll
knock the stuffin' out o' him; now mind me!"

"I am usually not in favor of resort to violence, judge; but
I must say that under the circumstances even such severity
would be perfectly justifiable."

"This bitters business is kinder fraudulent anyway,"
continued  the judge, meditatively. "I once had a very
cur'ous experience drinkin' that stuff. Last winter I read in
one of the papers an advertisment which said—But hold on;
I'll read it to you. I've got 'em all. I kep' 'em as a
cur'osity. Let's see; whered' I put them things? Ah! yes;
here they are;" and the judge produced some newspaper
cuttings from his pocketbook. "Well, sir, I read in the Argus
this parergraph:

"'The excessive moisture and the extreme cold and continuous
dampness of winter are peculiarly deleterious to the human
system, and colds, consumption and death are very apt to
ensue unless the body is braced by some stimulating tonic
such as Blank's Bitters, which give tone to the stomach,
purify the blood, promote digestion and increase the
appetite. The Bitters are purely medicinal, and they contain
no intoxicating element.'

"I'd been kinder oneasy the winter afore about my health, and
this skeered me. So I drank them Bitters all through the cold
weather; an' when spring come, I was just about to knock off
an' begin agin on water, when I was wuss frightened than ever
to see in the Argus the followin':

"'The sudden changes of temperature which are characteristic
of the spring, and the enervating influence of the increased
heat, make the season one of peculiar danger to the human
system, so that ague, fever and diseases resulting from
impurities clogging the circulation of the blood can only be
avoided by giving tone to the stomach and increasing the
powers of that organ by a liberal use of Blank's Bitters.'

"I thought there wa'n't no use takin' any risks, so I begun
agin; but I made up my mind to stop drinkin' when summer come
an' danger was over."

"Your confidence in those advertisements, judge, was
something wonderful."

"Jes' so. Well, about the fust of June, while I was a-
finishin' the last bottle I had, I seen in the Argus this
one. Jes lissen to this:

"'The violent heat of summer debilitates and weakens the
human system so completely that, more easily than at any
other time, it becomes a prey to the insidious diseases which
prevail during what may fairly be called the sickly season.
The sacrifice of human life during this dangerous period
would be absolutely frightful had not Nature and Art offered
a sure preventive in Blank's Bitters, which give tone to the
stomach,' etc., etc.

"This seemed like such a solemn warnin' that I hated to let
it go; an' so I bought a dozen more bottles an' took another
turn. I begun to think that some mistake'd been made in
gittin' up a climate for this yer country, and it did seem
astonishin' that Blank should be the only man who knew how to
correct the error, Howsomdever, I determined to quit in the
fall, when the sickly season was over, an' I was jes gittin'
ready to quit when the Argus published another one of them
notices, Here it is:

"'The miasmatic vapors with which the atmosphere is filled
during the fall of the year break down the human system and
destroy life with a frightful celerity which is
characteristic of no other season, unless the stomach is
strengthened by constant use of' Blank's Bitters, which are a
sure preventive of disease,' etc., etc.

"But they didn't fool me that time. No, sir. I took the
chances with those asthmatic vapors, and let old Blank rip. I
j'ined the temperance society, an' here I am, hearty as a
buck."

"You look extremely well."

"But, Adeler, I never bore no grudge agin the bitters men for
lyin' until they spread their owdacious falsehoods on the
blind-board of my cow. Then it did 'pear 's if they was
crowdin' me too hard."

"Judge, did you ever try to convert Cooley to temperance
principles? It seems to me that he would be a good subject to
work upon."

"Well, no; I never said nothin' to him on the subject. I'm
not a very good hand at convertin' people; but I s'pose
oughtter tackle Cooley too. He's bin a-carryin' on scand'lus
lately, so I hear."

"Indeed! I hadn't heard of it."

"Yes, sir; comin' home o' nights with a load on, an' a-
snortin' at that poor little wife of his'n. By gracious, it's
rough, isn't it? An' Mrs. Cooley was tellin' my old woman
that some of them fellers rubbed Cooley's nose the other
night with phosphorous while he was asleep down at the
tavern; an' when he went home, it 'peared 's if he had a
locomotive headlight in front of him."

"A very extraordinary proceeding, judge."

"Well, sir, when he got in the hall it was dark, an' he
ketched a sight o' that nose in the lookin'-glass on the hat-
rack, an' he thought Mrs. Cooley had left the gas burnin'.
Then he tried to turn it off, an' after fumblin' around among
the umbrellers an' hat-pegs for a while for the stop-cock, he
concluded the light must come from a candle, an' he nearly
bu'sted his lungs tryin' to blow it out. Then he grabbed his
hat an' tried to jam her down over that candle; an' when he
found he couldn't, he got mad, picked up an umbreller an' hit
a whack at it, which broke the lookin'-glass all to flinders;
an' there was Mrs. Cooley a-watchin' that old lunatick all
the time, an' afraid to tell him it was his own nose. I tell
you, Adeler, this yer rum drinkin's a fearful thing any way
you take it, now, ain't it?"

I am glad to say that the Argus has been fully repaid
for its attempts to beguile the judge into the use of
bitters. The Argus is in complete disgrace with all the
people who attend our church. Some of the admirers of Rev.
Dr. Hopkins, the clergyman, gave him a gold-headed cane a few
days ago, and a reporter of the Argus was invited to be
present. Nobody knows whether the reporter was temporarily
insane, or whether the foreman, in giving out the "copy,"
mixed it accidentally with an account of a patent hog-killing
machine which was tried in Wilmington on that same day, but
the appalling result was that the Argus next morning
contained this some-what obscure but very dreadful narrative:

"Several of Rev. Dr. Hopkins's friends called upon him
yesterday, and after a brief conversation the unsuspicious
hog was seized by the hind legs and slid along a beam until
he reached the hot-water tank. His friends explained the
object of their visit, and presented him with a. very hand-
some gold-headed butcher, who grabbed him by the tail, swung
him around, slit his throat from ear to ear, and in less than
a minute the carcass was in the water. Thereupon he came
forward and said that there were times when the feelings
overpowered one, and for that reason he would not attempt to
do more than thank those around him, for the manner in which
such a huge animal was cut into fragments was simply
astonishing. The doctor concluded his remarks, when the
machine seized him, and in less time than it takes to write
it the hog was cut into fragments and worked up into
delicious sausage. The occasion will long be remembered by
the doctor's friends as one of the most delightful of their
lives. The best pieces can be procured for fifteen cents a
pound; and we are sure that those who have sat so long under
his ministry will rejoice that he has been treated so
handsomely."

The Argus lost at least sixty subscribers in consequence of
this misfortune, and on the following Sunday we had a very
able and very energetic sermon from Dr. Hopkins upon "The
Evil Influence of a Debauched Public Press." It would have
made Colonel Bangs shiver to have heard that discourse.
Lieutenant Smiley came home with us after church, and I am
sorry to say he exulted over the sturdy blows given to the
colonel.

"I haven't any particular grudge against the man," he said,
"but I don't think he has treated me exactly fair. I sent him
an article last Tuesday, and he actually had the insolence to
return me the manuscript without offering a word of
explanation."

"To what did the article refer?"

"Why, it gave an account of a very singular thing that
appened to a friend of mine, the son of old Commodore Watson.
Once, when the commodore was about to go upon it voyage, he
had a presentiment that something would occur to him, and he
made a will leaving his son Archibald all his property on
condition that, in case of his death, Archibald would visit
his tomb and pray at it once every year. Archibald made a
solemn vow that he would, and the commodore started upon his
journey. Well, sir, the fleet went to the Fiji Islands, and
while there the old man came ashore one day, and was captured
by the natives. They stripped him, laid him upon a gridiron,
cooked him and ate him."



"That placed Archibald in a somewhat peculiar position?"

"Imagine his feelings when he heard the news! How could he
perform his vow? How could he pray at the commodore's tomb?
Would not the tomb, as it were, be very apt to prey upon him,
to snatch him up and assimilate him? There seemed to be an
imminent probability that it would. But he went. That noble-
hearted young man went out to the islands in search of the
savage that ate the commodore, and I have no doubt that he
suffered upon the same gridiron."

"You don't mean to say that Bangs declined to publish that
narrative?"

"He did, and he offered no explanation of his refusal."

"He is certainly a very incompetent person to conduct a
newspaper. A man who would refuse to give such a story to a
world which aches for amusement 'is worse than a blockhead."

[Note: I have reasons for believing that Smiley did not
construct this story. I remember having seen it in a French
newspaper long before I met the lieutenant, and I am sure he
borrowed it from that or some other publication.]

"By the way," said the lieutenant, changing the subject
suddenly, "I hear Parker has taken a class in the Sunday-
school. He is sly—monstrous sly, sir. Miss Magruder teaches
there, too. Parker seems to be determined to have her, and I
hope he may be successful, but I don't think he will be, I'm
sorry to say."

It was evident that Smiley had not heard the news, and I did
not enlighten him.

"Some men have a fitness for that kind of work, and some
haven't. There was poor Bergner, a friend of mine. He took a
class in a Sunday-school at Carlisle while stationed there.
The first Sunday, he told the scholars a story about a boy
named Simms. Simms, he said had climbed a tree for the
purpose of stealing apples, and he fell and killed himself.
'This,' said Bergner, conveys an impressive warning to the
young. It teaches an instructive lesson which I hope will be
heeded by all you boys. Bear in mind that if Simms had not
gone into that tree he would probably now be alive and well,
and he might have grown up to be a useful member of society.
Remember this, boys,' said Bergner, 'and resolve firmly now
that when you wish to steal apples you will do so in the only
safe way, which is to stand on the ground and knock them down
with a pole.'

A healthy moral lesson, wasn't it? Somebody told the
superintendent about it, and they asked Bergner to resign.
Yes, a man has to have a peculiar turn for that kind of thing
to succeed in teaching Sunday-school. I don't know how Parker
will make out."

Then the lieutenant shook hands, and left in order to catch
the last boat for the fort.

"Mrs. Adeler," I said, as I lighted a fresh cigar, "we may
regard it as a particularly fortunate thing that Smiley is
not entrusted with the religious education of any number of
American youth. Place the Sunday-schools of this land in the
hands of Smiley and others like him, and in the next
generation the country would be overrun with a race of
liars."

I am not aware that Bob Parker has ever made any very serious
attempt to write poetry for the public. Of course since he
has been in love with the bewildering Magruder he has
sometimes expressed his feelings in verse. But fortunately
these breathings of passion were not presented to a cold and
heartless world; they were reserved for the sympathetic
Magruder, who doubtless read them with delight and
admiration, and locked them up in her writing-desk with Bob's
letters and other precious souvenirs. This, of course, is all
right. Every lover writes what he considers poetry, and
society permits such manifestations without insisting upon
the confinement of the offenders in lunatic asylums. Bob,
however, has constructed some verses which are not of a
sentimental kind. Judge Pitman's story of the illumination of
Cooley's nose suggested the idea which Bob has worked into
rhyme and published in the Argus. As the poet has not been
permitted to shine to any great extent in these pages as a
literary person, it will perhaps be fair to reproduce his
poem in the chapter which contains the account of Cooley's
misfortune. Here it is:




TIM KEYSER'S NOSE.

TIM KEYSER lived in Wilmington;
He had a monstrous nose,
Which was a great deal redder than
The very reddest rose,
And was completely capable
Of most terrific blows.



He wandered down one Christmas day
To skate upon the creek,
And there, upon the smoothest ice,
He slid around so quick
That people were amazed to see
Him do it up so slick.



The exercise excited thirst;
And so, to get a drink,
He cut an opening in the ice
And lay down on the brink.
He said, "I'll dip my lips right in
And suck it up, I think."



And while his nose was thus immersed
Six inches in the stream,
A very hungry pickerel was
Attracted by its gleam;
And darting up, he gave a snap,
And Keyser gave a scream.



Keyser then was well assured
He had a splendid bite.
To pull his victim up he jerked
And tugged with all his might;
But that disgusting pickerel had
The better of the fight.



And just as Mr. Keyser thought
His nose was cut in two,
The pickerel gave its tail a twist
And pulled Tim Keyser through,
And he was scudding through the waves
The first thing that he knew.



Then onward swam that savage fish
With swiftness toward its nest,
Still chewing Mr. Keyser's nose;
While Mr. Keyser guessed
What sort of policy would suit
His circumstances best.



Just then his nose was tickled with
A spear of grass close by;
Then came an awful sneeze, which knocked
The pickerel into pi,
And blew its bones, the ice and waves
Two hundred feet on high!




Tim Keyser swam up to the top
A breath of air to take;
And finding broken ice, he hooked
His nose upon a cake,
And gloried in a nose which could
Such a concussion make.



And thus he drifted slowly on
Until he reached the shore;
And creeping out all dripping wet
He very roundly swore
To use that crimson nose as bait
For pickerel no more.






His Christmas turkey on that day
He tackled with a vim,
And thanked his stars as, shuddering,
He thought upon his swim,
That that wild pickerel had not
Spent Christmas eating him!







CHAPTER XVII.
A DISMAL SORT OF DAY—A FEW ABLE REMARKS ABOUT UMBRELLAS—THE
UMBRELLA IN A HUMOROUS ASPECT—THE CALAMITY THAT BEFEL COLONEL
COOMBS—AN AMBITIOUS BUT MISERABLE MONARCH—INFLUENCE OF
UMBRELLAS ON THE WEATHER—AN IMPROVED WEATHER SYSTEM—A LITTLE
NONSENSE—JUDGE PITMAN'S VIEWS OF WEATHER OF VARIOUS KINDS.

T is difficult to imagine anything more dismal than a rainy
day at New Castle, particularly at this late period in the
year. The river especially is robbed of much of its
attractiveness. The falling drops obscure the view, so that
the other shore is not visible through the gray curtain of
mist, and the few vessels that can be seen out in the channel
struggling upward with the tide or beating slowly downward to
the bay look so drenched and cold and utterly forlorn that
one shivers as he watches them, with their black sails and
their dripping cordage, and sees the moist sailors in
tarpaulins and sea-boots hurrying over the slippery decks.
The grain schooner lying at the wharf has all her hatches
down, and there is about her no other sign of life than one
soaked vagabond, who sits upon the bowsprit angling in a most
melancholy fashion for fish which will not bite. He may be
seeking for his supper, poor, damp sinner! or he may be an
infatuated being who deceives himself with the notion that he
is having sport. There is a peculiar feeling of comfort on
such a day to stand in a room where a bright fire blazes in
the grate, and from the window to watch this solitary
fisherman as the fitful gusts now and then blow the rain down
upon his head in sheets, and to observe the few people who
remain upon the streets hurrying by under their umbrellas,
each anxious to reach a place of shelter. The water pours in
yellow torrents through the gutter-ways, the carriages which
go swiftly past have their leathern aprons drawn high up in
front of the drivers, the stripped branches of the trees are
black with moisture, and from each twig the drops trickle to
the earth; the water-spout upon the side of the house
continues its monotonous song all day long, drip, drip, drip,
until the very sound contributes to the gloominess of the
time; there is desolation in the yard and in the garden,
where a few yellow corn-stalks and headless trunks of cabbage
remain from the summer's harvest to face the wintry storms,
and where the chickens gathered under the woodshed are
standing with ruffled feathers, hungry, damp and miserable,
some on one leg and some on two, and with an expression upon
their faces that tells plainly the story of their dejection
at the poor prospect of having any dinner.

It is a good time, Mrs. Adeler, to offer a few remarks upon
that subject of perennial interest, the weather, and
especially to refer to some facts in reference to that useful
but uncertain implement, the umbrella. I do not know why it
is so, but by common agreement the umbrella has been
permitted to assume a comic aspect. No man, particularly no
journalist, can be considered as having wholly discharged his
duty to his fellow-creatures unless he has permitted himself
to make some jocular remarks concerning the exception of
umbrellas from the laws which govern other kinds of property.
The amount of facetiousness that has attended the
presentation of that theory is already incalculably great,
and there is no reason for believing that it will not be
increased to an infinite extent throughout the coming ages.
It is perhaps a feeble idea upon which to erect so vast a
structure; but if it makes even a dismal sort of merriment,
we should not complain. And then reflect with what humorous
effect the comic artists introduce the excessive and
corpulent umbrella to their pictures of nervous or emphatic
old ladies, and how much more convulsive the laughter becomes
at the theatre when the low-comedy man carries with him an
umbrella of that unwieldy description! It is universally
admitted that an umbrella with distended sides is funny; and
if general consent is given to such a proposition, the
consequences are quite as satisfactory as if the article in
question was really plethoric with humor.

There are occasions when the simple elevation of an umbrella
is grotesquely absurd, as when a group of British guardsmen
sheltered themselves in this fashion from the rain during a
certain battle, to the infinite disgust of Wellington, who
ordered the tender warriors to put their umbrellas down lest
the service should be made ridiculous. It was a Frenchman,
Emile Girardin, I think, who brought an umbrella with him to
the dueling-ground, and insisted upon holding it over his
head during the combat. "I do not mind being killed," he
said, "but I object decidedly to getting wet." They gave him
much credit for admirable coolness; but I cherish a private
opinion that he was scared, and hoped, by making the affair
ridiculous, to bring it to a conclusion without burning
powder; and he succeeded, for the combatants shook hands and
went away friends.

And there was the case of Colonel Coombs—Coombs of Colorado.
He had heard that the most ferocious wild beast could be
frightened and put to flight if an umbrella should suddenly
be opened in its face, and he determined to test the matter
at the earliest opportunity. One day, while walking in the
woods, Coombs perceived a panther crouching, preparatory to
making a spring at him. Coombs held his umbrella firmly in
his hand, and presenting it at the panther, unfurled it. The
result was not wholly satisfactory, for the next moment the
animal leaped upon the umbrella, flattened it out and began
to lunch upon Coombs. Not only did the beast eat that anxious
inquirer after truth, but it swallowed the hooked handle of
the umbrella, which was held tightly in Coombs's grasp, and
for two or three weeks it wandered about with its nose buried
among the ribs of the umbrella. It was very handy when there
was rain, but it obstructed the animal's vision, and
consequently it walked into town and was killed.

In some countries the umbrella is the symbol of dignity and
power. One of the magnates of Siam is proud to begin his list
of titles with "Lord of Thirty-seven Umbrellas." Conceive, if
you can, the envy and hatred with which that bloated
aristocrat must be regarded by a man who is lord of only
fifteen umbrellas! Among certain African tribes the grandeur
of the individual increases with the size, and not with the
number, of the umbrellas. Did I ever tell you the story of
the African chieftain who determined to surpass all his
rivals in this respect?

He made up his mind to procure the largest umbrella in the
world, and he induced a trader to send his order to London
for the article. Its ribs were forty feet in length, and its
handle was like a telegraph pole. When it was distended, the
effect was sublime. The machine resembled a green gingham
circus tent, and it was crowned with a ferrule as large as a
barrel. When the umbrella arrived, there was great rejoicing
in the domestic circle of that dusky sovereign, and so
impatient was the owner to test its qualities that he fairly
yearned for the arrival of a rainy day. At last, one morning,
he awoke to find that his opportunity had come. The rain was
pouring in torrents. Exultingly he called forth his vassals,
and the work of opening the umbrella began in the presence of
an awestricken multitude. Two entire days were consumed by
the effort to elevate the monster, and at the end of the
second day, as the task was done, the storm ceased, and there
was a general clearing up. The disappointed chieftain waited
a day or two in vain for another shower, and finally, sick at
heart, he commanded the umbrella to be closed. The work
occupied precisely forty-eight hours, and just as the catch
snapped upon the handle a thunder-gust came up, and it rained
furiously all day. The frenzied monarch then consulted with
his medicine man, and was assured that there would certainly
be rain on the following Wednesday. The king therefore
ordered the gingham giant up again. While the swarthy
myrmidons were struggling with it there were at least sixty
or seventy violent showers, but just as it was fairly open
the clouds drifted away, and the sun came out with terrific
force. And it remained out. There was not a drop of rain or
so much as a fragment of cloud in the sky for two hundred and
seventy-three days, and the umbrella remained open during all
the time, while the potentate who owned it went dancing about
daily in an ecstasy of rage. At the end of the period he
sought the medicine man and slew him upon the spot. Then he
ordered the umbrella down. The very next morning after it was
closed the rain began, and it has been raining ever since.

Mrs. Adeler, that unfortunate savage thus became
intimately familiar with one of the most striking of
meteorological phenomena.

The influence of the umbrella upon the weather is a subject
that has engaged the attention of millions of mankind. The
precise laws by which that influence is exerted and governed
have not yet been defined, but the fact of the existence of
the influence is universally recognized. If there seems to be
a promise of rain in the morning when I leave home, and I
carry my umbrella with me, the sky clears before noon; but if
I neglect to take my umbrella, I will certainly be drenched.
If I carry an umbrella forty days in order to be prepared in
case of sudden showers, there will be perfect dryness during
that period; but if I forget the umbrella on the forty-first
day, the floodgates of heaven will assuredly be opened.
Sometimes the conduct of the elements is peculiarly
aggravating. When I have been caught in town by a rain-storm
and I had no umbrella, I have sometimes darted through the
shower to a store to purchase one, but always, just as the
man has given me the change, the rain has stopped. And when I
have kept one umbrella at the house and another at the
office, in order to be prepared at both ends of the line, all
the storms have begun and expended their fury while I was
passing between the two points.

This experience is not peculiar. It is that of every man who
uses an umbrella. I am persuaded, Mrs. Adeler, that the time
will come when science, having detected the character of the
mysterious sympathy existing between umbrellas and the
weather, will be able to give to a suffering world sunshine
or rain as we want it. Whether we shall then be any better
off is another matter.

In the mean time, while we are waiting for science to
penetrate the hidden secrets of the umbrella, let me unfold
to you a plan which I have devised for the better management
of the weather bureau at Washington. I confided the scheme,
once upon a time, to Old Probabilities himself, through the
medium of a newspaper at the capital, but he did not deign to
express an opinion concerning it. Perhaps it contained too
much levity to entitle it to the consideration of a man who
meditates upon the thunder and tries to trace the pathway of
the cyclone. I have called it

THE IMPROVED WEATHER SYSTEM.

The Probability man who meddles with our great American
weather means well, and tries conscientiously to do his best,
but his system is radically defective, and the consequence is
that his conjectures are despicably incorrect quite half the
time. The inconvenience caused by these mistakes, not only to
the people generally, but to me personally, is inconceivably
great, and it is not to be endured any longer.

For instance, if I read in the morning that this Probability
person entertains a conviction that we shall have a clear day
in my neighborhood, I place confidence in his assurance. I
remove the roof from my house in order to dry the garret
thoroughly, and I walk down town with a new umbrella under my
arm. Now, it is plainly evident that if; after all, it does
begin to rain, and I am obliged to unfurl that umbrella and
ruin it with the wet, and I am compelled, when I arrive at
home, to witness my family floating around in the dining-room
upon a raft constructed out of the clothes-horse and a few
bed-slats and pie-boards, the government for which Washington
died is a failure.

Or suppose that our friend at the weather office asserts that
a thunder-storm is certain to strike my section of the
country upon a given day. I believe him. I bring out my
lightning-rods and buckle them to the chimneys and set them
around on the roof and plant them out in the yard and rivet
them upon my hired girl; and I place my family safely in
feather beds in the middle of the room, and drink all the
milk in the neighborhood, and prevail upon the tax collector
to go and stand an hour or two under a tree where he will be
almost certain to be struck by lightning. And when all these
arrangements are completed, so that I feel equal to the
promised emergency, suppose that thunder-storm does not come?
When I watch that tax collector sally out and begin to assess
my property, counting in all those lightning-rods at double
their cost, is there any reason to wonder that I sit down and
sigh for some responsible despot who will give us a
Probability man who grasps the subject of the weather, as it
were, in a more comprehensive manner?

But I lost all faith in him after his ill-treatment of
Cooley. He said that a cyclone would sweep over this district
upon a certain morning, and Cooley was so much alarmed at the
prospect that he made elaborate preparations to receive the
storm. He arose before daybreak and went into the middle of
his garden, where he filled his pockets with pig lead,
fettered himself to the apple tree and fixed the preserving
kettle securely upon his head with a dog chain in order to
preserve his hair. Cooley stayed there until five o'clock in
the afternoon waiting for the simoom to swoop down upon him.

But it was a failure—a disgraceful failure. And when Cooley
looked out from under the kettle in the afternoon, he was
surprised to observe that the fence was filled with men and
boys who were watching him with intense interest. Then the
boys began to whistle upon their fingers and to make
unpleasant remarks, and finally Cooley was obliged to cut
loose and go into the house to avoid arrest by a policeman
upon a charge of lunacy.

Now, this is all wrong. The feelings of American citizens
ought not to be trifled with in such a manner, and I propose
to arrange a plan by which meteorological facts and
conditions can be observed with something like certainty.

The basis of my system is Corns. The marvelous accuracy with
which changes in the weather can be foretold by a man whose
feet are decorated with those excrescences is so well known
that it is hardly worth while to consider at length, at this
particular crisis, the human corn in its meteorological
characteristics. It is quite certain, however, that it will
be impossible to expect the Probability being to walk around
the country once or twice every day for the purpose of
submitting his corns to the diverse atmospheric influences
which exist between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. It would
wear out any man. It will be better, therefore, to have him
kept stationary. I propose, in that event, that he should buy
up any available corn that is in the market in any given
State, and have it transplanted and grafted upon his own toe.
Doubtless there are patriotic citizens in every portion of
the land who would be willing to lay upon the altar of their
beloved country their most cherished corns.

The Probability official then might obtain, let us assume,
one corn from each State and a reliable bunion to represent
each Territory. When these were engrafted upon his feet in a
healthful condition, each one would, as a matter of course,
be peculiarly susceptible to the atmospheric influences which
prevail in its native clime. All we have to do, then, is to
compel the weather man to wear exceptionally tight boots
while he is not attending to business, so that his barometers
will acquire the requisite amount of sensibility. Then I
should have pipes laid from each State to the office in
Washington for the purpose of conveying the different
varieties of atmosphere to the foot of the Probability
person. Suppose, then, he desired to make a guess in regard
to the weather in Louisiana. I should have a man stationed at
the end of the pipe in New Orleans with a steam fan, and he
could waft zephyrs, as it were, upon the Louisiana corn,
which would respond instantly, and we should have the facts
about the weather in that State with precision and accuracy.
When we admitted a new State, our friend could weld on a new
corn; or if the Mormons succeeded in procuring the admission
of their Territory as a State, we could plough up the Utah
bunion and plant a corn, so as to preserve the proprieties.

Of course this system of excrescences would be of no value as
an indicator of the movements of thunder-storms and
hurricanes. But in order to acquire information concerning
the former, how would it do to build up stacks of lightning-
rods in every portion of every State, and to connect each
State group, if I may be allowed the expression, with a wire
which shall be permanently fastened to the arm or leg of the
Probability man in Washington? Because, in such a case,
whenever a thunder-gust appeared in any portion of the
country, some one out of all those bunches of lightning-rods
would certainly be struck, and our conjectural friend at the
weather office would be likely to know about it right away.

As for hurricanes, I am in favor of putting an end to them at
once, instead of telegraphing around the country to warn
people to look out for them When I reorganize the weather
service, I shall have men stationed everywhere with machines
fixed up like the wind sails that are used on ship-board for
sending air into the hold. I should make the mouth of each
one a mile wide, construct it of stout canvas, and run the
lower end into a coal-mine, or a mammoth cave, or a volcano.
Then, when a tornado approached, I should place a man at each
side of the sail, put the men into balloons, send them up,
and spread the sail directly across the route of the
approaching cyclone. When it arrived, it would strike the
sail, of course; there would be a momentary flapping and
jerking around, and in a minute or two I should have that
hurricane comfortably packed away in the volcano, suppose we
say. A man would then be upon the spot, of course, to drive a
plug into the crater, so as to make everything tight and
snug, and one more nuisance is taken off the face of the
earth.

"Is that the whole of the article?" inquired Mrs. Adeler.

"Yes, that is all of it."

"Well, I am not surprised that no notice was taken of it. It
is perfectly nonsensical."

"I admit the fact, but still I shall not smother the article.
It will not do to take all the nonsense out of the world.
While thousands of learned fools are hard at work trying to
stupefy mankind, we must be permitted sometimes to indulge in
absurdities of a less weighty kind in order to counteract
them."

And while we are discussing the weather, let me not forget to
allude to the most remarkable of Judge Pitman's
peculiarities. He is the only man in the world of whom I know
anything who is always satisfied with the weather. No matter
what the condition of the atmosphere, he is contented and
happy, and willing to affirm, that the state of things at any
given moment is the very best that could have been devised.

In summer, when the mercury bolted up among the nineties, the
judge would come to the front door with beads of perspiration
standing out all over his red face, and would look at the sky
and say, "Splendid! perfectly splendid! Noble weather for the
poor and for the ice companies and the washerwomen! I never
saw sich magnificent weather for dryin' clothes. They don't
shake up any such climate as this in Italy. Gimme me my
umbreller, Harriet, while I sit out yer on the steps and
enjoy it."

In winter, when the mercury would creep down fifteen degrees
below zero, and the cold was nearly severe enough to freeze
the inside of Vesuvius solid to the centre of the globe,
Pitman would sit out on my fence and exclaim, "By gracious,
Adeler! did you ever see sich weather as this? I like an
atmosphere that freezes up yer very marrer. It helps the coal
trade an' gives us good skeetin'. Don't talk of summer-time
to me. Gimme cold, and give it to me stiff."

When there was a drought, Pitman used to meet me in the
street and remark, "No rain yet, I see! Magnificent, isn't
it? I want my weather dry, I want it with the dampness left
out. Moisture breeds fevers and ague, an' ruins yer boots. If
there's anything I despise, it's to carry an umbreller. No
rain for me, if you please."

When it rained for a week and flooded the country, the judge
often dropped in to see me and to observe, "I dunno how you
feel about this yer rain, Adeler, but it allers seems to me
that the heavens never drop no blessin's but when we have a
long wet spell. It makes the corn jump an' cleans the sewers
an' keeps the springs from gittin' too dry. I wouldn't give a
cent to live in a climate where there was no rain. Put me on
the Nile, an' I'd die in a week. Soak me through an' through
to the inside of my bones, and I feel as if life was bright
and beautiful, an' sorrer of no account."

On a showery day, when the sun shone brightly at one
moment and at the next the rain poured in torrents, the judge
has been known to stand at the window and exclaim, "Harriet,
if you'd've asked me how I liked the weather, I'd've said,
just as it is now. What I want is weather that is streaked
like a piece of fat an' lean bacon—a little shine an' a
little rain. Mix 'em up an' give us plenty of both, an’ I'm
yer man."

The judge is always happy in a thunder-storm, and one day,
after the lightning had knocked down two of his best apple
trees and splintered them into fragments, and the wind had
torn his chimney to pieces, I went over to see him. He was
standing by the prostrate trees, and he at once remarked,
"Did you ever know of a man havin' sich luck as this? I was
goin' to chop down them two trees tomorrer, an' as that
chimney never draw'd well, I had concluded to have it
rebuilt. An' that gorgeous old storm has fixed things just
the way I want 'em. Put me in a thunder-storm an' let the
lightnin' play around me, an' I'm at home. I'd rather have
one storm that 'd tear the bowels out of the American
continent than a dozen of yer little dribblin' waterin'-pot
showers. If I can't have a rippin' and roarin' storm, I don't
want none."

They say here in the village, but I do not believe it, that
one day the judge was upon his roof fixing a shingle, when a
tornado struck him, lifted him off, carried him a quarter of
a mile, and dashed him with such terrible force against a
fence that his leg was broken. As they carried him home, he
opened his eyes languidly and said, "Immortal Moses! What a
storm that was! When it does blow, it suits me if it blows
hard. I'd give both legs if we could have a squall like that
every day. I—I—" Then he fainted.

If contentment is happiness, then the life of Pitman is an
uninterrupted condition of bliss.






CHAPTER XVIII.
TROUBLE FOR THE HERO AND HEROINE—A BROKEN ENGAGEMENT AND A
FORLORN DAMSEL—BOB PARKER'S SUFFERING—A FORMIDABLE ENCOUNTER—
THE PECULIAR CONDUCT OF A DUMB ANIMAL—COOLEY'S BOY AND HIS
HOME DISCIPLINE—A STORY OF AN ECHO.

E had been talking of asking the Magruders to come to take
tea with us, so that the two families, which were now to be
brought into close relations, might become better acquainted.
But one evening, just as I had settled myself for a
comfortable perusal of the paper, Miss Magruder was ushered
into the room by the servant. It was plainly evident from her
appearance that she was in distress from some cause. We
should have guessed from her visit at such an hour
unaccompanied by any one that all was not right, even if her
countenance had not manifested extreme agitation. After the
usual salutation she asked,

"Is Mr. Parker not at home?"

"He has not yet returned from the city," I said. "I suppose
be has been detained for some reason. It is probable that he
will be here presently."

"I wanted to see him," she said, hesitatingly. "I am afraid
you'll think it very queer for me to come here at such a
strange time; but—but"—and here her voice quavered a little—
"but oh, something dreadful has happened—something very, very
dreadful."

Then the tears began to come into her pretty brown eyes, and
the little maid, after striving desperately to restrain them
and to retain her composure, buried her face in her hands and
began to sob. There was a woman by her side in a moment to
comfort her and to seek her confidence; but it was very
awkward for me. I was not quite certain whether I ought not
to fly from the room and permit the two to be alone. But I
remained with mingled feelings of sympathy and curiosity, and
with an indistinct notion that the forlorn damsel before me
regarded me as a flinty-hearted brute because I didn't
express violent indignation at her ill-treatment. I should
have done so if I had had any conception of the nature of the
wrong endured by her. At last, when she had obtained relief
in a good cry—and it is surprising how much better a troubled
woman feels when she has cried and wiped her weeping eyes—
Bessie told us the story.

"Father came to me to-day," she said, "and told me that he
had heard some dreadful things about Robert; and he said he
could not consent to my marriage with such a man, and that
our engagement must be broken off."

"What kind of things?" indignantly demanded Mrs. Adeler,
whose family pride was aroused; "what did he hear?"

"Oh, something perfectly awful!" exclaimed Bessie, looking up
with fresh tears in her eyes. "He said Robert drank a great
deal and that he was very often intoxicated."

"What an outrageous falsehood!" exclaimed Mrs. Adeler.

"I told father it was," said Bessie; "but he said he knew it
was true, and, worse than that, that Robert not only kept
very bad company in the city, but that he was an atheist—that
he only came to church in order to deceive us."

If the late Mr. Fahrenheit had had to indicate the warmth of
Mrs. Adeler's indignation at this moment, he would have given
215° as the figure. "I declare," she said, "that is the
wickedest falsehood I ever heard. I will call upon Mrs.
Magruder to-morrow morning and tell her so."

"And father insisted," said Bessie, "that I should write a
formal note to Robert, breaking our engagement and asking him
to discontinue his visits to our house. I did so, but I could
not bear to have him think me so heartless, and I felt as if
I must come here and tell him about it before the note
reached him. Please don't think it strange that I came, and
don't let any one know it." Then Bessie began to sob again.

"Certainly, Bessie," I replied, "it was very proper for you
to do as you have done. Your father has been unjust to you
and to Bob. Robert shall see him and demand an explanation.
But who do you suppose told your father these things?"

"I have no idea. But it must have been somebody who was
opposed to our marriage, and who hated Robert. I can't
believe that any one would have invented such stories without
a very malicious motive."

"Well, Bessie, the only thing we can do now is to permit the
matter to rest as it is until we have an opportunity to
disprove these slanders. Let me go home with you; and when
Bob comes in, I will tell him all about it. He shall call
upon your father. I will do so myself to-morrow. Bob has been
unfairly used. He is as proper a youth as any in the land,
and worthy of the love of any woman."

Then I escorted Bessie to her home, and upon my way back I
met Bob coming in hot haste toward me. He arrived at the
house just after our departure; and a few words from Mrs.
Adeler having placed him in command of the situation, he
started off at once with the hope to overtake us and to have
a few words with Bessie. He was breathless and in a condition
of frenzy. He at first insisted upon storming the castle of
the Magruders at once for the purpose of assailing the dragon
that guarded his fair lady. But I showed him that it would
perhaps injure Bessie if he should excite suspicion that she
had visited him, and that it would be ridiculous at any rate
to attack old Magruder at that time of night and while he was
in such a state of excitement. It was finally agreed that we
should wait until morning, and that then I should first visit
Mr. Magruder and obtain an explanation from him, so that Bob
could go there afterward fully prepared to vindicate himself.

"I'll bet anything," said Bob, as we walked home, "I know who
is the author of these slanders. It is Cooley. He don't like
you or any of your family, and he has taken this means of
injuring us. If it is he, I'll give him an aggravated case of
assault and battery to settle. I'll thrash him within an inch
of his life."

"I don't believe Cooley did it," I replied. "It is not the
kind of business that he would care to trouble himself with.
It is some one who has an interest in separating you and
Bessie."

"I don't know of any such person," said Bob.

"Perhaps Smiley did it."

"That may be," replied Bob; "he has little enough principle,
but I hardly think he would display so much malice, Besides,
he knows very well Bessie would not accept him under any
circumstances."

"Well, let us wait patiently for further developments. It is
not worth while to denounce any one until we can ascertain
who the offender is."

Bob had been delayed in the city by a visit to his parents,
who were going north for a week or two, and they consigned to
his care his younger brother, who came with him to our house
to remain during the absence of his father and mother. The
boy was at the house when we reached it; and when the time
came for him to go to bed, it was arranged that he should
sleep with Bob. The consequences of this were somewhat
peculiar. The youngster, it appears, has a habit of walking
in his sleep, and he was so afraid that he would do so on
this night, in a strange house, that Bob tied a strong piece
of twine about the lad's waist and fastened the other end to
his own body, so that he would be roused by any attempt on
the part of his brother to prowl about the room. It turned
out, however, that Bob was the, restless one. According to
his own account, he got to dreaming of his troubles. He
imagined that he was engaged in a frightful combat with Mr.
Magruder, and that, at the last, that amiable old gentleman
pursued him with a drawn dagger with the intent to butcher
him. In his alarm Bob pushed over to Henry's side of the bed,
and finally, as the visionary Magruder still appeared to be
thirsty for his blood, he climbed over Henry, got upon the
floor and hid himself beneath the bed. When the apparition of
the sanguinary parent disappeared, Bob, still soundly asleep,
must haveemerged from his hiding-place upon the side of the
bed opposite that at which he entered it. At any rate, the
cord ran from Henry's body beneath the bed clear around until
it connected with Bob. Early in the morning Bob moved over
suddenly toward his brother; and although he was more than
half asleep, he was amazed to see Henry drop over upon the
floor. Bob instantly jumped out after him, and as he did so,
he was even more surprised to perceive the child dart under
the bed. He followed Henry; and at the first movement in that
direction, Henry shot up off the floor, and was heard rolling
swiftly across the mattress above, only to disappear again
over the side as Bob came once more to the surface. By this
time both of them were wide awake and able to comprehend the
phenomenon. This is Mr. Parker's version. It is probably
exaggerated slightly. My private impression is that Henry was
pulled out upon the floor and under the bed, and that the
exercise ended immediately. Henry does not remember the
particulars with sufficient distinctness to be considered a
thoroughly reliable witness. His mind is clear upon only one
point: he is fully persuaded that he will not sleep in
harness with Bob again

.

Upon the day following Bessie's visit I called at Magruder's,
in accordance with my agreement with Bob. The servant said
Mr. Magruder had gone out, but that he would probably be home
in a few moments. I declined an invitation to go in the
house. It was a fine day, and I preferred to walk up and down
the porch while waiting, When a considerable time had elapsed
and Magruder did not come, I threw myself upon one of the
chairs on the porch and began to read the Argus.



While I was sitting there Magruder's dog came bounding up the
yard, and when he saw me instantly manifested a desire to
investigate me. I have never liked Magruder's dog; he is very
large, and he has an extremely bad reputation. When he
approached me, he looked at me savagely, and growled in such
a manner that cold chills began to run up and down my back.
Then the dog walked up and sniffed my legs with an
earnestness of purpose that I had never expected to see
displayed by a dumb animal. During this operation I
maintained a condition of profound repose. No man will ever
know how quiet I was. It is doubtful if any human being ever
before became so thoroughly still until his immortal soul
went to the land of everlasting rest.

When the ceremony was ended, the dog lay down close to
the chair. As soon as I felt certain that the animal was
asleep, I thought I would go home without seeing Mr.
Magruder; but when I attempted to rise, the dog leaped up and
growled so fiercely that I sat down again at once. Then I
thought perhaps it would be better not to go home. It
occurred to me, however, that it would be as well to call
some one to remove the dog, in case circumstances should make
it desirable for me to depart. But at the very first shout
the animal jumped to his feet, gave a fiendish bark and began
to take a few more inquisitorial smells at my legs. And
whenever I shuffled my feet, or attempted to turn the Argus
over in order to continue an article on to the following
page, or made the slightest movement, that infamous dog was
up and at me. Once, when I was positively compelled to
sneeze, I thought, from the indignation boisterously
manifested by the dog, that my hour at last had come.

Finally, Cooley's dog, which happened to be in the
neighborhood, became engaged in an angry controversy with
another dog in the street in front of me. Magruder's dog was
wide awake in a moment; and after turning a regretful glance
at me, as if he knew he was deliberately and foolishly 
throwing away a chance of obtaining several glorious bites,
he dashed down the walk and over the fence for the purpose of
participating in the discussion between his two friends.

I did not actually run, because that would not have
been dignified, and the servant-girl, looking from the
kitchen window, and not understanding the nature of the
emergency, might have suspected me of emotional insanity. But
I walked rapidly—very rapidly—to the rear fence of the yard,
and climbed over it. As I reached the top of the fence, I saw
the dog coming at full gallop down the yard. He was probably
chagrined, but I did not remain to see how he bore it. I went
directly home. Mr. Parker may manage his own love affairs in
the future. I shall not approach Mr. Magruder upon this
disagreeable subject again. I have enough to do to attend to
my own business.

When I reached home, I found Judge Pitman waiting for me. He
came in for the purpose of borrowing my axe for a few
moments. As we went around to the rear of the house to get
it, the judge said:

"I reckon you don't use no terbacker, do you?"

"I smoke sometimes; that is all."

"Well, I was jist feelin's if I wanted a chaw, an' I thought
p'rhaps you might have one about you. Seein' Cooley over
there on his porch put me in mind of it."

"That is rather a singular circumstance. Why should a view of
Cooley suggest such a thing?"

"'Tis kinder sing'lar; but you see," said the judge,
"Cooley was a-tellin' me yesterday mornin' about somethin'
that occurred the day before at his house. The old woman is
opposed to his chawin', an' she makes it stormy for him when
he does. So he never uses no terbacker 'round home, an' he
told her he'd given it up. The other day, just as he was
goin' in to supper, he pulled out his handkercher, an' out
come a plug of terbacker 'long with it. He didn't know it,
but directly Mrs. Cooley lit on it, an' she walked up to him
a' wanted to know if it was his. It was a little rough, you
understand, but he had presence of mind enough to turn to his
boy and say, 'Great Heavens! is it possible you've begun to
chow this ornary stuff? What d'you mean by sich conduct?
Haven't I told you often enough to let ter-backer alone?
Commere to me this minute, you rascal!' Cooley licked him
like the nation, an' then threw the terbacker out the winder
onto the porch, where he could git it agin in the mornin'."

"That was pretty severe treatment of the boy."

"An' Cooley says to me, 'By gracious, judge! s'pose'n my
children had all been girls! It makes an old father's heart
glad when he thinks he has a boy he can depend upon at sich
times!' Healthy old parent, ain't he?"

"The word 'healthy' hardly expresses with sufficient vigor
the infamy of his conduct."

"Cooley never did treat that there boy right," said the
judge, as he seated himself on the saw-horse in the woodshed
and locked his hands over one of his knees, evidently with
the intention to have some sociable conversation. "He never
behaved like a father to him. He brought up that there child
to lie. That echo business, f'r instance; it was scand'lus in
him."

"To what do you refer?"

"Why, afore Cooley come yer to live he kep' a hotel up in the
Lehigh Valley—a fashionable kinder tavern, I reckon; an'
there was another man about two miles furder up who had a
bigger hotel. You could stand on this other man's porch an'
make a splendid echo by whistlin' or hollerin'. You could
hear the noise agin a dozen times. Leastways, Cooley told me
so. Well, Cooley, you know, hated like pisin to be beaten on
that echo, an' so he kinder concluded to git one up for
himself. He made that there boy of his'n go over on the
mountain across the river an' hide among the bushes, an' then
he would take people up on the roof of the house and holler,
an' the boy would holler back agin. He told everybody that
the echo could only be heard on the roof, an' he kep' the
trap door locked, so's nobody would find him out."

"That was a poor kind of a swindle."

"Yes, sir. Well, that boy, you 'bserve, gradually got rusty
in the business an' tired of it, an' sometimes he'd take
another boy over with him, an' they'd git to playin' an'
forgit to answer. It was embarrassin' for Cooley, an' the
secret begun to leak out. But one day the whole concern was
bu'sted. Cooley took a lot of folks from the city, among 'em
some o' them newspaper people, an' for a while the boy worked
all right. But he had another feller with him, and he kep' a-
repeatin' things that no-body said. Cooley stood it for a
while, though he was mad as fury; an' at last, when somebody
tried to start the echo, there was no answer. They all
thought it was mighty queer, but after callin' a good many
times, the boy come out in full view an' yelled back, 'I'm
not a-goin' to answer any more. Bill Johnson won't gimme my
knife, an' I won't holler till I git it; blamed if I do.'
Cooley tells me that the manner in which he sailed across the
creek after that child was somethin' awful to behold. But it
knocked him, sir. It closed him up. Them newspaper men
started the thing on him, an' they run him so hard that he
had to quit. He sold out and come yer to live. But is it any
wonder that boy's spiled? Cooley'd spile a blessed young
angel the way he goes on. But I must say good-mornin'. Much
obleeged for the axe. Good-bye."

And the judge went home meditating upon Cooley's unfitness
for the duties of a parent. I would like to know if that echo
story is true. I have no doubt the judge received it from
Cooley, but it sounds as if the latter ingenious gentleman
might have wrenched it from his imagination.






CHAPTER XIX.
THE CERTIFICATE CONCERNING PITMAN'S HAIR—UNENDURABLE
PERSECUTION—A WARNING TO MEN WITH BALDHEADED FRIENDS—AN
EXPLANATION—THE SLANDERER DISCOVERED —BENJAMIN P. GUNN—A
MODEL LIFE INSURANCE AGENT.



 HAVE been the victim of a somewhat singular persecution for
several weeks past. When we came here to live, Judge Pitman
was partially bald. Somebody induced him to apply to his head
a hair restorative made by a Chicago man named Pulsifer.
After using this liquid for a few months, the judge was
gratified to find that his hair had returned; and as he
naturally regarded the remedy with admiration, he concluded
that it would be simply fair to give expression to his
feelings in some form. As I happened to be familiar with all
the facts of the case, the judge induced me to draw up a
certificate affirming them over my signature. This he mailed
to Pulsiter. I have not yet ceased to regret the weakness
which permitted me to stand sponsor for Judge Pitman's hair.
Of course, Pulsifer immediately inserted the certificate;
with my name and residence attached to it, in half the papers
in the country, as a displayed advertisement; beginning with
the words, "HOPE FOR THE BALDHEADED; THE MOST REMARKABLE CURE
ON RECORD," in the largest capital letters.

I have had faith in advertising since that time. And Pulsifer
had confidence in it too, for he wrote to me to know what I
would take to get him up a series of similar certificates of
cures performed by his other patent medicines. He had a corn-
salve which dragged a little in its sales, and he was
prepared to offer me a commission if I would write him a
strong letter to the effect that six or eight frightful corns
had been eradicated from my feet with his admirable
preparation. He was in a position, also, to do something
handsome if I could describe a few miraculous cures that had
been effected by his Rheumatic Lotion, or if I would name
certain ruined stomachs which had, as it were, been born
again through the influence of Pulsifer's Herb Bitters; and
from the manner in which he wrote, I think he would have
taken me into partnership if I had consented to write an
assurance that his Ready Relief had healed a bad leg of
eighteen years' standing, and that I could never feel that my
duty was honorably performed until he sent me a dozen bottles
more for distribution among my friends whose legs were in
that defective and tiresome condition. I was obliged to
decline Pulsifer's generous offer.

I heard with singular promptness from other medical men.
Fillemup & Killem forwarded some of their Hair Tonic, with a
request for me to try it on any bald heads I happened to
encounter, and report. Doser & Co. sent on two packages of
their Capillary Pills, with a suggestion to the effect that
if Pitman lost his hair again he would get it back finally by
following the enclosed directions. I also heard from Brown &
Bromley, the agents for Johnson's Scalp Awakener. They sent
me twelve bottles for distribution among my bald friends;
then Smith & Smithson wrote to say that a cask of their
Vesuvius Wash for the hair would be delivered in my cellar by
the express company; and a man called on me from Jones,
Butler & Co. with a proposition to pump out my vinegar
barrel, and fill it with Balm of Peru for the gratuitous use
of the afflicted in the vicinity.

But this persecution was simply unalloyed felicity when
compared with the suffering that came in other forms. I will
not attempt to give the number of the letters I received. I
cherish a conviction that the mail received at our post-
office doubled the first week after Judge Pitman's cure was
announced to a hairless world. I think every bald-headed man
in the Tropic of Cancer must have written to me at least
twice upon the subject of Pulsifer's Renovator and Pitman's
hair. Persons dropped me a line to inquire if Pitman's
baldness was hereditary; and if so, if it came from his
father's or his mother's side. One man, a phrenologist, sent
on a plaster head mapped out into town-lots, with a
suggestion that I should ink over the bumps that had been
barest and most fertile in the case of Pitman, He said he had
a little theory which he wanted to demonstrate. A man in San
Francisco wrote to inquire if my Pitman was the same Pitman
who came out to California in 1849 with a bald head; and if
he was, would I try to collect two dollars Pitman had
borrowed from him in that year? The superintendent of a
Sunday-school in Vermont forwarded eight pages of foolscap
covered with an argument supporting the theory that it was
impious to attempt to force hair to grlow upon a head which
had been made bald, because although Elisha was bald, we find
no record in the Bible that he used renovator of any kind. He
warned Pitman to beware of Absalom's fate, and to avoid
riding mules out in the woods. A woman in Snyder county,
Penna., sent me a poem inspired by the incident, and entitled
"Lines on the Return of Pitman's Hair." A party in Kansas
desired to know whether I thought Pulsifer's Renovator could
be used beneficially by a man who had been scalped. Two men
in New Jersey wrote, in a manner totally irrelevant to the
subject, to inquire if I could get each of them a good hired
girl. I received a confidential letter from a man who was
willing to let me into a "good thing" if I had five hundred
dollars cash capital. Mrs. Singerly, of Frankford, related
that she had shaved her dog, and shaved him too close, and
she would be relieved if I would inform her if the Renovator
would make hair grow on a dog. A devoted mother in Rhode
Island said her little boy had accidentally drank a bottle of
the stuff, and she would go mad unless I could assure her
that there was no danger of her child having his stomach
choked up with hair. And over eleven hundred boys inquired
what effect the Renovator would have on the growth of
whiskers which betrayed an inclination to stagnation.

But the visitors were a more horrible torment. Bald men came
to see me in droves. They persecuted me at home and abroad.
If I went to church, the sexton would call me out during the
prayers to see a man in the vestibule who wished to ascertain
if Pitman merely bathed his head or rubbed the medicine in
with a brush. When I went to a party, some bald-headed
miscreant would stop me in the midst of the dance to ask if
Pitman's hair began to grow in the full of the moon or when
it was new. While I was being shaved, some one would bolt
into the shop and insist, as the barber held me by the nose,
upon knowing whether Pitman wore ventilators in his hat. If I
attended a wedding, as likely as not a bare-headed outlaw
would stand by me at the altar and ask if Pitman ever slept
in nightcaps; and more than once I was called out of bed at
night by wretches who wished to learn, before they left the
town, if I thought it hurt the hair to part it behind.

It became unendurable. I issued orders to the servants to
admit to the house no man with a bald head. But that very day
a stranger obtained admission to the parlor; and when I went
down to see him, he stepped softly around, closed all the
doors mysteriously, and asked me, in a whisper, if any one
could hear us. Then he pulled off a wig; and handing me a
microscope, he requested me to examine his scalp and tell him
if there was any hope. I sent him over to see Pitman; and I
gloat over the fact that he bored Pitman for two hours with
his baldness.



I am sorry now that I ever wrote anything upon the subject of
his hair. A bald Pitman, I know, is less fascinating than a
Pitman with hair; but rather than have suffered this misery,
I would prefer a Pitman without an eye-winker, or fuzz enough
on him to make a camel's-hair pencil. But I shall hardly give
another certificate of cure in any event. If I should see a
patent-medicine man take a mummy which died the year Joseph
was sold into Egypt, and dose it until it kicked off its rags
and danced the polka mazourka while it whistled the tune, I
would die at the stake sooner than acknowledge the miracle on
paper. Pitman's hair winds me up as far as medical
certificates are concerned.

Bob has succeeded in obtaining from Mr. Magruder an
explanation of the interference of that stern parent with the
progress of his love affair, and we hope now to secure a
happy adjustment of the difficulty.

"When I entered the room," said Bob, "the old man looked
gloomy and stiff, as if he regarded me as a totally depraved
being, too far gone in iniquity to be worth an effort to
effect a reform. I went right at him. I told him I had heard
that some one had made certain charges against me which were
likely to hurt my reputation, and that it was because of
these that he had refused to permit me to marry his daughter.

"He said I had stated the case correctly. Then I asked him to
give me the name of the person who had made these
accusations. He hesitated for a few moments, and I then
declared that the charges were false and slanderous, and
asserted that I had a right to know who the author of them
was.

"After thinking over the matter for a while, he said, 'Well,
Mr. Parker, I believe you have that right. I have thought
lately that I did not perhaps treat you very fairly in not
bringing you face to face in the first place with the man who
accused you. But I almost pledged myself to regard his
statements as confidential; and as the evidence seemed to be
overwhelming against you, I concluded not to offer you the
opportunity. Mrs. Magruder takes a different view of the
matter. She thinks you should not be condemned without a
hearing, and she distrusts your accuser. His name is Smiley—
Lieutenant Smiley.'

"Then the old man went on," said Bob, "and told me that
Smiley had sought a private interview with him, at which
Smiley had declared that I was not only a debauchee, but an
atheist. He made this statement, he told Mr. Magruder, with
reluctance and regret, but he felt that as a friend of the
family he had a duty to perform which was imperative. Smiley
declared that he had frequently seen me under the influence
of liquor, and that I had often attacked him for professing
to believe in the Christian religion. A splendid old
professor of religion he is!" exclaimed Mr. Parker. "And
then," continued Bob, "Mr. Magruder said Smiley produced two
letters, one from a man named Dewey who pretended to be the
pastor of a church in Philadelphia, from which he said I was
dismissed for expressing atheistical opinions, and the other
from a certain Samuel Stonebury, wherein Samuel gave me a
dreadful character for honesty and sobriety,

"Thereupon I informed Mr. Magruder that I knew of no
clergyman named Dewey, and that I didn't believe such a man
existed in Philadelphia; that I never belonged to any church,
and certainly was never kicked out of one because of my
atheistical opinions, for I never entertained such views. I
informed him also that Mr. Stonebury was a youth who was once
employed in our store, and who was discharged because I
discovered that he had been stealing. How Smiley found him I
can't imagine. They must have had a natural tendency to
gravitate toward each other as children of the same old
father of lies.

"Then Mr. Magruder said that if I could prove these facts he
would not only hand Bessie over to me again, but he would
also make me a very humble apology. I promised to accomplish
these results, and to-morrow I will set about the work. I
have no doubt at all that Stonebury wrote the letter signed
'Dewey,' and that Smiley suggested that playful little dodge
to him. I will move on Smiley's works when I meet him. He is
the wickedest kind of a scoundrel."

And so the case of Parker versus Smiley stands at present. I
should have a higher respect for Magruder if he had acted
more justly with Bob in the first place. If Mrs. Magruder's
instinct and common sense had not induced her to regard
Smiley with suspicion, I am afraid that Bob's wrongs would
never have been righted. The doctor is evidently the wiser
and better person of the two, and I am not surprised now that
she keeps her husband a little in the background.

Some relatives of the Magruders named Kemper came to the
village to live a few weeks ago, and they rented a house not
far from mine. We have a life insurance agent in the town
named Benjamin P. Gunn, and he is decidedly the most
enterprising and indefatigable of the fraternity of which he
is a member. He has already bored everybody in the county
nearly to death, and it is easy to imagine the delight he
feels when a new victim comes within his reach. The Kempers
were hardly fixed in their new home when Gunn, who had been
awaiting with impatience a chance to attack them, one morning
called for the purpose of ascertaining if he could induce Mr.
Kemper to take out a policy of insurance upon his life. In
response to his summons Mrs. Kemper came into the parlor to
see him. The following conversation then ensued:

"I suppose," said Gunn, "Mr. Kemper has no insurance on
his life?"

"No," said Mrs. Kemper.

"Well, I'd like to get him to take a policy in our company.
It's the safest in the world—the largest capital, smallest
rates and biggest dividends."

"Mr. Kemper don't take much interest in such things now,"
said Mrs. K.

"Well, madam, but he ought to, in common justice to you. No
man knows when he will die; and by paying a ridiculously
small sum now, Mr. Kemper can leave his family in affluence.
I'd like to hand you, for him, a few pamphlets containing
statistics upon the subject; may I?"

"Of course, if you wish to."

"Don't you think he can be induced to insure?" asked Gunn.

"I hardly think so," replied Mrs. Kemper.

"He is in good health, I suppose? Has he complained lately of
being sick?"

"Not lately."

"May I ask if he has any considerable wealth?"

"Not a cent."

"Then, of course, he must insure. No poor man can afford to
neglect such an opportunity. I suppose he travels sometimes—
goes about in railroad cars and other dangerous places?"

"No, he keeps very quiet."

"Man of steady habits, I s'pose?"

"Very steady."

"He is the very man I want," said Gunn. "I know l can sell
him a policy."

"I don't think you can," replied Mrs. Kemper.

"Why? When will he be home? I'll call on him. I don't know of
any reason why I shouldn't insure him."

"I know," replied Mrs. K.

"Why?"

"He has been dead twenty-seven years!" said the widow.

Then Mr. Gunn said "good-morning," and returned to his
office. The widow must have told the story to some one,
probably to Magruder, for it was soon known all over town,
and those who had suffered from an excess of Gunn gloried in
his discomfiture. As this was the first time in his career
that he had ever been down, it is not surprising that several
of his enemies should improve the opportunity by giving him a
few vigorous kicks. The most venomous attack upon him
however, appeared in the Argus. It came, I think, from that
remarkable medical man Dr. Tobias Jones, who dislikes Gunn
because he employs a rival physician, Dr. Brindley, to
examine persons who apply for policies. He called the article

A LIFE INSURANCE AGENT.

His name was Benjamin P. Gunn, and he was the agent for a
life insurance company. He came around to my office fourteen
times in one morning to see if he could not persuade me to
take out a policy. He used to waylay me on the street, at
church, in my own house, and bore me about that policy. If I
went to the opera, Gunn would buy the seat next to me, and
sit there the whole evening talking about sudden death and
the advantages of the ten-year plan. If I got into a railway
car, Gunn would come rushing in and sit by my side, and drag
out a lot of mortality tables and begin to explain how I
could gouge a fortune out of his company. If I sat down to
dinner in a restaurant, up would come Gunn; and seizing the
chair next to me, he would tell a cheering anecdote about a
man who insured in his company for $50,000 only last week,
and was buried yesterday. If I attended the funeral of a
departed friend, and wept as they threw the earth upon his
coffin, I would hear a whisper; and turning around, there
would be the indomitable Benjamin P. Gunn, bursting to say,
"Poor Smith! Knew him well. Insured for ten thousand in our
company. Widow left in comfortable circumstances. Let me take
your name. Shall I?"

He followed me everywhere, until at last I got so sick
of Gunn's persecutions that I left town suddenly one evening
and hid myself in a distant city, hoping to get rid of him.
At the end of two weeks I returned, reaching home at one
o'clock in the morning. I had hardly got into bed before
there was a ring at the door-bell. I looked out, and there
was Gunn with another person. Mr. Gunn observed that he
expected my return, and thought he would call about that
insurance policy. He said he had the doctor with him, and if
I would come down he would take my name and have me examined
immediately. I was too indignant to reply. I shut the window
with a slam and went to bed again. After breakfast in the
morning I opened the front door, and there was Gunn sitting
on the steps with his doctor, waiting for me. He had been
there all night. As I came out they seized me and tried to
undress me there on the pavement in order to examine me. I
retreated and locked myself up in the garret, with orders to
admit nobody to the house until I came downstairs.

But Gunn wouldn't be baffled. He actually rented the house
next door and stationed himself in the garret adjoining mine.
When he got fixed, he spent his time pounding on the
partition and crying, "Hallo! I say! how about that policy?
Want to take it out now?" And then—he would tell me some more
anecdotes about men who were cut off immediately after paying
the first premium. But I paid no attention to him and made no
noise. Then he was silent for a while.

Suddenly the trap-door of my garret was wrenched off; and
upon looking up, I saw Gunn, with the doctor and a crowbar
and a lot of death-rates, coming down the ladder at me. I
fled from the house to the Presbyterian church close by, and
paid the sexton twenty dollars to let me climb up to the
point of the steeple and sit astride of the ball. I promised
him twenty more if he would exclude everybody from that
steeple for a week. Once safely on the ball, three hundred
feet from the earth, I made myself comfortable with the
thought that I had Gunn at a disadvantage, and I determined
to beat him finally if I had to stay there for a month.

About an hour afterward, while I was looking at the superb
view to the west, I heard a rustling sound upon the other
side of the steeple. I looked around, and there was Benjamin
P. Gunn creeping up the side of the spire in a balloon, in
which was the doctor and the tabular estimates of the losses
of his company from the Tontine system. As soon as Gunn
reached the ball he threw his grappling-iron into the
shingles of the steeple, and asked me at what age my father
died, and if any of my aunts ever had consumption or liver
complaint.

Without waiting to reply, I slid down the steeple to the
ground and took the first train for the Mississippi Valley.
In two weeks I was in Mexico. I determined to go to the
interior and seek some wild spot in some elevated region
where no Gunn would ever dare to come. I mounted a mule, and
paid a guide to lead me to the summit of Popocatepetl. We
arrived at the foot of the mountain at noon. We toiled upward
for about four hours. Just before reaching the top I heard
the sound of voices; and upon rounding a point of rocks, whom
should I see but Benjamin P. Gunn, seated on the very edge of
the crater, explaining the endowment plan to his guide and
stupefying him with a mortality table, while the doctor had
the other guide a few yards off, examining him to see if he
was healthy. Mr. Gunn arose and said he was glad to see me,
because now we could talk over that business about the policy
without fear of interruption. In a paroxysm of rage I pushed
him backward into the crater, and he fell a thousand feet
below with a heavy thud. As he struck the bottom I heard a
voice screaming out something about "non-forfeiture;" but
there was a sudden convulsion of the mountain, a cloud of
smoke, and I heard no more.

But on the following Thursday an eruption began, and the
first thing that was thrown out was Benjamin P. Gunn.
scorched, with his hair singed off and in a profuse
perspiration, but still active and ready for business. If I
should be killed, I verily believe Gunn would commit suicide
in order that he might follow me into the next world.

Of course this is mere burlesque and it is hardly fair
treatment of Gunn. But I am gratified to learn that such
ridicule does not hurt his feelings. On the day the article
appeared he called to see Colonel Bangs. The colonel
apprehended an assault; and rallying his clerks and reporters
around him, he seized a club and gave orders that Gunn should
be admitted. But Benjamin did not intend war. He grasped the
colonel's hand; and after thanking him for such a handsome
gratuitous advertisement, he pulled a schedule out of his
pocket and argued with Bangs until the latter in despair
agreed to take out another policy for ten thousand dollars in
Gunn's company.

We do not regard Lieutenant Smiley as a very entertaining
person at present, and of course he is not quoted with
enthusiasm. But during the prevalence of the excitement
created by the victory over Pitman's baldness, Smiley related
an anecdote bearing upon the subject of hair which combined
instruction with amusement in a remarkable degree, and it may
be profitable to reproduce it here as an illustration of the
demoralizing tendencies of the red man.

During the recent visit of a party of Indians to the East,
one of the number, Squatting Bear, was observed to behave
himself in a very remarkable and mysterious manner. He
separated himself from his companions on one occasion for
several hours, and was then seen returning dragging a huge
Saratoga trunk behind him through the streets with a string.
When he reached his lodgings with the trunk, the other
Indians were puzzled. Some of them believed the trunk to be a
model for a new kind of wigwam with a Mansard roof, while
others conceived the idea that it was a patent bath-tub of
some peculiar sort, and that Squatting Bear, in a moment of
mental aberration, had been seized with an inexplicable and
unprecedented desire to wash himself. The souls of the
savages burned with fiery indignation as they contemplated
the possibility of the adoption of this revolutionary,
enervating and demoralizing practice of the pale faces by the
noble red man. But when they questioned Squatting Bear and
remonstrated with him, that incomprehensible brave merely
placed his copper-colored finger upon his burnt-umber nose
and winked solemnly with his right eye.

The trunk was carried through to the wigwam of Squatting Bear
unopened, and within the precincts of his home it was hidden
finally from view, and was soon entirely forgotten.

In the tribe the brave who killed the largest number of
enemies in any given year and secured the usual trophies of
victory was entitled to occupy the position as chief.
Squatting Bear was known to have ardent aspirations for the
office, and he worked hard to win it. For a while after his
return he was always foremost in every fight: and when the
scalps were counted around the camp-fire, he invariably had
secured the greatest number. Gradually, however, certain of
the braves were impressed with the notion that Squatting's
trophies sometimes did not bear a very correct proportion to
the ferocity of the contest or to the number of the slain.
Several times, after a brief skirmish in which ten or fifteen
men were killed, Squatting would come sidling home with as
many scalps as there were dead men; and at the same time the
other warriors would together have nearly as many more.

The braves thought it was queer, but they did not give the
subject very serious attention until after the massacre of a
certain band of emigrants which had passed close by the camp
of the tribe. There were just twenty persons in the company,
and after the butchery several Indians took the trouble to
count the bodies and to keep tally with a butcher-knife upon
the side of a chip. That night, when the scalps were
numbered, each brave had one or two apiece, but Squatting
Bear handed out exactly forty-seven of the most beautiful
bunches of human hair that had ever been seen west of the
Mississippi. The braves looked cross-eyed at each other and
cleared their throats. Two of their number stole out to the
battlefield for the purpose of counting the bodies again, and
of ascertaining if this had been a menagerie with a few
double-headed persons in the party.

Yes, there lay exactly twenty corpses, and, to make matters
worse, one of them was a bald-headed man who, for additional
security to his scalp, had run a skate-strap over his head
and buckled it under his chin.

When they returned, the entire camp devoted itself to
meditation and calculation.

Twenty men killed and forty-seven scalps in the possession of
a single Indian, without counting those secured by other
participants in the contest! The more the warriors pondered
over this fact, the more perplexing it became. A brave, while
eating his supper and reflecting upon the problem, would
suddenly imagine he saw his way clear, and he would stop,
with his mouth full of baked dog, and fix his eyes upon the
wall and think desperately hard. But the solution invariably
eluded him. Then all of them would glide behind their wigwams
and perform abstruse mathematical calculations upon their
fingers, and they would get sticks and jam the points into
the sand and do hard sums out of their aboriginal arithmetic.
And they would tear around through the Indian rule of three,
and struggle through their own kind of vulgar fractions, and
wrestle with something that they believed to be a
multiplication table. But in vain. Forty-seven scalps off
twenty heads! It seemed incredible and impossible.

They tried it with algebra, and let the number of heads equal
x and the number of scalps equal y, and they multiplied x
into y and subtracted every letter in the alphabet in
succession from the result until their brains reeled; but
still the mystery remained unsolved.

At last a secret council was held, and it was determined that
Squatting Bear must have some powerful and wonderful charm
which enabled him to perform such miracles, and all hands
agreed to investigate the matter upon the first opportunity.
So the next week there was another fight, in which four
persons were killed, and that night Squatting actually had
the audacity to rush out one hundred and eighty-seven scalps,
and to ask those benighted savages, sitting around their
fire, to believe that he had snatched all that hair from
those four heads.

It was too much—much too much; they seized him and drove a
white oak stake through his bosom to hold him still, and then
they proceeded to his wigwam to ascertain how that scalp
business was conducted by the Bear family. They burst open
the Saratoga trunk the first thing, and there they found
fifteen hundred wigs and a keg of red paint, purchased by the
disgraceful aboriginal while in Philadelphia.

That concluded his career. They buried him at once in the
Saratoga trunk, and the wigs with him; and ever since that
time they have elected annually a committee on scalps, whose
business it is to examine every hirsute trophy with a double-
barreled microscope of nine hundred diameters.






CHAPTER XX.
A CERTAIN REMARKABLE BOOK—A FEW SUGGESTIONS RESPECTING
BOSTON—DELUSIONS OF CHILDHOOD—BULLYING GENERAL GAGE—JUDGE
PITMAN AND THE CATECHISM—AN EXTRAORDINARY BLUNDER—THE FACTS
IN THE CASE OF HILLEGASS—A FALSE ALARM.

HILE I was helping one of my youngsters a night or two ago to
master a tough little problem in his arithmetic, I picked up
the history that he had been studying, and as he went off to
bed with the other tiny travelers up the hill of knowledge, I
looked through the volume. It was Goodrich's History of the
United States, for the use of beginners; and it had a very
familiar appearance. I gained my first glimpse of the past
from this very book; and not only could I remember the text
as I turned over the leaves, but the absurd pictures of
General Washington and the surrender of Cornwallis, the
impossible portraits of John Smith and Benjamin Franklin, and
the unnatural illustration of the manner in which the Pilgrim
Fathers landed, seemed like respectable old acquaintances
whom I had known and admired in happier days.

The man who can find one of the books that he studied when he
was a child at school will experience a pleasant sensation if
he will open it and look over its pages. It will recall some
delightful memories, and bring him very close again to the
almost forgotten time when that wretched little book was to
him the mightiest literary achievement in existence. For this
reason I love Goodrich's History; and I will continue to
regard it with affection even though my judgment may not give
it approval as a work of very remarkable excellence.

When Mrs. Adeler descended, after tucking the weary scholars
comfortably in bed, I directed her attention to these facts,
and to some of the peculiarities of Goodrich's effort:

"This little book, Mrs. A., first unlocked for me the door of
history. It is a history of the United States; and as it was
written by a man who lived in Boston and believed in Boston,
it is hardly necessary to say that in my childhood I obtained
from the volume the impression that our beloved native land
consisted chiefly of Boston. I do not wish to revile that
city. It is in many respects a model municipality. It is, I
think, better governed than any other large community in the
land, it has greater intellectual force than any of our
cities, and its people have a stronger and more demonstrative
civic pride. In Boston the best men are usually at the front,
and the conduct of public affairs is not entrusted, as it is
in Philadelphia and other cities, to blackguardly politicians
whom a respectable man would not admit to his house, and who
maintain themselves in power by fraudulent elections and by
stealing the people's money. Every Boston man believes in the
greatness of his city, and is proud of it. That is an
excellent condition of public sentiment, and we may pardon it
even if it does sometimes produce results that are slightly
ridiculous.

"Goodrich was what might be called an excessive Boston man,
and his little history is very apt, unintentionally, to
convey erroneous impressions to the infant mind. In my early
boyhood, being completely saturated with Goodrich, I
entertained an indistinct idea that the eye of Columbus
rested upon Boston long before any other object appeared
above the horizon, and somehow I cherished a conviction that
the natives who greeted him and bowed down at his feet were
men who inhabited Bunker Hill Monument and disported
themselves perpetually among the chambers of Faneuil Hall. I
never doubted that every important event in our annals, from
the landing of those unpleasant old Puritans of the Mayflower
down to the election of Andrew Jackson, occurred in Boston,
and was attributable entirely to the remarkable superiority
of the people of that city. I scoffed at the theory that John
Smith was in Virginia at the time of his salvation by
Pocahontas, and I was even disposed to regard the account of
the signing of the Declaration of Independence at
Philadelphia as a sort of an insignificant 'side show' which
should have been alluded to briefly in a foot-note. I
honestly believed that the one great mistake of George
Washington's life was that he was born elsewhere than in
Boston, and I felt that, however hard such retribution might
appear, he deserved to be considered a little less great on
account of that error.

"As for the war of the Revolution, I could not doubt, while I
maintained my faith in Goodrich, that it was begun by the
high-spirited citizens of Boston in consequence of the wrongs
inflicted upon them by that daring and impious monarch King
George III. It was equally clear that the conflict was
carried on only by the people of Boston, and that the victory
was won at last because of the valor displayed by the
citizens of that community.

"In my opinion, and apparently in the opinion of Goodrich,
the leading event of the war was that related in chapter
eighty-five. The story occupies the whole chapter. The
historian evidently intended that the youthful mind, while
meditating upon the most important episode of the dreadful
struggle, should not be disturbed by minor matters.

“Chapter eighty-five relates that certain British soldiers
demolished snow hills that had been constructed by some boys
upon Boston Common, a hallowed spot which Goodrich taught me
to regard as the pivotal point of the universe. The boys
determined to call upon General Gage, and to protest against
this brutal outrage committed by the hireling butchers of a
bloated despot. Now listen while I read the account of that
interview as it is given by Goodrich:

"General Gage asked why so many children had called upon him.
'We come, sir,' said the tallest boy, 'to demand
satisfaction.' 'What!' said the general; 'have your fathers
been teaching you rebellion, and sent you to exhibit it
here?' 'Nobody sent us, sir,' answered the boy, while his
cheek reddened and his eye flashed. We have never injured nor
insulted your troops; but they have trodden down our snow-
hills and broken the ice on our skating-ground. We
complained, and they called us young rebels, and told us to
help ourselves if we could. We told the captain of this, and
he laughed at us. Yesterday our works were destroyed the
third time, and we will bear it no longer.' General Gage
looked at them a moment in silent admiration, and then said
to an officer at his side, “The very children here draw in a
love of liberty with the air they breathe.'

"The story of this event, which shaped the destinies of a
great nation and gave liberty to a continent, I learned by
heart. Many and many a night have I lain awake wishing that
Philadelphians would organize another war with Great Britain,
so that British soldiers could come over and batter down a
snow hill that I would build in Independence Square. I felt
certain that I should go at once, in such an event, to see 
the general, and should overwhelm him with another outburst
of fiery indignation. It seemed rather hard that Philadelphia
boys should never have a chance to surpass the boys of
Boston. But still I could not help admiring those young
braves and regarding them as the real authors of American
independence. I was well assured that if that 'tallest boy'
had not entered the general's room and flashed his eye at
Gage all would have been lost; the country would have been
ground beneath the iron heel of the oppressor, and Americans
would have been worse than slaves. Perhaps it did me no harm
to believe all this; but it seems to me that we might as well
instruct children properly to begin with. Therefore I shall
give our boy, Agamemnon, some private lessons in history to
supplement the wisdom of Goodrich."

Just as I had concluded my remarks, Judge Pitman came in to
ask me to let him look at the evening paper which I had
brought with me from the city. I explained to him the nature
of the subject that had been considered, and the judge, as
usual, had something to say about it.

"Do you know," he observed, "that them school-books that they
make now-a-days is perfectly bewilderin' to a man like me?
When I went to school, we learned nothin' but readin',
writin' and arithmetic. But now—well, they've got clear past
me. I could no more rassle with the learnin' they have at the
schools now than a babe unborn."

"To what special department of learning do you refer?" I
inquired.

"Oh, all of 'em, all of 'em. I had a very cur'ous
experience with one o' them books once," said the judge, with
a laugh. "Some years ago I took a notion to jine the church,
an' they give me the catechism to learn afore I could git in.
When I got home, I laid the book away on the shelf, an'
didn't go for it for two or three days. When I was ready to
study it up, I reached down what I thought was the catechism,
an' I was kinder surprised to see that it was called
'Familiar Science.' You understand it was a book my daughter
had been learnin' at school. But I knowed no better. I never
paid no 'tention to religion afore; an' although it struck me
as sorter queer that a catechism should have such questions
and answers in it, I thought the church people that give me
the book must know what was right, so I said nothin' an' went
to work at it."

"How did you succeed?"

"Oh, putty good. I learned three or four pages by heart, an'
I thought that was 'bout enough. So after while the minister
an' the rest come 'round an' begun examinin' me. I noticed
that the questions kinder didn't fit in, but I did my best;
an' when they'd ask me about the Scripters, I'd jam in
somethin' about carbonic acid gas, an' when they inquired
about the whole duty of man, I desp'rately give 'em somethin'
relatin' to the functions of lightnin'-rods."

"You must have astonished them."

"You never seen men wuss bewildered," replied the judge; "but
I think I really skeered 'em when they asked me about
Solomon's temple, an' I lit out with an answer referrin' to
smoky chimneys. They thought I was insane. But, when I pulled
out the book an' showed it to 'em, the preacher laughed an'
told me about the mistake. Then we hunted up the catechism
an' got the thing straight. The church folks had the laugh on
me for a while, but I didn't mind it. An' it was pretty fair
for a joke, wasn't it?"

"Excellent."

"But I got a better one on at least one of them fellers.
Doctor Brindley was on the examinin' committee, an' he run me
harder than any of 'em about it. Well, sir—Do you know old
Hillegass?"

"No; I never heard of him."



"He lives out yer on the Wilmington road. Well, sir, some
time afore that Hillegass was putty near dead. He was the
wust case I ever seen. Broken down, thin an' pale, with no
appetite, his lungs weak, his liver good for nothin', his
legs full of rheumatics, his heart affected an' his head
achin' with neuralger, I really believe that man was the
sickest human bein' that ever breathed the breath of life.
All the doctors in the country had a shy at him one time an'
another; an' as he kep' a-gettin' wuss an' wuss, they made
him mad, an' he wouldn't pay their bills."

"He was not much to blame for that."

"Certainly not. Well, one day them doctors met, an'
after talkin' the thing over they agreed not to go to
Hillegass's again unless he settled up, you understand. They
said, 'Now we'll let Hillegass die; we've fooled with him
long enough. He's either got to pay or perish. No more
Hillegass for us unless we see some cash.' So for about a
year they let him alone; an' whenever one of 'em would drive
past the house, he would pull up for a minute, look to see if
there was crape on the door, an' then go on, shakin' his head
an' sayin', 'Poor Hillegass! the stingy old fool's not long
for this world.'"

"Did he die?"

"Die! One day Dr. Brindley felt kinder sorry for Hillegass,
an' he weakened on his resolution. So he called at the house
to see how he was gittin' on. As he went in the yard he seen
a stoutish man liftin' a bar'l of flour in a waggin. When the
man got the bar'l in, he seen the doctor an' come for'ard.
The doctor thought he knew the scar on the man's nose, but he
couldn't believe it. Howsomedever, it was old Hillegass, well
an' hearty as a buck, an' able to h'ist the roof off the barn
if he'd a mind to. You understand that I had a very soft
thing on Brindley jes' then; an' he never seemed to take no
furder interest in the catechism business when he met me. An'
they don't encourage doctors much out that way now; no, sir.
They trust to luck an' natur', which in my opinion is the
best way, anyhow."

"A great many remarkable things seem to have happened in this
place," I said.

"Yes," responded the judge. "You'd hardly think it of such 
quiet town as this 'pears to be; but somehow there's 'most
always somethin' lively goin' on. There was that fuss 'round
at Dr. Hopkins's a couple o' year ago; did you hear 'bout
that?"

"Not that I know of."

"Well, we'd jes' got a new fire-engine in the town, an' the
men that run her thought they'd play a little joke on the
chief of the department by rushin' 'round to his house an'
pretendin' it was afire. By a most unfort'nit circumstance,
the chief moved out of the house that mornin', and Dr.
Hopkins—the preacher, you know—moved in. Them fellers come a-
peltin' 'round with the engine, an' they run up their ladders
an' begun aplayin' on the roof in a manner that skeered the
Hopkinses nearly to death. But the other fire company thought
there really was a fire, an' they come out with their engine
an' begun to squirt on the house. The others tried to explain
how it was, but the new-comers wouldn't believe 'em, an' they
kep' a-pourin' water into the winders an' a carryin' on like
mad. So at last they got up a fight, an' they fought all over
the house an' on the stairs an' up an' down the entries,
until Dr. Hopkins was putty near insane; an' when they went
home, he counted up about two hundred dollars damages, which
them fellers had to pay. Yes, it is astonishin' how they used
to keep things a-movin' in this town. An now I really must be
goin'. I'll send back the paper the fust thing in the
mornin', for certain."

The judge then went home; and just as he passed out of the
door Bob Parker came in with a radiant countenance. He had
succeeded in obtaining the evidence that was needed for his
vindication.






CHAPTER XXI.
SETTLING THE BUSINESS—VINDICATION OF MR. BOB PARKER—A
COMPLETE RECONCILIATION—THE GREAT COOLEY INQUEST—THE
UNCERTAINTY IN REGARD TO THOMAS COOLEY—A PHENOMENAL CORONER—
PROFITABLE INVESTIGATIONS—HOW THE PEOPLE PROSPERED—THE
SOLUTION OF THE MYSTERY.

R. PARKER had good reason for exultation. He had in his
possession testimony which exposed and completely defeated
the wretched little conspiracy organized against him by
Smiley.

"It was a very easy thing to settle this business," said Bob.
"I explained the matter to the members of our firm, and they
not only gave me a letter containing very strong expressions
of confidence in me and denouncing Stonebury as a wholly
untrustworthy and disreputable person, but they insisted that
I should make Stonebury confess. Accordingly, a member of the
firm accompanied me while I hunted him up. We found that he
had a clerkship in one of the municipal offices, and we
called to see him. He turned absolutely white when he saw me,
and looked as if he would like to beat a retreat. But we went
at him, and threatened that if he did not acknowledge in
writing that he had maligned me we would prosecute him for
the theft committed while he was engaged at the store, and
have him ousted from his present position.

"He came down at once, and began to excuse his conduct
upon the ground that Smiley had compelled him to do as he
did. Then he made a written confession that his statements
concerning me were lies, and that he was the real author of
the letter which professed to come from Rev. Dr. Dewey. Here
it is—here are both letters; and I propose to enlighten the
Magruder intellect with them this very night."

"Wouldn't it be better to wait until to-morrow? It is rather
late now."

"No, sir. I intend to settle the affair finally and for ever
before I go to bed. I have been waiting long enough. Now I am
going to enjoy my victory without further delay. Let's go
around there at once."

So Bob and I started for the Magruder mansion; and when we
reached the street, he strode along at such a rapid gait that
I could hardly keep up with him. As we approached the house I
ventured to suggest that the dog might perhaps be at large,
in which event I thought I would rather remain in the drug
store on the other side of the street until he returned.

"I would go into the house," exclaimed Bob, "if there were a
million bloodhounds tearing around the front yard."

"Well, I believe I wouldn't. I have less enthusiasm than you.
I am growing old and cautious. A much smaller quantity of
bloodhound would restrain what little impetuosity I have.
Only one vigorous bloodhound stationed in that yard and
betraying a disposition to exclude me would dampen my ardor.
I should go home at once."

"Magruder's dog won't bite," said Bob. "He knows me well, and
we needn't be a bit afraid of him."

"Very well, I will run the risk; but if any accident occurs,
I shall blame you for it. I would rather you should lose your
lady-love than that I should be deprived of the use of my
legs."

"And, of course, I wouldn't. But come along, and never mind
the dog."

As we entered the gate the dog was there, and he followed us
upon the porch, still manifesting intense eagerness to sniff
our trowsers. It is remarkable with what carefulness and
steadiness a man walks under such circumstances. I would not
have made a sudden jump or a quick movement of any kind for a
valuable consideration.

When we entered the house, Mr. Magruder met us, and we went
with him into the library, where Mrs. Magruder was sitting
with a book in her hand. We obtained a glimpse of Bessie as
she vanished through the other door into the next room; and
Bob seemed to feel a little disappointed that she had not
remained. Mr. Magruder began the conversation:

"Well, Mr. Parker, I trust you have been successful in your
efforts?"

"Yes, sir," replied Bob. "I have accomplished all that I
hoped for. I have, I think, procured evidence which will
vindicate me completely and prove that I have been grossly
slandered."

"I hope this is the case," said Mr. Magruder. "What is the
nature of your—"

"Here are two letters. This one is from one of my employers.
The other is written by Samuel Stonebury, a man whose name at
least is known to you."

Magruder took the papers and read them aloud, so that his
wife might obtain the information supplied by them. Then, as
he slowly folded them up, he said:

"Mr. Parker, this does indeed seem to be conclusive. I blame
myself very much fig having reposed confidence in Smiley and
in his villainous friend, but more than all because I treated
you as if you were guilty before I heard you in your own
defence. I owe you a very humble apology, sir, and I now make
it. I hope you will forgive me;" and Magruder extended his
hand.

"I believed in you from the first," said Mrs. Magruder. "And
I thank you for it," replied Bob.

"I suppose Bessie might as well come in now, my dear," said
Mr. Magruder.

"Certainly," replied his wife, and she called Bessie.

Bessie had evidently been listening upon the other side of
the door, for she entered instantly, with her smiling face
rosy with blushes. Bob merely took her hand, and stood by her
looking as if he would like to indulge in a tenderer
demonstration. Then I announced my intention to go home, and
as I did so Bob said he believed he would stay a little
longer. Mr. and Mrs. Magruder came out with me into the hall
to say good-bye, and as the library-door closed I thought I
heard the sound of a kiss. I hope the old people went into
the parlor or retired to bed after my departure. There had
been a cruel separation of the two lovers, and a good deal of
genuine suffering, at least upon Bessie's part, and it was
but fair that they should have a chance to enjoy to the very
utmost, without the intrusion of another person, the bliss of
that reunion.

Upon the day following this reconciliation Smiley was in
town, and he called at Magruder's. The old gentleman saw him
coming, and met him at the door. In reply to Smiley's
salutation Magruder looked sternly at him, and after telling
him that his villainy had been exposed, the indignant man
ordered the lieutenant to leave his house and never to enter
it again. Smiley turned upon his heel and slunk away. We have
probably seen the last of him; and just as he has disappeared
we have learned that he is likely to be cashiered from the
army for bad conduct. His brother officers at the fort have
discovered his true character just as it has been revealed to
us.

This rambling narrative would not deserve to be received as a
faithful record of events that have occurred in our
neighborhood if it should fail to include an account of the
extraordinary circumstances attending what is known here as
"The Great Cooley Inquest." The story of that remarkable
business must be given even if it shall be introduced with
abruptness.

My neighbor William Cooley had a brother named Thomas, who
lived at a place called Vandyke, in New Castle county. Thomas
Cooley was in some respects a very remarkable man. He was
gifted with genius, but it was genius of an impracticable
kind. He was an inventor, and during the later years of his
life he devoted all his time to the work of constructing
surprising machines which would never do anything when they
were constructed.

Down at the patent-office they got so at last that when
a new model and specifications would come along from Cooley,
the commissioner and clerks would grant him a patent on the
spot, for they knew, from a rich and generous experience,
that when Cooley invented anything it was perfectly certain
to be unlike any other contrivance ever conceived by the mind
of fallen man; and they were aware, at any rate, that nobody
who was sane enough to be at large would ever want to
interfere with Cooley's exclusive right to pin together such
a bewildering and useless lot of cranks and axles and wheels.
I think Cooley had about two hundred patents of various
kinds; and besides the machines and dodges thus protected by
the law, he owned scores of others which were never heard of
in Washington or anywhere else but at Cooley's home.

Cooley had a kind of "den" of his own in the garret. He used
to shut himself up in this for hours together while he
perfected his inventions or conducted his chemical
investigations. His last idea was that he could put together
a compound which would rule gunpowder out of the market, and
make the destruction of armies and navies comparatively easy.
And so, for a time, Mrs. Cooley, while bustling about in the
vicinity of the den, instead of hearing the buzz and hum of
wheels and the click of the hammer, would sniff terrific
smells, evolved by the irrepressible Cooley from the contents
of his laboratory. And one day there came a fearful
explosion. The roof was torn off and reduced to splinters,
and Thomas Cooley had disappeared.

Vandyke, as I have said, is in New Castle county, Delaware,
but it is also close to the boundary line between Delaware
and the counties of Cecil and Kent, in Maryland.

And so it was not surprising when, a few minutes after the
explosion, persons in all three of the counties perceived
fragments of a demoralized and disintegrated human being
tumbling from the air. The pieces of the unhappy victim of
the disaster were unevenly distributed between New Castle,
Cecil and Kent. The first named got twelve of the fragments.
There were persons who thought Cooley might have showed even
greater partiality for his own county, but I do not blame
him; he was in a measure controlled by circumstances.

I think the friends of the coroner complained with greatest
bitterness. He was an enthusiastic coroner. He had been
known, when one of Dr. Tobias Jones's relatives returned from
Egypt with a mummy embalmed fifteen hundred years before the
Christian era, to seize that ancient subject of Pharaoh and
summon a jury, and sit upon it, and brood over it and think.
And it is rumored that he put that jury up to bringing in a
verdict, "The death of the deceased ensued from cause or
causes unknown, at the hands of persons also unknown." His
enemies at the next election openly asserted that he charged
the county with the usual fee, with compound interest from
the time of Moses.

So of course when Thomas Cooley went up, he wasn't sorry; and
the more Cooley was scattered over New Castle county, the
more serene and affable the coroner felt. When he had
selected his jury and looked around him a little in order to
command the situation, he perceived that Cooley had put into
his hands a tolerably good thing. The coroner spent the next
three days holding an inquest upon each of the twelve
fragments of the deceased. He empaneled a new jury every
time, and then proceeded cautiously and deliberately in each
case.

There was by no means complete unanimity of opinion. The
first jury decided that "the deceased met his death by being
struck by something sudden." The second one advanced the
theory that "Thomas Cooley was surreptitiously and
insidiously blowed apart." The others threw out suggestions
respecting the probability that the trouble came from
Cooley's well-known weakness for flying machines, or from his
being lifted out and cut up by some kind of a hurricane. Once
the jury decided not to bring in a verdict, but merely to
pass resolutions of regret.

And the coroner would sit there over the particular piece of
Cooley in question, and smile and permit these manifestations
of generous feeling to have full play. It didn't perplex hint
that all the verdicts differed. "Truth," he remarked to a
friend, "is well enough. But as Cooley is certainly dead,
what's the odds if we can't agree as to what killed him? Let
us collect our fees and yield with Christian resignation to
destiny."

It was always interesting to me to hear that coroner converse
upon the subject of resignation. He would rather have died
than to have resigned while any of the Cooleys were in town
inventing explosive compounds.

The Cecil county coroner discovered six pieces of the
deceased within his jurisdiction, but his pride would not 
permit him to yield the supremacy in such a matter to his
rival over the line. The New Castle man had twelve inquests,
and so would he, with more besides. And his juries used to go
out and consult and come in after a while with a majority
report, declaring, perhaps, that deceased was killed by
fooling with some sort of a gun, and a minority report
insisting that he had been murdered and dissected by a
medical student or students unknown.

And then the coroner would disband the inquest and drum up a
fresh jury, which would also disagree, until out of those six
fractions of poor old Cooley the coroner got thirty-seven
deliberations, with the attendant fees. And every time the
doctors would testify that post-mortem examinations revealed
the fact that the inside of the deceased was crammed with
fragments of the Latin language; and invariably the jurors
would sit there and try to look as if they understood those
terms, although a dim impression prevailed most of the time
that the physicians were indulging recklessly in profanity.

And when a relative of Cooley's testified before the thirty-
seventh jury that "Thomas Cooley was a man of marked
idiosyncrasies, and his brain was always excited by his
irresistible fondness for chimeras of various kinds," the
jury looked solemn and immediately brought in a verdict that
"death was caused by idiosyncrasies forming on his brain in
consequence of excessive indulgence in chimeras, thus
supplying an awful warning to the young to refrain from the
use of that and other intoxicating beverages."

Only two pieces fell in Kent county, but the coroner was
animated by even greater professional enthusiasm than his
neighbors across the border. He spent the entire season over
as much of Cooley as he could reach. All his juries but one
disagreed, and he had eighty-four. The sixth would have been
unanimous but for an obstinate man named Selfridge. All the
others were for a verdict of mysterious butchery, but
Selfridge insisted upon attributing the disaster to nitro-
glycerine. So earnest was he that he fought over the subject
with a fellow-juryman named Smith; and he held Smith down and
remonstrated with him, and showed him the matter in different
lights, and bit his nose to convince Smith that the nitro-
glycerine hypothesis was correct. And when the jury was
dismissed, Selfridge, true to his solemn convictions, carried
the war into the papers, and published an obituary poem
entitled "A Monody on the Death of Thomas Cooley," in which
he presented his views in this fashion:

"When Cooley got his glycerine all properly adjusted,
He knocked it unexpectedly, and suddenly it busted;
And when it reached old Thomas C., he got up quick and
dusted,
And left his wife and family disheartened and disgusted."



It was discovered that one of the bones of the deceased had
fallen directly across the boundary line between Cecil and
Kent. As soon as the fact was reported, the coroner of Kent
rallied a jury upon his end; and just as the proceedings were
about to begin, the Cecil coroner arrived with a jury for the
purpose of attending to his share of the work. While the
authorities of Kent mused at one end of the bone, the jurymen
of Cecil reflected at the other end, and the result was that
each brought in an entirely different verdict. But they were
unanimous on the question of the collection of fees.

In all there were thirteen or fourteen conflicting verdicts
rendered, and so some uncertainty prevailed as to the precise
cause of Cooley's death. Men's minds were unsettled, and
their conclusions were demoralized, in the presence of so
much official authority of an indecisive kind. But nobody
mourned over these differences. They were a blessing for the
people of the counties. Almost every man in the neighborhood
had had a turn at Cooley's remains, and some of them had
served on the juries six or seven times. The farmers all
bought new mowing-machines that spring with their fees. The
doctors collected more money for post-mortem examinations
than they would have done in a time of an epidemic of small-
pox and sudden death. People fixed up their houses and paid
off mortgages and laid in their port; and started grocery
stores and gave hops out of the profits of Cooley's
explosion. And there were men who cherished a wish that
Cooley could be put together again and exploded once a month
for the next decade. But that of course was impossible.



One day, when the tide of prosperity was at its height, the
widow Cooley perceived a wagon driving up to her door. The
man within the vehicle dismounted, and unloaded four pieces
of iron pipe sixty feet long. Presently another wagon
arrived, and this driver also unloaded the same quantity of
pipe. Then a third driver arrived and did the same thing Then
a fourth came, and Mrs. Cooley saw a man in it with a queer-
looking object by him. It proved to be Thomas Cooley himself.
Thomas had been up to the city at a machine-shop getting up a
working model of a new kind of a patent duplex elliptic
artesian pump; and now he was home again. The remains
scattered over the counties were—so Cooley said—merely a lot
of beef with which he had been trying to make a new kind of
patent portable soup and an improved imperishable army
sausage; and the explosion, he thought, must have been caused
by spontaneous combustion.

Thomas Cooley would have been happy, after all, but for one
thing—everybody outside of his own family refused to
recognize him as a living man. If he was willing to move
about in the community in the character of an unburied
corpse, the people would agree not to interfere and not to
insist upon his burial; but that was as far as they could go
conscientiously. Their duty to society, their obligations to
the law, compelled them to reject the idea that he was
anything more than inanimate remains. He was officially dead.
The fact had been declared under oath by hundreds of jurymen,
and it was registered in the records of two States and three
counties. The testimony was overwhelmingly against him. To
admit that he was still alive would be dangerous, it would be
revolutionary. The foundations of society would be shaken,
the majesty of the law would suffer insult, the fabric of
republican government would be undermined. If a being who was
legally only a mere cadaver was to be permitted to strut out
into daylight, and to urge incendiary theories about the
condition of his vital spark, nothing would be safe; there
would be no guarantee that the cemeteries would not unload,
and that all of the departed would not be crowding out and
wanting to vote. Besides, if it was admitted that Cooley was
yet alive, all the money that had been earned by the jurymen,
all the fees that had been charged by the coroners, would
have to be returned to the county treasuries. The people were
aghast at the thought. The coroners entered into a solemn
compact to persist in ignoring Cooley or to regard him merely
as an absurd and very indelicate goblin who had behaved in a
manner wholly unworthy of a ghost with gentlemanly instincts.
They declared publicly that they could not admit that Cooley
was alive unless there should be a general resurrection in
the States of Delaware and Maryland, and until that time
arrived, they considered that the best thing Cooley could do
would be to select a sepulchre somewhere and creep into it
and behave.

I do not know that I can find a better place than this to
insert a bundle of rhymes which I have at hand. The wholesale
slaughter in which the hero and heroine indulge seems to
entitle the poem to association with the three coroners above
mentioned. And I may venture to remark that not one of the
officials in question will read the lines without a feeling
of profound regret that such magnificent opportunities for
inquests are hardly likely to be presented in Maryland and
Delaware. Our New Castle coroner would accumulate millions in
the shape of fees if he could have the privilege of summoning
juries to investigate such a butchery as this.

A HINDOO LEGEND.

There was a Hindoo maiden once on India's coral strand
Who had some forty suitors for her coffee-colored hand.
Her father was a Brahmin of aristocratic caste
Who much internal revenue in dry goods had amassed.

These lovers thought it would be nice the dusky maid to wed
And spend the rupees lavishly when her papa was dead.
But she turned up her nose at them—a very pretty pug—
Because clandestinely she loved an elegant young Thug.

This Thug, in his profession, was a very active man;
He strangled eighty men the year to practice he began.
But as the maiden's father had no taste for art at all,
He foolishly disliked the Thug, and wouldn't let him call.

And then she loved him better still, as always is the case,
And so she met him daily at a certain trysting-place.
Hand in hand amid the verdant fields deliciously they
strayed,
Now culling flowers, now strangling little children as they
played.

And this young Thug, one afternoon, he kissed the maid and
said,
"It really seems to me, my dear, high time that we should
wed.
And as your guardians to me so seriously object,
'Twould be as well to kill them; I can do it, I expect."

Then said the lovely maiden, with a sweet, confiding smile:
"I go for chopping of them up in most effectual style.
And as my marriage simply on my papa's death depends,
Why, just for fun we'll butcher all my relatives and
friends."

The Thug procured a hatchet, and the maiden got a knife;
They cut and slashed the Brahmin till he was bereft of life;
Then they seized the loving mother, though she desperately
fought,
And crunched her aged bones beneath the car of Juggernaut.

A consecrated lasso, thrown with admirable skill,
Swiftly roped her brother in and choked him 'gainst his will.
Her sister's fair young form was hooked upon the sacred
swing;
And flying 'round until she died; she screamed like
everything.

The maiden jabbed the knife into the colored coachman's brain
And stabbed her uncle William and her aunt Matilda Jane.
The Thug he steeped his hatchet in the chambermaiden's gore,
And with a skewer pinned the cook against the cellar door.

The maiden cut her grandpa up in little tiny bits,
And scared her grandma so she died in epileptic fits
The dry nurse with the clothes-line was serenely strangled,
while
They tossed the little baby to the sacred crocodile.



And when the fuss was over, said the maiden to the Thug:
"You'd better have a hole within the cemetery dug;
And let the undertaker take extraordinary pains
To decently inter this lot of mangled-up remains."

And when the usual bitter tears were at the funeral shed,
The lovers to the temple went, in order to be wed.
The priest had barbecued a man that day for sacrifice;
They cooked him with the cracklin' on; with gravy brown and
nice,

The chief priest asked the maiden, when the services began,
If her papa had said she might annex this fine young man?
"Oh no," she said, "my loving wish he foolishly withstood,
So him and all the family we slaughtered in cold blood."

"You shock me!" said the pious priest; "your conduct makes me
sad;
You never learned at Sunday-school to be so awful bad.
I've told you often, when you killed a person anywhere,
To bring the body to that old nine-headed idol there

“The great Vishnu is suffering for victims every day,
And here you go and cut them up and throw the bones away.
Extravagance is sinful; I must really put it down;
I've half a mind to pull the string and make the idol frown.

"I must punish you with rigor; and I order that you two
Instead of getting married shall severest penance do."
So on a piece of paper then he scribbled a brief word;
The lovers as they left, of course, felt perfectly absurd.

The Thug then read the order o'er, and bursting into tears,
He said, "This paper realizes my unpleasant fears.
Upon my word, my sweetest one, it really chills my blood;
I've got to suffocate you in the Ganges' holy mud."

And so he sadly led her down unto the river's bank,
And like a stone into the cold, religious slime she sank.
And there she stuck the livelong day, and all the following
night
Until an alligator came and ate her at a bite.

The Thug he felt exceeding hurt at her untimely fate,
But his, though not so dreadful, was not nice, at any rate.
The priest, in his fierce anger, had condemned him, it
appears,
To stand alone upon one leg for forty-seven years!






CHAPTER XXII.
AN ARRIVAL—A PRESENT FROM A CONGRESSMAN—MEDITATIONS UPON HIS
PURPOSE—THE PATENT OFFICE REPORT OF THE FUTURE—A PLAN FOR
REVOLUTIONIZING PUBLIC DOCUMENTS AND OPENING A NEW DEPARTMENT
OF LITERATURE—OUR TRIP TO SALEM—A TRAGICAL INCIDENT—THE LAST
OF LIEUTENANT SMILEY.



VERY mysterious package came to me through the post-office
yesterday. I brought it home unopened, and, as is usual in
such cases, we began to speculate upon the nature of the
contents before we broke the seals. Everybody has a
disposition to dally for a while with a letter or a package
from an unknown source. Mrs. Adeler felt the parcel
carefully, and said she was sure it was something from her
aunt—something for the baby, probably. Bob imagined that it
was an infernal machine forwarded by the revengeful
Stonebury, and he insisted that I should put it to soak in a
bucket of water for a few hours before removing the wrapper.
The children were hopeful that some benign fairy had adopted 
this method of supplying the Adeler family with supernatural
confectionery; and for my part, I had no doubt that some one
of my friends among the publishers had sent me half a dozen
of the latest books.

We opened the bundle gradually. When the outside casing was
torn away, another envelope remained, and as this was slowly
removed the excitement and curiosity reached an almost
painful degree of intensity. At last all the papers were
taken off, and I lifted from among them a large black volume.
It was only a patent-office report sent to me by that
incorruptible statesman and devoted patriot, the Congressman
from our State.

I have endeavored to conjecture why he should have selected
me as the object of such a demonstration. Certainly he did
not expect me to read the report. He knows that I, as a man
of at least ordinary intelligence, would endure torture
first. I cannot think that he hoped to purchase my vote by
such a cheap expedient. Congressmen do, I believe, still
cherish the theory that the present of a patent-office report
to a constituent secures for the donor the fealty of the
recipient; but it is a delusion. Such a gift fills the soul
of an unoffending man with gloomy and murderous thoughts.
Every one feels at times as if he would like to butcher some
of his fellow-men; and my appetite for slaughter only becomes
keen when I meet a Congressman who has sent me a patent-
office report. Neither can I accept the suggestion that my
representative was deceived by the supposition that I would
be grateful for such an intimation that an eminent man, even
amid the oppressive cares of State, has not forgotten so
humble a worm as I. He knows me well; and although I am aware
that there is in Washington a prevalent theory that a wild
thrill of exultation agitates the heart of a constituent when
be receives a public document or a flatulent oration from a
lawmaker, my Congressman is better informed. He would not
insult me in such a manner. I can only account for his
conduct upon the theory that he misdirected the volume, which
he intended for some one else, or upon the supposition that
he has heard me speak of the necessity for the occasional
bombardment of Cooley's dog at night, and he conceived that
he would be helping a good cause by supplying me with a new
and formidable missile. I have never attacked a dog with a
patent-office report, but I can imagine that the animal might
readily be slain with such a weapon. A projectile should have 
ponderosity; and a patent-office report has more of that
quality to the cubic inch than any other object with which I
am familiar. Still, I do not care to tax the treasury of the
United States for material with which to assail Cooley's dog.
I would rather endure the nocturnal ululations, and have the
money applied to the liquidation of the national debt.

It is, however, apparent that Congressmen will never
surrender the patent-office report; and if this is admitted,
it seems to me that the man who succeeds in infusing into
those volumes such an amount of interest that people will be
induced to read them will have a right to be regarded as a
great public benefactor. I suppose no human being ever did
read one of them. It is tolerably certain that any man who
would deliberately undertake to peruse one from beginning to
end would be regarded as a person who ought not to be at
large. His friends would be justified in placing him in an
asylum. I think I can suggest a method by which a reform can
be effected. It is to take the material that comes to hand
each year and to work it up into a continuous story, which
may be filled in with tragedy and sentiment and humor.



For instance, if a man came prowling around the patent office
with an improvement in hayrakes, I should name that man
Alphonso and start him off in the story as the abandoned
villain; Alphonso lying in wait, as it were, behind a dark
corner, for the purpose of scooping his rival with that
improved hay-rake. And then the hero would be a man, suppose
we say, who desired an extension of a patent on accordeons. I
should call such a person Lucullus, and plant him, with a
working model of the accordeon, under the window of the
boarding-house where the heroine, Amelia, who would be a
woman who had applied for a patent on a new kind of red
flannel frills, lay sleeping under the soothing influence of
the tunes squeezed from the accordeon of Lucullus.

In the midst of the serenade, let us suppose, in comes
a man who has just got out some extraordinary kind of a
fowling-piece about which he wants to interview the head of
the department. I should make this being Amelia's father and
call him Smith, because that name is full of poetry and
sweetness and wild, unearthly music. Then, while Lucullus was
mashing out delicious strains, I might make Alphonso rush on
Smith with his hay-rake, thinking he was Lucullus, and in the
fight which would perhaps ensue Smith might blow out
Alphonso's brains somehow on the spot by a single discharge,
we might assume, of Smith's extraordinary fowling-piece,
while Lucullus could be arrested upon the suit of the
composer who had a copyright on the tune with which he
solaced Amelia.

If any ingenious undertaker should haunt the patent-office at
this crisis of the story with a species of metallic coffin, I
might lay Alphonso away comfortably in one of them and have a
funeral, or I might add a thrill of interest to the narrative
by resuscitating him with vegetable pills, in case any
benefactor of the race should call to secure his rights as
the sole manufacturer of such articles. In the mean time,
Lucullus, languishing in jail, could very readily burst his
fetters and regain his liberty, provided some man of
inventive talent called on the commissioner to take out
searches, say, on some kind of a revertible crowbar.

Then the interest of the story would be sustained, and a few
more machines of various kinds could be worked in, if, for
instance, I should cause this escaped convict of mine to
ascertain that the musical composer had won the heart of
Amelia, in the absence of her lover, by offering to bring her
flannel frills into market, and to allow her a royalty, we
will assume, of ten cents a frill. When Lucullus hears of
this, I should induce him to try to obtain the influence of
Amelia's parents in his behalf by propitiating old Mr. Smith
with the latest variety of bunion plaster for which a patent
was wanted, while Mrs. Smith could be appeased either with a
gingham umbrella with an improvement of six or seven extra
ribs, or else a lot of galvanized gum rings, if any inventor
brought such things around, for her grandchildren.

Then, for the sake of breaking the monotony of these
intrigues, we could have a little more of the revivified
Alphonso. I could very readily fill the heart of that
reanimated corpse with baffled rage, and cause him to sell to
old Smith one of McBride's improved hydraulic rams. Smith
could be depicted as an infatuated being who placed that ram
down in the meadow and caused it to force water up to his
house. And Alphonso, of course, with malignant hatred in his
soul, would meddle with the machine, and fumble around until
he spoiled it, so that Smith could not stop it, and it would
continue to pump until the Smiths had a cascade flowing from
their attic window. Mrs. Smith, in her despair, might impale
herself on a variety of reversible toasting-fork,and die
mingling the inventor's name with maledictions and groans,
while Smith, in the anguish of his soul, could live in the
barn, from whence he could use an ingenious kind of breech-
loading gun—patent applied for—to perforate artists who came
around to sketch the falls.



In the mean time, Lucullus might come to the rescue
with a suction pump and save the Smith mansion, only to find
that Amelia had flown with the composer, and had gone to sea
in a ship with a patent copper bottom, and a kind of a
binnacle for which an extension had been granted by Congress
on the 26th of February. It would then be well, perhaps, to
have that copper-bottomed ship attacked by pirates, and after
a bloody hand-to-hand contest, in which the composer could
sink the pirate craft with the model of a gunpowder pile-
driver which he has in the cabin, the enraged corsairs should
swarm upon the deck of the other ship for the purpose of
putting the whole party to the sword. And, of course, at this
painful crisis it would be singularly happy to cause it to
turn out that the chief pirate is our old friend Alphonso,
who had sold out his interest in his hay-rake, discontinued
his speculations in hydraulic rams and become a rover upon
the seas. The composer, it would seem, would then be in a
particularly tight place; and if the commissioner of patents
had any romance in his Soul, he would permit me to cause that
pirate to toss the musician overboard. Amelia would then tear
herself from the pirate's loathsome embrace and plunge in
after him. The two would float ashore on a life-raft, if any
applications of that kind happened to be presented to the
department. When they got to land, Amelia would shiver with
cold until her jaws rattled, and the painful truth would be
disclosed to her lover that she wore teeth which were
attached to one of the gutta-percha plates about which there
was a controversy in the courts.

Then, if we seemed to be approaching the end of the report, I
think I would cause the composer to shriek "False! false!" or
to use some exciting language of that kind, and to tear out
his hair and wring his nose and fly off with a broken heart
and a blasted life to join the pirates and to play melancholy
airs in a minor key, expressive of delusive dreams, for ever
and for ever, upon some kind of a double-barreled flute with
a copyright on it.

Thus even the prosaic material of which the patent-office
reports are constructed could be made to yield entertainment
and instruction, and afford a basis of succulent and
suggestive fact for a superstructure of pathetic and blood-
curdling fiction. The advantages of adopting such a method in
constructing these documents would be especially marked in
the case of Congressmen. The member who now sends a patent-
office report to one of his constituents is regarded by that
man as a kind of moral ruin who ought to be put in some place
where it would be impossible for him to destroy the happiness
and poison the peace of unoffending families. But when a
competent novelist prepares those reports, when he throws
over them the glamour of his fancy, when he adorns them with
his graceful rhetoric, and gives a certain intense human
interest to all the hay-rakes and gum rings and suction pumps
which now fill the leaden pages, these reports will be sought
after; their tone will be changed; children will cry for
them; Sunday-schools will offer them as rewards, and the
intelligent American voter whose mind craves healthy
literature will elect to Congress the man who will promise to
send him the greatest number of copies.

Here is the story of a tragical event of which I was a
witness, and which has created a profound impression upon the
people of this community. An aunt of Bessie Magruder's lives
at Salem; and as she had never seen Bob, she invited him and
his betrothed to visit her one day last week, coupling the
invitation with a request that we and the elder Magruders
would come at the same time and take dinner with her. When
the boat from up the river arrived at New Castle, the entire
party of us went aboard. As the steamer shot across the water
to Delaware City, Bob and Bessie wandered away by themselves,
while the rest of us passed the time pleasantly in
conversation. At Delaware City we came out of the cabin to
watch the people as they passed over the gangway. To our
surprise and vexation, Lieutenant Smiley appeared among them.
As he pressed forward in the throng some one jostled him
roughly, when he uttered a fierce oath and aimed a blow at
the offender. It missed the mark, and he plunged forward
heavily. He would have fallen had not one of the boat's crew
caught him in his arms. We saw then that he was intoxicated.

I watched Bob as he looked at the wretched man. His face
flushed with indignation as he recalled the injury done to
him by Smiley, and he looked as if he would have found
intense satisfaction in an attempt to give the lieutenant a
thrashing on the spot. But he did not contemplate such a
performance, and Bessie clung tightly to his arm, half afraid
that he might have a sudden and irresistible impulse to
revenge, and half afraid lest Smiley might make some shocking
demonstration against the party in that public place. As he
staggered past us he recognized us; and, brutalized as he was
with liquor, he seemed to feel the shame of his condition and
the infamy of his past conduct. He went away to the other
side of the boat and concealed himself from view.

When the vessel left the wharf and proceeded down the bay,
past the fort, we walked about the lower deck, looking at the
scenery and at the shipping which thronged the water. No one
of us perceived Smiley or knew that he was near us. We had,
indeed, suffered ourselves to forget the scene we had just
witnessed, and we were speaking of other matters. As I stood
by the railing with my wife and the Magruders, Bob and Bessie
came out from the cabin, and Bob had just spoken one word,
when a man came with a hurried and uneven step to the
gangway. It was Smiley. He had been sitting in the corner
behind one of the beams of the boat, with his hat pulled over
his eyes. The rail at the gangway swings aside to admit of
passage to and from the wharf. Now it opened out upon the
water. Smiley paused for one moment, with his fingers
clenched upon it; then he flung it wide open, and leaped
forward into the sea.

A cry of horror came from the lips of those who saw him make
the plunge, and instantly the steamer resounded with screams
for help. Before any of us could recover from the paralysis
of terror occasioned by the act, Smiley rose to the surface
far away from the boat, and with a shriek so awful, so full
of agony and despair, that it chilled the blood of those who
heard it, he threw up his arms and sank. In a second Bob
tossed off his coat, and before I could restrain him he
leaped into the water. He rose instantly, and struck out
boldly in the direction in which Smiley had been seen.

Bessie almost fainted in her father's arms, and Mrs. Adeler
was white with fear. The next moment the steamer stopped, and
an attempt was made to lower the boat. The operation required
time; and meanwhile, Bob, who is a good swimmer, gallantly
cleft his way through the waves. 1 think Smiley never rose
again. For as I entered the life-boat I could see Bob turning
about and endeavoring to swim toward the steamer. He was a
long way from us, for the vessel had gone far before her
headway could be overcome. Our boatmen pulled with desperate
energy lest the brave fellow should be unable to sustain
himself; and as I stood in the stern and watched him with
eager eyes, I could see that he gave signs of being in
distress. It was heavy work in the water, with his clothing
on, and the sea was rough. We were within a hundred yards of
him when he sank, and I felt my heart grow sick as I saw him
dragged beneath the waves.

But as we reached the spot one of the men, who was leaning
over the side, uttered an exclamation; and extending his
arms, he pulled the lad's head and shoulders above the
surface. A moment later he was in the boat, but insensible.
As we turned about to seek the steamer, we rubbed his hands
and his temples and strove to bring him back to life, and we
seemed to have partial success.

But when we reached the vessel and placed him upon the
cushions in the cabin, we committed him to better hands than
ours. Mrs. Magruder's medical skill then was of the highest
service. She cared for the poor lad with a motherly
tenderness which was as admirable as her art. In a brief
while he revived; and though suffering greatly, he seemed
sure of life. It would have made him blush, even in his
weakness, to have heard the praises heaped upon him for his
splendid courage; we rejoiced at them, but we rejoiced more
to think how he had avenged himself upon his enemy by an act
of sublime self-sacrifice.



And so, as he came back to consciousness, we neared our
journey's end; and while we carried Bob from the boat to the
carriage and placed him among his loving friends, we
shuddered to think how the wretched man who had wrought so
much evil was even now sweeping past us in the embrace of
that swift current to burial beneath the rolling billows of
the sea.






CHAPTER XXIII.
PITMAN AS A POLITICIAN—HE IS NOMINATED FOR THE LEGISLATURE—
HOW HE WAS SERENADED, AND WHAT THE RESULT WAS—I TAKE A HAND
AT POLITICS—THE STORY OF MY FIRST POLITICAL SPEECH—MY
RECEPTION AT DOVER—MISERY OF A MAN WITH ONLY ONE SPEECH—THE
SCENE AT THE MASS MEETING—A FRIGHTFUL DISCOMFITURE.

OME of the friends of Judge Pitman induced him, just before
the last election, to permit himself to be nominated for the
State Legislature, and accordingly he was presented to the
people of this community as a candidate. Of course he was not
selected because of his fitness for the position. The party
managers knew him to be a very popular man; and as the
success of the party is the only thing they care for, they
chose Pitman as the person most likely to secure that result.
I cannot say that I disapproved of the selection. For some
reason, it appears to be entirely impossible for the American
citizens who live in any of the Middle States to find
educated and intelligent men who are willing to represent
them in the Legislatures. Those bodies are composed for the
most part of men whose solitary purpose is plunder.

They are legislators simply because it pays better to
blackmail railroad companies and to accept bribes from people
who want votes for rascally measures than it does to pick
pockets. They have the instincts and the principles of a
pickpocket, but their ambition is greater. They do not steal
handkerchiefs and watches, because they can filch fabulous
sums of money from the public treasury and from villains who
want to do dirty work under the color of the law. They know
enough to enable them, with the assistance of party rings, to
have themselves counted in at election-time, and to devise
new and dexterous schemes of dishonesty; but in other and
rather more desirable of the qualifications of law-makers
they are deficient. They occupy the most important place in
republican governments without knowing what republicanism
means, and they create laws for the communities without
having any knowledge of the science of law or the slightest
acquaintance with the needs and requirements of the people
for whom they act. The average American legislator is both
ignorant and dishonest. Judge Pitman is ignorant, but he is
honest; and as his election would secure at least a very
important half of a fitting legislator, I supported him.

My other neighbor, Cooley, was the chairman of the committee
to whose care was consigned the management of the campaign in
which Judge Pitman played so prominent a part; and Cooley
conducted the business with even an excess of enthusiasm.
Just after the nomination of Pitman, Cooley called on him to
say that a number of his friends had declared their intention
to offer him a serenade. Cooley informed the judge that some
refreshment must be given to the serenaders, but he, as the
chairman of the committee, would attend to that; the judge
need not make preparations of any kind. Accordingly, on the
following evening a brass band, accompanied by a score or two
politicians, entered Pitman's front yard, and for half an
hour there was some very good music. Then the judge came out
upon the porch and made a better speech than I had expected
to hear from him. He concluded by asking the company to enter
his house. Cooley was there with a wagon-load of meat and
drink, including, of course, a large quantity of rum of the
most impressive kinds. The judge, with the fear of the
temperance society present in his mind, protested against the
liquor; but Cooley demonstrated to him that he would be
defeated and the party ruined if it was excluded, and so
Pitman reluctantly permitted it to be placed upon his table.
Besides, as Cooley had been so very liberal in undertaking to
make this provision at his own cost, the judge disliked to
hurt his feelings by refusing to permit the use of that which
Cooley evidently considered the most important portion of it.



The guests remained at the banquet until four o'clock the
next morning, the politicians meanwhile making speeches and
the band playing occasionally in the dining-room in a most
uproarious manner. We could hear the noise at my house during
the night, and sleep was possible only with the windows
closed.



At four o'clock my door-bell rang violently; and upon
descending to ascertain the cause of a visit at such an
unseemly hour, I encountered Judge Pitman. He was nearly
frantic with indignation.

"Adeler," he said, "them fellers is a-carryin' on an' smash
the furniture an' bu'st things generally. Mrs. Pitman's 'bout
skeered to death. Can't you come over an' help me clear them
out?"

"Why don't you call a couple of policemen? You hunt up two or
three officers while I dress myself, and we will see if we
can't adjourn the meeting."

By the time I was ready Pitman arrived with one
policeman, and we proceeded to his house. As we entered, the
leader of the band was sitting upon the stairs, infamously
drunk, with the handle of his umbrella in his mouth, vainly
endeavoring to play a tune by fumbling his fingers among the
ribs. Mr. Cooley was in a corner of the parlor supporting
himself by the wall while he endeavored to discuss the
question of the tariff with Pitman's plaster bust of Daniel
Webster, and to correct Daniel's view of the local option
law. Another politician was sitting upon the carpet crying
because, so he informed us, his wife's maiden name was
McCarthy, and just as the policeman was removing him a combat
occurred between the bass drummer and a man from Wilmington,
during which the drummer was hurled against the pier glass
and then dragged out to bleed upon the rug. The house was
finally cleared of the company just as the church clock
struck six, and then Pitman went to bed with sentiments of
complete disgust for politics and politicians.

But he remained a candidate of the party. He had promised to
run, and he determined to go through with the business.

"That serenade was rough enough without anythin' wuss," said
the judge to me a day or two afterward; "but I did think
Cooley was a-rubbin' it in 'most too hard when he come over
yesterday with a bill for the refreshments which he wanted me
to pay."

"Why, I thought he agreed to supply the supper?"

"So he did. But now he says that of course he was only actin'
for me. 'The candidate,' he says, 'always foots all the 
bills.' I'll foot this one, an' then I'll foot Cooley if he
ever brings them ruffians to my house agin. I expect nothin'
else but the temperance society will shut down on me for that
riot we had t'other night."

"I hope not; but I should think that affair would have made
you sorry that you ever undertook this business."

"So it does," replied the judge, "but I never back down when
I go into a thing. I 'm goin' to run for the Legislatur'; and
if I'm elected, I'm goin' to serve my country honestly until
my time's up. Then I'm comin' home, an' goin' to stay home.
And what's more, I'll stir up that Legislatur' while I'm in
it. You mind me!"

The result of the contest was that the judge was elected by a
large majority, and he will sit in the next Assembly.

I played a peculiar part in the campaign; and although the
narrative of my experience as an amateur politician is not a
particularly grateful one to me, it might as well be given,
if for no other reason, because it will serve to warn others
against the fate that befel me.

I had for some time entertained a strong conviction that
nature designed me for an orator. I was assured that I
possessed the gift of eloquence which enables great speakers
to sway the passions of the multitude, and I felt that I
needed but the opportunity to reveal this fact to the world.
Accordingly, at the beginning of the political campaign of
which I speak I sent my name to one of the executive
committees of the State, in Wilmington, with the request that
it might be written down with the names of the speakers who
could be called upon whenever important meetings were held. I
waited impatiently all through the campaign for a summons to
appear and electrify the people. It did not come, and I was
almost in despair. But on the day before the election I
received from the chairman a brief note, saying that I had
been announced to speak at Dover that evening before a great
mass meeting, and requesting me to take the early afternoon
train, so that I might report to the local chairman in Dover
before nightfall. The pleasure with which this summons was
received was in some measure marred by the fact that I had
not a speech ready, and the time was so short that elaborate
preparation was impossible. But I determined to throw into
some sort of shape the ideas and arguments which would
readily occur to the mind of a man familiar with the ordinary
political questions of the day and with the merits of the
candidates, and to trust to the inspiration of the occasion
for the power to present them forcibly and eloquently.

Of course it was plain that anything like an attempt at
gorgeousness in such a speech would be foolish, so I
concluded to speak plainly and directly to the point, and to
enliven my argument with some amusing campaign stories. In
order to fix my points firmly in my mind and to ensure their
presentation in their proper order, they were numbered and
committed to memory, each argument and its accompanying
anecdote being associated with a particular arithmetical
figure. The synopsis, if it may be called by that name,
presented an appearance something like the following,
excepting that it contained a specification of the points of
the speech which need not be reproduced here.

THE SPEECH.

1. Exordium, concluding with Scott's famous lines, "Breathes
there a man with soul so dead," etc.

2. Arguments, introducing a narrative of the facts in the
case of Hotchkiss, who was locked out upon the roof of his
house all night. (See particulars farther on.) The design of
the story is to give a striking picture of the manner in
which the opposition party will be left out in the cold by
the election. (Make this strong, and pause for cheers.)



3. Arguments, followed by the story of the Kickapoo
Indian who saw a locomotive approaching upon the plains, and
thinking it was a superior breed of buffalo, determined to
capture it, so that he could take the first prize at the
Kickapoo agricultural fair. He tied his lasso to his waist
and threw the other end over the smoke-stack. The locomotive
did not stop; but when the engineer arrived at the next
station, he went out and cut the string by which a small bit
of copper-colored meat was tied to his smoke-stack. This is
to illustrate the folly of the attempt of conservatism to
check the onward career of pure and enlightened liberalism
toward perfect civilization, etc., etc.

4. Arguments, and then the anecdote of that Dutchman in Berks
county, Pa., who on the 10th of October, 1866, was observed
to go out into his yard and raise the American flag; then he
got his gun and fired a salute seventeen or eighteen times,
after which he consumed six packs of fire-crackers and gave
three cheers for the Union. He enjoyed himself in this manner
nearly all day, while his neighbors gathered around outside
and placed their elbows upon the fence, watching him and
wondering what on earth he meant. A peddler who came along
stopped and had an interview with him. To his surprise, he
found that the German agriculturist was celebrating the
Fourth of July, 1859. He did not know that it was any later
in the century, for he had been keeping his time on a notched
stick; and having been sick a great deal, he had gotten the
thing in a dreadful tangle. When he learned that he was seven
Fourths in arrears, he was depressed; but he sent out and
bought a box of fire-crackers and a barrel of gunpowder, and
spent a week catching up. (Tell this vivaciously, and make
the point that none but a member of the other party could
forget the glorious anniversary of our country's birth, and
say that the whole party will have to do up a lot of back
patriotism some day, if it desires to catch up with the
people whose devotion to the country is encouraged and kept
active by our aide.)

5. Arguments, supplemented with the narrative of a confiding
man who had such child-like faith in a patent fire-
extinguisher which he had purchased that he set fire to his
house merely to have the fun of putting it out. The fire
burned furiously, but the extinguisher gave only two or three
imbecile squirts and then collapsed, and in two hours his
residence was in ashes. Go on to say that our enemies have
applied the torch of anarchy to the edifice of this
government, but that there is an extinguisher which will not
only not collapse, but will subdue the flames and quench the
incendiary organization, and that extinguisher is our party.
(Allow time for applause here.)

6. Arguments, introducing the story of the Sussex county
farmer who was discouraged because his wife was perfidious.
Before he was married she vowed over and over again that she
could chop four cords of wood a day, but after the ceremony
the farmer found he was deceived. The treacherous woman could
not chop more than two cords and a half, and so the dream of
the husband was dissipated, and he demanded a divorce as the
only balm for the wounds which lacerated his hear. Let this
serve to illustrate the point that our political enemies have
deceived us with promises to reduce the debt, to institute
reforms, etc., etc., none of which they have kept, and now we
must have the government separated from them by such a
divorce as will be decreed to-morrow, etc., etc.

7. Peroration, working in if possible the story of Commodore
Scudder's dog, which, while out with its master one day,
pointed at some partridges. The commodore was about to fire, 
but he suddenly received orders to go off on a three years'
cruise, so he dropped his gun, left the dog standing there
and went right to sea. When he returned, three years later,
he went back to the field, and there was his gun, there was
the skeleton of the dog still standing and pointing just as
he had left it, and a little farther on were the skeletons of
the partridges. Show how our adversaries in their relations
to the negro question resemble that dog. We came away years
ago and left them pointing at the negro question, and we come
back now to find that they are at it yet. Work this in
carefully, and conclude in such a manner as to excite frantic
applause.



It was not much of a speech, I know. Some of the arguments
were weak, and several of the stories failed to fit into
their places comfortably. But mass meetings do not criticize
closely, and I was persuaded I should make a good impression,
provoking laughter and perhaps exciting enthusiasm. The only
time that could be procured for study of the speech was that
consumed by the journey. So when the train started I took my
notes from my pocket and learned them by heart. Then came the
task of enlarging them, in my mind, into a speech. This was
accomplished satisfactorily. I suppose that speech was
repeated at least ten times between New Castle and Dover
until at last I had it at my tongue's end. In the cars the
seat next to mine was occupied by a colored gentleman, who
seemed to be a little nervous when he perceived that I was
muttering something continually; and he was actually alarmed
once or twice when in exciting passages I would forget myself
and gesticulate violently in his direction. Finally, when I
came to the conclusion and was repeating to myself the
exhortation, "Strike for your altars and your fires," etc.,
etc., I emphasized the language by striking fiercely at the
floor with the ferule of my umbrella. It hit something soft.
I think it was the corn of my colored friend, for he leaped
up hurriedly, and ejaculating "Gosh!" went up and stood by
the water-cooler during the rest of the journey, looking at
me as if he thought it was dangerous for such a maniac to be
at large.



When the train arrived at Dover, I was gratified to find the
chairman of the local committee and eighteen of his fellow-
citizens waiting for me with carriages and a brass band. As I
stepped from the car the band played "See, the Conquering
Hero comes!" I marched into the waiting-room of the depot,
followed by the committee and the band. The chairman and his
friends formed a semi-circle and stared at me. I learned
afterward that they had received information from Wilmington
that I was one of the most remarkable orators in the. State.
It was impossible not to perceive that they regarded me
already with enthusiastic admiration; and my heart sank a
little as I reflected upon the possibility of failure.

Then the music ceased, and the chairman proposed "three
cheers for our eloquent visitor." The devoted beings around
him cheered lustily. The chairman thereupon came forward and
welcomed me in the following terms:

"My dear sir, it is with unfeigned satisfaction that I have—
may I say the exalted honor?—of welcoming you to the city of
Dover. You come, sir, at a moment when the heart of every
true patriot beats high with hope for a glorious triumph over
the enemies of our cherished institutions; you come, sir, at
a time when our great party, the true representative of
American principles and the guardian of our liberties, bends
to grapple with the deadly foe of our country; at a time,
sir, when the American eagle—proud bird, which soars, as we
would, to the sun—screams forth its defiance of treason, and
when the banner of the free, the glorious emblem of our
nationality, waves us onward to victory; you come, sir, to
animate with eloquence the hearts of our fellow-citizens; to
inspire with your glowing language the souls of those who
shrink from performing their duty in this contest; to depict
in words of burning, scathing power, the shame, the disgrace,
the irretrievable ruin, which will befall our land if its
enemies are victorious, and to hold up those enemies, as you
well know how, to the scorn and contempt of all honest men.
We give you a hearty welcome, then, and assure you that Dover
will respond nobly to your appeal, giving to-morrow such a
vote for justice, truth and the rights of man that the
conservative wolf will shrink back in dismay to his lair.
Welcome, sir, thrice welcome to our city!"

I stood looking at this man throughout his speech with a
conviction, constantly growing stronger, that I should be
obliged to reply to him at some length. The contemplation of
such a thing, I need hardly say, filled me with horror. I had
never made a speech of the kind that would be required in my
life, and I felt positively certain that I could not
accomplish the task now. I had half a mind to hurl at the
heads of this chairman and his attendant fiends the entire
oration prepared for the evening; but that seemed so
dreadfully inappropriate that the idea was abandoned. And
besides, what should I say at the mass meeting? The comfort
of the situation was not, by any means, improved by the fact
that these persons entertained the belief that I was an
experienced speaker who would probably throw off a dozen
brilliant things in as many sentences. It was exceedingly
embarrassing; and when the chairman included his remarks, the
cold perspiration stood on my forehead and my knees trembled.

Happily, the leader of the band desired to make himself
conspicuous, so he embraced the opportunity afforded by the
pause to give us some startling variations on "The Star-
Spangled Banner."

As we stood there listening to the music, I observed that the
energetic gentleman who played upon the drum and cymbals was
looking at me with seemed to be a scornful smile. He had a
peculiarly cold eye, and as he fixed it on me I felt that the
frigid optic pierced through and through my assumption of
ease and perceived what a miserable sham it was for me to
stand there pretending to be an orator. I quailed before that
eye. Its glance humiliated me; and I did not feel more
pleasantly when, as the band dashed in to the final quavers
which bring up suggestions of "the land of the free and the
home of the brave," I saw the scorn which erst flashed from
that eye change into a look of wild exultation. The cymbal
man knew that my hour had come. He gave a final clash with
his brasses and paused. I had to begin. Bowing to the
chairman, I said,

“Mr Chairman and fellow-citizens, there are times—times—there
are times, when, fellow-citizens, when—when the heart—there
are times, I say, Mr. Chairman and fellow-citizens, when the
heart—the heart of—of—" It wouldn't do. I stuck fast, and
could not get out another word.

The cold-eyed man seemed ready to play triumphal strains upon
his drum and to smash out a pæan upon his cymbals. In the
frenzy and desperation of the moment, I determined to take
the poetry from my exordium and to jam it into the present
speech, whether it was appropriate or not. I began again:
"There are times, I say, fellow-citizens and Mr. Chairman,
when the heart inquires if there breathes a man with soul so
dead, who never to himself hath said, 'This is my own, my
native land '—whose heart has ne'er within him burned as home
his footsteps he hath turned from wanderings on a foreign
shore? If such there breathe, go, mark him well!" (Here I
pointed to the street, and one of the committee, who seemed
not to comprehend the thing exactly, rushed to the window and
looked out, as if he intended to call a policeman to arrest
the wretch referred to.) "For him no minstrel raptures
swell." (Here the leader of the band bowed, as if he had a
vague idea that this was a compliment ingeniously worked into
the speech for his benefit; but the cold-eyed man had a
sneering smile which seemed to say, "It won't do, my man, it
won't do. I can't be bought off in that manner.") "High
though his titles, proud his name, boundless his wealth as
wish can claim; despite these titles, power and pelf, the
wretch, concentred all in self, living, shall forfeit fair
renown, and doubly dying shall go down to the vile dust from
whence he sprung, unwept, unhonored and unsung."

I stopped. There was embarrassing silence for a moment, as if
everybody thought I had something more to say. But I put on
my hat and shouldered my umbrella to assure them that the
affair was ended. Then it began to be apparent that the
company failed to grasp the purpose of my remarks. One man
evidently thought I was complaining of something that
happened to me while I was upon the train, for he took me
aside and asked me in a confidential whisper it wouldn't be
better for him to see the conductor about it. Another man
inquired if the governor was the man referred to. I said,
"No; the remarks were of a poetical nature; they were
quoted." The man seemed surprised, and asked where I got them
from. "From Marmion." He considered a moment, and then said,
“Don't know him. Philadelphia man, I reckon?" The occasion
was too sad for words. I took the chairman's arm and we
marched out to the carriages, the cold-eyed man thumping his
drum as if his feeling of animosity for me would kill him if
it did not find vigor of that kind.

We entered the carriages and formed a procession, the band,
on foot, leading the way and playing "Hail to the Chief." I
rode with the chairman, who insisted that I should carry the
American flag in my hand. As we passed up the street the
crowd cheered us vehemently several times, and the chairman
said he thought it would be better if I would rise
occasionally and bow in response. I did so, remarking, at the
last, that it was rather singular such a reception should be
given to a complete stranger.

The chairman said he had been thinking of that, and it had 
occurred to him just at that moment that perhaps the populace
had mistaken the character of the parade. "You see," said he,
"there is a circus in town, and I am a little bit afraid the
people are impressed with the idea that this is the showman's
procession, and that you are the Aerial King. That monarch is
a man of about your build, and he wears whiskers."

The Aerial King achieved distinction and a throne by leaping
into the air and turning two backward somersaults before
alighting, and also by standing poised upon one toe on a wire
while he balanced a pole upon his nose. I had no desire to
share the sceptre with that man, or to rob him of any of his
renown, so I furled the flag of my beloved country, pulled my
hat over my eyes and refused to bow again.

It was supper-time when we reached the hotel, and as soon as
we entered, the chairman invited us into one of the parlors,
where an elaborate repast had been prepared for the whole
party. We went into the room, keeping step with a march
played by the band, which was placed in the corner. When
supper was over, it was with dismay that I saw the
irrepressible chairman rise and propose a toast, to which he
called upon one of the company to respond. I knew my turn
would come presently, and there seemed to be no choice
between the sacrifice of my great speech to this paltry
occasion and utter ruin and disgrace. It appeared to me that
the chairman must have guessed that I had but one speech, and
that he had determined to force me to deliver it prematurely,
so that I might be overwhelmed with mortification at the mass
meeting. But I made up my mind to cling desperately to the
solitary oration, no matter how much pressure was brought to
bear to deprive me of it. So I resolved that if the chairman
called upon me I would tell my number two story, giving the
arguments, and omitting all of it from my speech in the
evening.

He did call. When two or three men had spoken, the chairman
offered the toast, "The orator of the evening," and it was
received with applause. The chairman said: "It is with
peculiar pleasure that I offer this sentiment. It gives to my
eloquent young friend an opportunity which could not be
obtained amid the embarrassments of the depot to offer,
without restraint, such an exhibition of his powers as would
prove to the company that the art which enabled Webster and
Clay to win the admiration of an entranced world was not
lost—that it found a master interpreter in the gentleman who
sits before me."

This was severe. The cold-eyed child of the Muses sitting
with the band looked as if he felt really and thoroughly glad
in the inmost recesses of his soul for the first time in his
life.

I rose, and said: "Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, I am too much
fatigued to make a speech, and I wish to save my voice for
to-night; so I will tell you a story of a man I used to know
whose name was Hotchkiss. He lived up at New Castle, and one
night he thought he would have a little innocent fun scaring
his wife by dropping a loose brick or two down the chimney
into the fireplace in her room. So he slipped softly out of
bed; and dressed in his night-shirt, he stole up stairs and
crept out upon the roof. Mr. Hotchkiss dropped nineteen
bricks down that chimney, Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, each
one with an emphatic slam, but his wife didn't scream once."

Everybody seemed to think this was the end of the story; so
there was a roar of laughter, although I had not reached the
humorous part or the real point of the anecdote, which
describes how Hotchkiss gave it up and tried to go down
stairs, but was surprised to find that Mrs. Hotchkiss, who
had been watching all the time, had retreated, fastening the
trap-door, so that he spent the next four hours upon the comb
of the roof with his trailing garments of the night
fluttering in the evening breeze. But they all laughed and
began to talk; and the leader of the band, considering that
his turn must have come, struck out into "Hail Columbia,"
while the man with the cymbals seemed animated with fiendish
glee.

I tried to explain to the chairman that it was all wrong,
that the affair was terribly mixed.

He said he thought himself that it seemed so somehow, and he
offered to explain the matter to the company and to give me a
chance to tell the story over again properly.

I intimated, gloomily, that if he undertook such a thing I
would blow out his brains with the very first horse-pistol I
could lay my hands upon.

He said perhaps, then, it would be better not to do so.

The proceedings at the mass meeting were to begin at eight
o'clock. At half-past seven I went to the telegraph office,
and sent the following despatch to the Wilmington papers,
fearing the office might be closed when the meeting
adjourned:

"DOVER,——,18—: A tremendous mass meeting was held here to-
night. The utmost enthusiasm was displayed by the crowd.
Effective speeches were made by several prominent gentlemen,
among them the eloquent young orator Mr. Max Adeler, whose
spirited remarks, interspersed with sparkling anecdote,
provoked uproarious applause. Dover is good for five hundred
majority, and perhaps a thousand."

At eight o'clock a very large crowd really did assemble in
front of the porch of one of the hotels. The speakers were
placed upon the balcony, which was but a few feet above the
pavement, and there was also a number of persons connected
with the various political clubs of the town. I felt somewhat
nervous; but I was tolerably certain I could speak my piece
acceptably, even with the poetry torn out of the introduction
and the number two story sacrificed. I took a seat upon the
porch and waited while the band played a spirited air or two.
It grieved me to perceive that the band stood directly in
front of us upon the pavement, the cold-eyed drummer
occupying a favorable position for staring at me.

The chairman began with a short speech in which he went
over almost precisely the ground covered by my introduction;
and as that portion of my oration was already reduced to a
fragment by the use of the verses, I quietly resolved to
begin, when my turn came, with point number two.

The chairman introduced to the crowd Mr. Keyser, who was
received with cheers. He was a ready speaker, and he began,
to my deep regret, by telling in capital style my story
number three, after which he used up some of my number six
arguments, and concluded with the remark that it was not his
purpose to occupy the attention of the meeting for any length
of time, because the executive committee in Wilmington had
sent an eloquent orator who was now upon the platform and
would present the cause of the party in a manner which he 
could not hope to approach.

Mr. Keyser then sat down, and Mr. Schwartz was introduced.
Mr. Schwartz observed that it was hardly worth while for him
to attempt to make anything like a speech, because the
gentleman from New Castle come down on purpose to discuss the
issues of the campaign, and the audience, of course, was
anxious to hear him. Mr. Schwartz would only tell a little
story which seemed to illustrate a point he wished to make,
and he thereupon related my anecdote number seven, making it
appear that he was the bosom friend of Commodore Scudder and
an acquaintance of the man who made the gun. The point
illustrated I was shocked to find was almost precisely that
which I had attached to my story number seven. The situation
began to have a serious appearance. Here, at one fell swoop,
two of my best stories and three of my sets of arguments were
swept off into utter uselessness.

When Schwartz withdrew, a man named Krumbauer was brought
forward. Krumbauer was a German, and the chairman announced
that he would speak in that language for the benefit of those
persons in the audience to whom the tongue was pleasantly
familiar. Krumbauer went ahead, and the crowd received his
remarks with roars of laughter. After one particularly
exuberant outburst of merriment, I asked the man who sat next
to me, and who seemed deeply interested in the story,

"What was that little joke of Krumbauer's? It must have been
first rate."

"So it was," he said. "It was about a Dutchman up in Berks
county, Penna., who got mixed up in his dates."

"What dates?" I gasped, in awful apprehension.

"Why, his Fourths of July, you know. Got seven or eight years
in arrears and tried to make them all up at once. Good,
wasn't it?"

"Good? I should think so; ha! ha! My very best story, as I'm
a sinner!"

It was awfully bad. I could have strangled Krumbauer and then
chopped him into bits. The ground seemed slipping away
beneath me; there was the merest skeleton of a speech left.
But I determined to take that and do my best, trusting to
luck for a happy result.

But my turn had not yet come. Mr. Wilson was dragged out
next, and I thought I perceived a demoniac smile steal over
the countenance of the cymbal player as Wilson said he was
too hoarse to say much; he would leave the heavy work for the
brilliant young orator who was here from New Castle. He would
skim rapidly over the ground and then retire. He did. Wilson
rapidly skimmed all the cream off of my arguments numbers
two, five and six, and wound up by offering the whole of my
number four argument. My hair fairly stood on end when Wilson
bowed and left the stand. What on earth was I to do now? Not
an argument left to stand upon; all my anecdotes gone but
two, and my mind in such a condition of frenzied bewilderment
that it seemed as if there was not another available argument
or suggestion or hint or anecdote remaining in the entire
universe. In an agony of despair, I turned to the man next to
me and asked him if I would have to follow Wilson.

He said it was his turn now.

"And what are you going to say?" I demanded, suspiciously.

"Oh, nothing," he replied—" nothing at all. I want to leave
room for you. I'll just tell a little story or so, to amuse
them, and then sit down."

"What story, for instance?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing, nothing; only a little yarn I happen to
remember about a farmer who married a woman who said she
could cut four cords of wood, when she couldn't."

My worst fears were realized. I turned to the man next to me,
and said, with suppressed emotion,

"May I ask your name, my friend?"

He said his name was Gumbs.

"May I inquire what your Christian name is?"

He said it was William Henry.

"Well, William Henry Gumbs," I exclaimed, "gaze at me! Do I
look like a man who would slay a human being in cold blood?"

"Hm-m-m, n-no; you don't," he replied, with an air of
critical consideration.

"But I AM!" said I, fiercely I AM; and I tell you now that if
you undertake to relate that anecdote about the farmer's wife
I will blow you into eternity without a moment's warning; I
will, by George!"

Mr. Gumbs instantly jumped up, placed his hand on the railing
of the porch, and got over suddenly into the crowd. He stood
there pointing me out to the bystanders, and doubtless
advancing the theory that I was an original kind of a
lunatic, who might be expected to have at any moment a fit
which would be interesting when studied from a distance.

The chairman looked around, intending to call upon my friend
Mr. Gumbs; but not perceiving him, he came to me and said:

"Now is your chance, sir; splendid opportunity; crowd worked
up to just the proper pitch. We have paved the way for you;
go in and do your best."

"Oh yes; but hold on for a few moments, will you? I can't
speak now; the fact is I am not quite ready. Run out some
other man."

"Haven't got another man. Kept you for the last purposely,
and the crowd is waiting. Come ahead and pitch in, and give
it to 'em hot and heavy."

It was very easy for him to say "give it to them," but I had
nothing to give. Beautifully they paved the way for me!
Nicely they had worked up the crowd to the propser pitch!
Here I was in a condition of frantic despair, with a crowd of
one thousand people expecting a brilliant oration from me who
had not a thing in my mind but a beggarly story about a fire-
extinguisher and a worse one about a farmer's wife. I groaned
in spirit and wished I had been born far away in some distant
clime among savages who knew not of mass meetings, and whose
language contained such a small number of words that speech-
making was impossible.

But the chairman was determined. He seized me by the arm and
fairly dragged me to the front. He introduced me to the crowd
in flattering, and I may say outrageously ridiculous, terms,
and then whispering in my ear, "Hit 'em hard, old fellow, hit
'em hard," he sat down.

The crowd received me with three hearty cheers. As I heard
them I began to feel dizzy. The audience seemed to swim
around and to increase tenfold in size. By a resolute effort
I recovered my self-possession partially, and determined to
begin. I could not think of anything but the two stories, and
I resolved to tell them as well as I could. I said,

"Fellow-citizens: It is so late now that I will not
attempt to make a speech to you." (Cries of "Yes!" "Go
ahead!" "Never mind the time!" etc., etc.) Elevating my
voice, I repeated: "I say it is so late now that I can't make
a speech as I intended on account of its being so late that
the speech which I intended to make would keep you here too
late if I made it as I intended to. So I will tell you a
story about a man who bought a patent fire-extinguisher which
was warranted to split four cords of wood a day; so he set
fire to his house to try her, and—No, it was his wife who was
warranted to split four cords of wood—I got it wrong; and
when the flames obtained full headway, he found she could
only split two cords and a half, and it made him—What I mean
is that the farmer, when he bought the eating—courted her,
that is, she said she could set fire to the house. and when
he tried her, she collapsed the first time the extinguisher
did, and he wanted a divorce because his house—Oh, hang it,
fellow-citizens, you understand that this man, or farmer,
rather, bought a—I should say courted a—that is, a fire-ex—"
(Desperately.) "Fellow-citizens! IF ANY MAN SHOOTS THE
AMERICAN FLAG, PULL HIM DOWN UPON THE SPOT; BUT AS FOR ME,
GIVE ME LIBERTY OR GIVE ME DEATH!"

As I shouted this out at the top of my voice, in an ecstasy
of confusion, a wild, tumultuous yell of laughter came up
from the crowd. I paused for a second beneath the spell of
that cold eye in the band, and then, dashing through the
throng at the back of the porch, I rushed down the street to
the depot, with the shouts of the crowd and the uproarious
music of the band ringing in my ears. I got upon a freight
train, gave the engineer five dollars to take me along on the
locomotive, and spent the night riding to New Castle.






CHAPTER XXIV.
THE WEDDING-DAY—ENORMOUS EXCITEMENT IN THE VILLAGE—
PREPARATIONS FOR THE EVENT—THE CONDUCT OF BOB PARKER—THE
CEREMONY AT THE CHURCH, AND THE COMPANY AT MAGRUDER'S—A LAST
LOOK AT SOME OLD FRIENDS—DEPARTURE OF THE BRIDE AND GROOM—
SOME UNCOMMONLY SOLEMN REFLECTIONS, AND THEN THE END.

ESTERDAY was the day of the wedding. I suppose no one can
hope to describe accurately the sensation that is created by
such an event in a little community like. ours. It has
supplied the ladies of the village with material for
discussion for several weeks past, and the extraordinary
interest manifested in it has constantly grown stronger until
it culminated in a blaze of excitement which made calmness
upon the part of any New Castilian upon the great day a
wholly impossible condition. My own wife has introduced the
subject in her conversation with me at every available
opportunity; and when I have grown weary of hearing about the
preparations for the wedding, about the purchases made by the
Magruders for Bessie, about the presents given to the bride
by her friends, about the future prospects of the pair, and
about other matrimonial things innumerable, the excellent
partner of my joys, still with unabated enthusiasm, has
turned from so dull a listener, and seizing her bonnet and
shawl, has darted off to visit Mrs. Jones or Mrs. Hopkins,
and has found them eager to participate in conversation upon
these subjects. During the past month this sympathetic woman
has called at Magruder's at least three times a day to
ascertain the latest facts respecting the situation, and to
give advice and assistance to the busy workers who have been
preparing the multitude of articles which a girl must have
before she is married. Every woman in the village was
familiar, long ago, with the minutest details of the
arrangements, and all of them were so deeply absorbed in the
preparations and in contemplation of the approaching
catastrophe that they cared for nothing else. If there had
been revolutions, if thrones had tottered to their fall, if
hurricanes had swept over the land and the nations had been
stricken by the scourge, I verily believe that these devoted
women of New Castle would have regarded these calamities with
steadfast composure, and would have excluded them from a
place in the social debates wherein the wedding of Bessie
Magruder was the one great subject of discussion.

There is nothing more intense in nature than the interest
felt by a woman in the marriage of another woman. The fanatic
fury of a Hindoo devotee is mere icy indifference in
comparison to it.

It was entertaining to watch Bob Parker upon the evening
before the wedding and upon the morning of the great day
itself. He had everything ready a week before the time, and
upon the last night of his bachelor life he had nothing to do
but to sit at home with us and think. And so, while I read my
book and while Mrs. Adeler finished the bonnet that she had
made for the occasion from old material (the dexterous
economy of that woman, by the way, is simply phenomenal), Bob
fidgeted about. He pretended to read the paper; he threw
himself upon the lounge and counterfeited sleep; he darted
suddenly up stairs to see if he had put a sufficient number
of collars in his trunk; he darted down again and tried on
his new hat for the fiftieth time; he stood by the fire and
expressed his fear, often repeated during the day, that there
would be rain on the morrow; he tried to wind up his watch
four times, and he examined his pocketbook over and over
again to ascertain if the ring was safe. At a ridiculously
early hour he said he was tired and must go to bed; but when
I ascended the stairs about midnight, I could hear him still
moving about. He was nervous, excited and anxious.



Before daylight dawned Bob was out of bed and down stairs
smoking and guessing at the weather. When we descended, he
was in extreme agitation lest the man should not come with
the bouquets. When the flowers did arrive, they looked so
much like business that he immediately flew up to his room
and put on his wedding suit.

Then we had to wait nearly two hours for the carriages, and
Bob was harassed by doubts as to the correctness of the
appearance of his neck-tie. Three times Mrs. Adeler applied
thread and needle to that article of adornment, and at last
Bob threw it away and assumed another. He seemed to have a
strong conviction that the eyes of the entire assembly would
be concentrated upon that white tie. Then he put on his
gloves and sat, flushed and uncomfortable in his new
clothing, waiting for the moment of his departure. Presently
he discovered that he had lost one of his gold shirt buttons;
and after a very long and very warm search for it, he thought
he felt it in his boot. I procured a boot jack for him; and
when the button was found, he had to remove his gloves again
in order to pull his boot on. He was beginning to be acutely
miserable when, at last, the carriages arrived. Then Mrs.
Adeler came down; and when I had buttoned her gloves with a
hair-pin and criticised the appearance of her dress, we went
out to the street and drove away. When we reached Magruder's,
the doorway was surrounded by quite a throng of persons. The
excitement had reached even the lower classes, and a crowd
composed of slatternly women with babies in their arms, of
truant servant-girls, of unclean children, of idle men and
noisy boys, stood upon the pavement waiting for the bride to
come out. As we descended from the carriages, Bob was the
chief object of interest, and while the women eyed him with
admiration the boys made very unpleasant remarks concerning
his clothing, particularly his "claw-hammer coat." When we
entered the house, Bob ascended to some mysterious region
above to wait for Bessie, while we examined the bridal gifts
and conversed with the paternal Magruder, who was plainly
uncomfortable in his wedding garments.



Then the bride descended amid exclamations of admiration from
the servants and their friends, who were collected in a knot
at the rear of the hall. She did look very sweet and pretty,
that little maiden, in her lovely white dress, with orange
blossoms in her dark hair, with a radiant light in her brown
eyes and with a faint glow warming her cheek. Bob Parker had
good reason to feel proud as he led the fair girl to the
altar; and he was proud, despite his trepidation.

And when our salutations were over, when the satins and silks
were all arranged and the bridesmaids and groomsmen were
ready, we marched through the critical assembly outside the
door and drove swiftly to the church. At the gate we found,
awaiting the wedding party, another throng of spectators,
among them that gloomy undertaker, with his chin hooked upon
the wall, and his mind still brooding over his wrongs.

Then we heard the organ playing the Coronation March, and as
the bridal party entered the church and swept up the aisle
the Wedding March burst forth. There was a fluttering and a
turning of heads in the pews; then silence, and then the
ceremony began. Bob was pale as a ghost, and his replies
could hardly be heard, but Bessie spoke with perfect
distinctness. It is strange that women on these occasions
should always be more composed than men.

And when the solemn words were said, Bob kissed his wife
gallantly, and then, as the organ uttered Mendelssohn's
lovely melody "I waited for the Lord," the two turned about
and in the aisle met hosts of friends eager to congratulate
them. At any other time Bob might have been mortified that he
was a person of secondary importance. It was the bride that
the people looked at, and not the groom. But now he was too
happy and too ready to forget himself. He was too glad to
have his wife greeted warmly to think of any other thing. By
the time the church porch was reached every woman present had
the details of Bessie's costume fixed indelibly in her mind,
ready for description and explanation to her friends; and
while the bell in the steeple rang out a merry peal, we
returned to the Magruder mansion, where, in the company of
friends, we passed the few hours before the departure of Mr.
and Mrs. Parker.

Rev. Dr. Hopkins was there, beaming at the guests through his
gold spectacles, and making himself very comfortable with the
oysters and terrapin and chicken salad. He even had a smile
for Colonel Bangs, who was discussing with Mr. Magruder the
probable effect upon the railway interests of the country of
an article in the Argus of that morning upon "Our Grinding
Monopolies." It was interesting to listen to the colonel.

"I tell you," said he, with vehemence, "the time has come,
for the overthrow of these gigantic railroad corporations;
the time has come for a free press to open its batteries upon
the monopolies which are trampling the rights of the people
beneath their feet. There will be a bitter fight, sir, mark
me; it will be a battle to the death. But the Argus enters
the lists boldly and without fear. The article of to-day
unsheaths the sword; it warns the railway tyrants that the
battle has begun."



"I am sure it will alarm them," said Mr. Magruder. "And you,
I suppose, are willing to give up everything for the cause?
How about your annual free pass to Philadelphia?"

"Oh, ah! as for that," exclaimed the colonel, "you perhaps
observed that I expressly excepted our own road and
complimented its officers. A man must not go to extremes in
these matters, Magruder. And then there's the advertising,
you know! No, sir; we must proceed, as it were, cautiously at
first. Precipitate action might ruin everything."

Dr. Tobias Jones also had overcome his professional animosity
to Mrs. Magruder, and he was not only present, but he was
conversing pleasantly with that lady, probably upon the
subjects of bilious fever and aneurisms. Benjamin P. Gunn was
there, bustling around among the guests and paying especial
attention to Bob. When I saw Gunn in earnest conversation
with the groom and caught the words, "in favor of your wife,
you know," I became aware of the fact that Benjamin was
improving the festive hour with an attempt to do a bit of
business. Even Judge Pitman was present, for Mr. Magruder
liked the old man and was in a gracious mood upon that day. I
welcomed the judge heartily when, dressed in a swallow-tail
coat of a surprising pattern, he came up to me and said,

"Splendid send-off for them young folks, ain't it? I tell
you, they didn't do things this way when me an' Harriet 
consolidated! We lived down yer in Kent; an' when we were
married by the squire, I give him fifty cents an' then went
out an' borrowed a waggin so's me an' Harriet could take a
little drive. We come up yer to New Cassel an' stayed two
days at the tavern, an then drove back an' begun work agin,
jes' 's if nothin' oncommon had happened." "It was not the
custom then, I suppose, to make a display on such occasions?"
"No, sir! People hadn't no money to git up sich fodderin' as
this yer. They had to go slower. Still,". mused the judge,
"it's all right—it's all right. Gittin' married 's a big
event; an' if you kin make a fuss over it, you ought to. If
my daughter ever tries it, I'll give her the best I kin buy.
A weddin' like this is nice all 'round, but the wimmen in
partickler is amazin' fond of sich things. If you'll excuse
me, I believe I'll try another fried oyster."

There was another exciting time when Bessie, at last,
came down in her traveling dress and stood with Bob ready to
depart. While the cabman carried the trunks to the carriage,
Bessie said her farewells. There was a good-bye for mother,
uttered with tears in the eyes of both of them, a tender
adieu to father, kisses for the women and a shake of the hand
for the men, and then they entered the carriage. We flung an
old shoe or two after them and waved our hands, and Cooley's
boy gave them a parting salute with a stone that shivered the
carriage window. We watched them as they went down the
street, and saw, now and then, a handkerchief fluttered
toward us; then they turned a corner and disappeared.

It was a little lonely in the cottage upon that evening with
Bob no longer a member of the family. We shall miss him, with
his sprightliness and fun; and we shall half incline to
regret that the little drama we have watched so long with
eager interest is ended, even though the prince, after all
his suffering, has found the princess and wedded her, and
though at last they have gone "across the hills and far away
"beyond "the utmost purple, rim of that new world, which is
the old."

We sat in the old room in silence for a while, both looking
at the fire and both thinking, not so much of the events of
the day as of the promise of the future for those two
voyagers into the golden regions of delight. Then Mrs. Adeler
said, with half a sigh:

"I do hope they will be happy!"

"And so do I; and I really believe they will be, for both of
them have sweet tempers and good common sense; those are the
qualities that are likely to ensure the felicity of married
folks."

"But it is a great risk for Bob to run; and for Bessie too,
for that matter."

"So it is; but it is a risk that may fairly be taken when the
judgment gives approval to the choice of the heart. Lovers do
not bother themselves, however, a great deal with the
possibilities of the future. They have only sunshine now, and
it seems as if so clear a sky could never breed cloud and
storm. It is a happy thing for them, as well as for the rest
of us, that no human ingenuity can lift the veil that shuts
from our eyes the mysteries of the years to come. Think what
a journey it is that began to-day! Separate and apart they
have come thus far; but now they are to travel during all
their lives together, over rough places as well as where the
way is smooth. The power of each over the happiness of the
other is infinite. He can make her wholly miserable, and she
can utterly destroy his peace. A violent demonstration is not
required. A little indifference at first, a harsh word, then
a growing coldness, then neglect, and for ever afterward
complete separation of heart and soul and feeling, though
outwardly they seem united.

"And even if they should be as happy as the most blessed of
us, it is well that their imaginations should throw about the
future a glamour which will hide the reality. A tried and
well-proved love will hardly bear the shock when misfortune
and poverty come; it sometimes permits an almost fatal
display of ill-temper when there are sleepless nights with
sick and peevish children, when the soul is vexed with the
cares of business, with the smaller trials of life, and with
the myriad petty annoyances that are encountered in the path
of every man. There are few of us who are heroes among the
troubles of common life. Perhaps we bear the heavy blows
courageously enough; but we cry out when we are stung by the
pigmy arrows that are shot at us every day, at home and in
the world. The truly great man is he who is patient and
forbearing beneath small vexations. The real hero is he who
bears the burden of his life, with its swarm of minor
troubles, with calm, sweet evenness of temper and with
steadfast courage. The peevish and the irritable are the
enemies of peace in this world. Our lad and lass, we may
hope, will find a place for themselves among those who wisely
choose the better part.

"And now, Mrs. Adeler, would it not be well to close our
record, as the hero and the heroine depart? It is the custom
in the novel and upon the stage, to end the story when the
knight and the lady who have loved and suffered through all
the pages and all the acts are made man and wife. We have not
done much with our pair; but it is enough that we have told a
simple story of an old passion in still another form, and
that we have given the chronicles of the village with what
quality of humor we could infuse into them, but without
malice or vulgarity and without irreverence. I have no
patience with those who seek to find amusement by committing
these faults. There is matter enough in harmless things for
sportiveness; and rather than try to excite mirth by hurting
the feelings of my neighbors, by stooping to coarseness, or
by speaking with levity of things that are sacred, I would
consent to write only books that should be as solemn as
tragedy itself. We have had some strange experiences since
the record began, and we should be very dull indeed if we had
not learned something from them. Of one thing we are
completely convinced: it is that a man who is made miserable
because his neighbors will not do as he wishes them to do had
better not come to this or any other village with the intent
to be made happy. The man who voluntarily becomes a hermit is
a fool. A man of sense must necessarily desire to live with
his fellows and to enjoy their society, their sympathy and
the comforts that can be obtained with their assistance. He
can have these only by making sacrifices for them. He must
not only give up some of his natural rights as an individual,
but he must make up his mind to endure patiently disagreeable
things that are done by his neighbors. He may flee from the
city to escape the professor of music who hammers a piano
ceaselessly, but in his new home he will certainly find a
compensating nuisance of some kind. Until all men learn to
think and act alike, he will find everywhere in the world
those who are fond of the things that he hates, and who will
do things that he thinks should be left undone. The man,
therefore, who comes to the village in pursuit of perfect
peace and quiet of course will not find them. He will
encounter the disagreeable practices and peculiarities of
other people precisely as he did in the city; he will be
called upon to endure annoyances as aggravating as any of
those from which he has flown. He can have comparative
contentment and repose in either place only by determining to
have them despite his neighbors. It is probable that men will
always have in this world sharp corners and rough surfaces
with which they will jag and tear each other as they roll
onward in the swift current of life. Perhaps we shall have
smoothness and evenness when we enter Paradise. I hope so, at
any rate. And meantime let us all stop growling about evils
which cannot be cured.

"And now I will conclude our meek little story. Perhaps
regretfully I will close the door through which the public
has been suffered to peep in upon the movements of out quiet
life at home and in the village, and thus will end the
spectacle. That life will continue, but it shall be sacred to
ourselves, and the events that give it interest, shall go
unrecorded."




