
STUDIES IN THE ART
OF
RAT-CATCHING.

For the Use of Schools

BY 
H. C. BARKLEY


Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2017
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain


Title Page

STUDIES IN THE ART 
OF 
RAT-CATCHING.

BY H. C. BARKLEY,
AUTHOR OF  
"MY BOYHOOD," "BETWEEN THE DANUBE AND THE BLACK SEA," ETC.

LONDON:  
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.  
1896.



PREFACE. 
By the Author

MY publisher writes to say that he, and he thinks others too, 
would like to know how I ever came to write such a book as 
this! It came about in this way. Some two years ago, I was 
about to leave England for a considerable time, and a few days 
before starting, I went to stay in a country house, full of 
lads and lassies, to say good-bye. One evening, while sitting 
over the study fire, the subject of rat-catching came up, and, 
as the aged are somewhat wont to do, I babbled on about past 
days and various rat-catching experiences, till one of the 
boys exclaimed, "I say, what sport it would be if they would 
only teach rat-catching at school! Wouldn't I just work hard 
then, that's all!"

The stories came to an end. at bed-time, and I was then 
pressed by my hearers to write from foreign lands some more of 
my old reminiscences, and I readily gave a promise to do so. 
In this way most of the following stories were written; and in 
writing them, I endeavoured to carry out the idea that they 
were exercises to be used in schools.

I don't anticipate that head-masters will very generally adopt 
the book in their schools; but I hope it may, in some few 
instances, give boys a taste for a wholesome country pastime.

The characters and incidents are rough, very rough, pen and 
ink sketches of real people and scenes, and the dogs are all 
dear friends of past days.

 

INTRODUCTION. 
Addressed to all Schoolboys.

EVER since I was a boy, and ah! long, long before that, I 
fancy, the one great anxiety of parents of the upper and 
middle classes blessed with large families has been, "What are 
we to do with our boys?" and the cry goes on increasing, being 
intensified by the depreciation in the value of land, and by 
our distant colonies getting a little overstocked with young 
gentlemen, who have been banished to them by thousands, to 
struggle and strive, sink or swim, as fate wills it. At home, 
all professions are full and everything has been tried; and, 
go where you will, even the children of the noble may be found 
wrestling with those of the middle and working classes for 
every piece of bread that falls in the gutter. Nothing is 
infra dig. that brings in a shilling, and all has been and is 
being tried. The sons of the great are to be found shoulder to 
shoulder with "Tommy Atkins," up behind a hansom cab, keeping 
shops, selling wines, horses, cigars, coals, and generally 
endeavouring feebly to shoulder the son of the working man out 
of the race over the ropes. Fortunately Heaven tempers the 
wind to the shorn lamb, and I believe it has done so now. I 
believe kind Dame Nature during the last summer has stepped in 
and opened out an honourable path for many gentlemen's sons, 
that I think will be their salvation, and at all events, if it 
does not make them all rich, will, if they only follow it, 
make them most useful members of society and keep them out of 
mischief and out of their mammas' snug drawing-rooms. I have 
followed the path myself, and, after fifty years' tramp down 
it, have been forced to abandon it owing to gout and 
rheumatism. I have not picked up a big fortune at it, or 
become celebrated, except quite locally; but I have had a good 
time and helped the world in general, and am content with my 
past life.

I was the son of a worthy country parson, who in my youth 
proposed to me in turn to become a judge, a bishop, a general, 
a Gladstone, a Nelson, a Sir James Paget, and a ritualistic 
curate; but when talking to me on the subject the good old man 
always said, "Mind, my boy, though I propose these various 
positions for you, yet, if you have any decided preference 
yourself, I will not thwart you, I will not fly in the face of 
nature."

For some time I thought I should rather like to be a bishop, 
and to this day I think I should have made a good one; but the 
voice spoke at last, and my destiny was settled.

With the modest capital of five shillings given me by my 
father, and a mongrel terrier, given me by a poacher who had 
to go into retirement for killing a pheasant and half killing 
a keeper, I began my career as a—but I had better give you one 
of my professional cards. Here it is—

————————————————— 
BOB JOY, 
	RAT-CATCHER 
To HRH The Prince of Wales, 
The Nobility and Gentry. 
—————————————————

I had a struggle at first. Rats, full-grown ones, only fetched 
twopence each, and the system adopted by farmers of letting 
their rat-killing, for, say, three pounds a year for a farm of 
400 acres, almost broke me; but I stuck to my profession, and 
do not regret having done so.

In those days, and during all my active life, I have had to 
work to live, owing to the constant scarcity of rats; but if I 
managed to make a living then, what might not be done now, 
when Nature has sent the rat to our homesteads by thousands, 
and farmers and others are being eaten off the face of the 
earth by them?

Why, my dear young friends, your fortune stares you in the 
face, and you have only to stretch out your hand and grasp it—
no! I have made a mistake: you have a little more to do—you 
have, first, to learn your profession, which is no easy 
matter; and to enable you to do this, I intend writing the 
following book for the use of schools (which I herewith 
dedicate to the Head Masters of Eton, Harrow, Westminster, 
Rugby, and all other schools); but in placing this book on 
your school-desk, allow me to say that it is no good having it 
there through the long school hours unless you open it, read 
it, and deeply ponder over it; and more, my dear boys, let me 
pray that you will take it home with you, and, casting aside 
your usual holiday task, study it well, and, as far as 
possible, actively put in practice what I am going to try and 
teach you. Some fathers may wish their sons to enter on a more 
humble course of life, but this I rather doubt. However, 
should they do so, it will be only so much the better for 
those who take it up: there will be more room for them. Most 
mothers, I fear, will object to it on the ground that rats and 
ferrets don't smell nice; but this objection is not 
reasonable, They might as well say that the whiff of a fox on 
a soft December morning as you ride to covert is not 
delicious!

Respect your parents, respect even their prejudices; gently 
point out to your father that you are ambitious and wish for a 
career in which you can distinguish yourself. Above all, 
respect your mother, and show your respect by not taking 
ferrets or dead rats in your pockets into her drawing-room, 
and by washing your hands a little between fondling them and 
cuddling her. But to finish this sermon, let me point out that 
though in this great profession you will be everlastingly 
mixed up with dogs of all sorts, always make them come to you, 
and never go to them.

One last word. If in the following pages you come across a bit 
of grammar or spelling calculated to make a Head Master sit 
up, excuse it, and remember that I have been a rat-catcher all 
my life, and as a class we are not quite A1 at book learning.

 

CHAPTER I. 
The Ferret Family—Crossed with the Polecat—Choosing Ferrets—
Hutches—Feeding Ferrets—"Bar the Tail"—Handling Ferrets.


IN the following elementary treatise for the use of public 
schools, I propose following exactly the same plan as my 
parson (a good fellow not afraid of a ferret or a rat) does 
with his sermons—that is, divide it into different heads, and 
then jumble up all the heads with the body, till it becomes as 
difficult to follow as a rat's hole in a soft bank; and, to 
begin with, I am going to talk about ferrets, for without them 
rat-catching won't pay.

Where ferrets first came from I am not sure, but somewhere I 
have read that they were imported from Morocco, and that they 
are not natives of Great Britain any more than the ordinary 
rat is. If they were imported, then that importer ranks in my 
mind with, but before, Christopher Columbus and all such 
travellers. Anyhow it is quite clear that nowhere in Great 
Britain are there wild ferrets, for they are as distinct from 
the stoat, the mouse-hunter, the pole-cat, etc., as I am from 
a Red Indian; and yet all belong to the same family, so much 
so that I have known of a marriage taking place between the 
ferret and pole-cat, the offspring of which have again married 
ferrets and in their turn have multiplied and increased, which 
is a proof that they are not mules, for the children of mules, 
either in birds or beasts, do not have young ones.

There are two distinct colours in ferrets—one is a rich dark 
brown and tan, and the other white with pink eyes; and in my 
opinion one is just as good as the other for work, though by 
preference I always keep the white ferret, as it is sooner 
seen if it comes out of a hole and works away down a fence or 
ditch bottom. I have never known a dark-coloured ferret coming 
among a litter of white ones or a white among the dark; but 
there is a cross between the two which produces a grizzly 
beast, generally bigger than its mother, which I have for many 
years avoided, though it is much thought of in some parts of 
the Midlands. I fancy (though I may be wrong) that the cross 
is a dull slow ferret, wanting in dash and courage, and not so 
friendly and affectionate as the others, and therefore apt to 
stick with just its nose out of a hole so that you can't pick 
it up, or else it will "lay up" and give a lot of trouble 
digging it out.

For rat-catching the female ferret should always be used, as 
it is not half the size of the male, and can therefore follow 
a rat faster and better in narrow holes; in fact, an ordinary 
female ferret should be able to follow a full-grown rat 
anywhere. The male ferret should be kept entirely for 
rabbiting, as he has not to follow down small holes, and being 
stronger than the female can stand the rough knocking about he 
often gets from a rabbit better than his wife can.

In buying a ferret for work, get one from nine to fifteen 
months old, as young ferrets I find usually have more courage 
and dash than an old one. They have not been so often punished 
and therefore do not think discretion the better part of 
valour. However this will not be found to be an invariable 
rule. I have known old ferrets that would have faced a lion 
and seemed to care nothing about being badly bitten; whereas I 
have known a young ferret turn out good-for-nothing from 
having one sharp nip from a rat. Such beasts had better be 
parted with, for a bad, slow, or cowardly ferret is vexation 
of spirit and not profitable.

If I am buying brown ferrets I always pick the darkest, as I 
fancy they have most dash. This may be only fancy, or it may 
be the original ferret was white and that the brown is the 
cross between it and the polecat, and that therefore the 
darker the ferret, the more like it is in temper as well as 
colour to its big, strong, wild ancestor. Anyhow I buy the 
dark ones.

If I am buying female ferrets, I like big long ones, as a 
small ferret has not weight enough to tackle a big rat, and 
therefore often gets desperately punished. I like to see the 
ferrets in a tub, end up, looking well-nourished and strong; 
and directly I touch the tub I like to see them dash out of 
their hidden beds in the straw and rush to spring up the sides 
like a lot of furies. When I put my hand in to take one, I 
prefer not to be bitten; but yet I have often known a ferret 
turn out very well that has begun by making its teeth meet 
through my finger. When I have the ferret in hand, I first 
look at its tail and then at its feet, and if these are clean 
it will do. If, on the other hand, I find a thin appearance 
about the hairs of its tail and a black-looking dust at the 
roots, the ferret goes back into the tub; or if the underside 
of the feet are black and the claws encrusted with dirt, I 
will have nothing to say to it, as it has the mange and will 
be troublesome to cure. All this done, I put the ferret on the 
ground and keep picking it up and letting it go; if when I do 
this it sets up the hairs of its tail, arches its back and 
hisses at me, I may buy it; but I know, if I do, I shall have 
to handle it much to get it tame. If, on the other hand, when 
I play with it the ferret begins to dance sideways and play, I 
pay down my money and take it at once, for I have never known 
a playful ferret to prove a bad one.

If when you get the ferret it is wild and savage, it should be 
constantly handled till it is quite tamed before it is used. 
Little brothers and sisters will be found useful at this. Give 
them the ferret to play with in an empty or nearly empty barn 
or shed where it cannot escape. Put into the shed with them 
some long drain pipes, and tell them to ferret rats out of 
them. The chances are they will put the ferret through them 
and pick it up so often, that it will learn there is nothing 
to fear when it comes out of a real rat's hole, and will ever 
after "come to hand" readily. You had better not be in the way 
when the children return to their mother or nurse. I have had 
disagreeable moments on such occasions.

Having got all your ferrets, the next question is how to keep 
them. I have tried scores of different houses for them. I have 
kept them in a big roomy shed, in tubs, in boxes, and in pits 
in the ground; but now I always use a box with three 
compartments. The left-hand compartment should be the smallest 
and filled with wheat-straw well packed in, with a small round 
hole a little way up the division, for the ferrets to use as a 
door. The middle compartment should be empty and have the 
floor and front made of wire netting, to allow light, 
ventilation and drainage. The third compartment should be 
entered from the middle one by a hole in the division, but 
should have a strong tin tray fitting over the floor of it 
covered with sand, which can be drawn out and cleaned; the 
front of this compartment, too, should be wire netting. The 
sand tray should be removed and cleaned every day, even 
Sundays. The house should stand on legs about a foot high. 
Each compartment should have a separate lid, and the little 
entrance holes through the divisions should have a slide to 
shut them, so that any one division can be opened without all 
the ferrets rushing out. The bed should be changed once a 
week. Such a box as I have shown is large enough for ten 
ferrets. For a mother with a family a much smaller box will 
suffice, but it should be made on the same plan. For bedding 
use only wheat-straw. Either barley-straw or hay will give 
ferrets mange in a few days.

After housing the ferrets, they will require feeding. I have 
always given my ferrets bread and milk once or twice a week, 
which was placed in flat tins in the middle compartment; but 
care should be taken to clean out the tins each time, as any 
old sour milk in them will turn the fresh milk and make the 
ferrets ill. The natural food of ferrets is flesh—the flesh of 
small animals—and therefore it should be the chief food given. 
Small birds, rats and mice are to them dainty morsels, but the 
ferrets will be sure to drag these into their beds to eat and 
will leave the skins untouched; these should be removed each 
day. When my ferrets are not in regular work they are fed just 
before sunset; if they are fed in the morning they are no good 
for work all day, and one can never tell (except on Sundays) 
that one of the dogs may not find a rat that wants killing. 
The day before real work, I give the ferrets bread and milk in 
the morning, and nothing on the day they go out until their 
work is over. This makes them keen. Remember ferrets work hard 
in a big day's ratting, and therefore should be well nourished 
and strong; a ferret that is not will not have the courage to 
face a rat.

I have listened to all sorts of theories from old hands about 
feeding ferrets, but have followed the advice of few. For 
instance, I have been told that if you give flesh, such as 
rats and birds, to a ferret that has young ones, it will drag 
it into the straw among the little ones, who will get the 
blood on them, and then the mother will eat them by mistake. 
All I can say is, I have reared hundreds of young ferrets and 
have always given the mothers flesh. It is true that ferrets 
will eat their young, and the way to bring this about is to 
disturb the babies in the nest. If you leave them quite alone 
till they begin to creep about I believe there is no danger.

Then many old rat-catchers never give a ferret a rat with its 
tail on, as they believe there is poison in it. I remember one 
old fellow saying to me as he cut off the tail before putting 
the rat into the ferrets' box, "Bar the tail—I allus bars the 
tail—there's wenom in the tail." There may be "wenom" in it; 
but, if there is, it won't hurt the ferrets, for they never 
eat it or the skin.

If ferrets are properly cared for they are rarely ill, and the 
only trouble I have ever had is with mange, which, as I have 
said before, attacks the tail and feet. Most rat-catchers keep 
a bottle of spirits of tar, with which they dress the affected 
parts. It cures the mange, but, by the way the poor little 
beasts hop about after being dressed, I fear it stings 
dreadfully. I have always used sulphur and lard, and after 
rubbing it well in a few times I have always found it worked a 
cure. The objection to sulphur and lard is that it does not 
hurt, for I have noticed that sort of man generally prefers 
using a remedy that hurts a lot—that is, where the patient is 
not himself, but an animal.

No big day's ratting ever takes place without a ferret getting 
badly bitten. When this is so, the ferret should never be used 
again until it is quite well. It should be sent home and put 
in a quiet box, apart from the others, and the bites gently 
touched with a little sweet oil from time to time; or, if it 
festers much, it should be sponged with warm water.

I have often had ferrets die of their wounds, and these have 
usually been the best I had. Again, with wounds the old rat-
catcher uses the tar-bottle, chiefly, I think, because it 
hurts the ferret, and therefore must have "a power of wirtue."

Before going further I should point out to all students of 
this ennobling profession that the very first thing they have 
to learn is to pick up a ferret. Don't grab it by its tail, or 
hold it by its head as you would a mad bulldog; but take hold 
of it lightly round the shoulders, with its front legs falling 
gracefully out below from between your fingers. Then when you 
go to the box for your ferrets, and they come clambering up 
the side like a pack of hungry wolves, put your hand straight 
in among them without a glove, and pick up which one you 
require. Don't hesitate a moment. Don't dangle your hand over 
their heads till you can make a dash and catch one. The 
ferrets will only think your hand is their supper coming and 
will grab it, with no ill intent; but if you put it down 
steadily and slowly, they will soon learn you only do so to 
take them out, and your hand will become as welcome to them as 
flowers in spring.

True, at first, with strange ferrets you may be bitten; but it 
is not a very serious thing if you are, as ferrets' bites are 
never venomous, as the bites of rats often are. I have in my 
time been bitten by ferrets many dozens of times and have 
never suffered any ill effects. There, I think that is enough 
for your first lesson, so I will send it off at once and get 
it printed for you.

 

CHAPTER II. 
Bag versus Box—Ferrets Fighting—The Ratting Spade—Ratting 
Tools—Hints to Schoolmasters—Learning Dog-Language—With a 
Scold in the Voice—Dogs' Kennel—Treating Dogs Kindly—Dogs in 
their Proper Place

THE first chapter of this lesson-book has gone to the printer, 
so I don't quite know what I said in it, but I think we had 
finished the home-life of the ferret and were just taking it 
out of its box. Different professors have different opinions 
as to what is next to be done with it. Many (and they are good 
men too) think you should put it into a box about eighteen 
inches long, ten inches high, and ten wide; the box to be 
divided into two compartments, with a lid to each, and with 
leather loops to these lids through which to thrust a pointed 
spade so as to carry it on your shoulder. I have tried this 
plan, but I have never quite liked it. I have found that after 
a heavy day's work the box was apt to get heavy and feel as if 
it were a grand-father's clock hanging on your back. Then the 
ratting spade was engaged instead of being free to mump a rat 
on the head in a hurry, or point out a likely hole to the 
dogs. When a ferret was wanted, all the others would dash out 
and have to be hunted about to be re-caught. Now and then the 
lids came open and let all out; and now and then I let the box 
slip off the spade and fall to the ground, and then I felt 
sorry for the ferrets inside it! No, I have always carried my 
ferrets in a good strong canvas bag, with a little clean straw 
at the bottom, and a leather strap and buckle stitched on to 
it with which to close it. Don't tie the bag with a piece of 
string—it is sure to get lost; and don't have a stiff buckle 
on your strap that takes ten minutes to undo. Remember the 
life of a rat may depend upon your getting your ferret out 
quickly. Never throw the bag of ferrets down; lay them down 
gently. Don't leave the bag on the ground in a broiling sun 
with some of the ferrets in it while you are using the others, 
or in a cold draughty place on a cold day; find a snug corner 
for them, if you can, and cover them up with a little straw or 
grass to keep them warm.

If, when carrying your ferrets, they chatter in the bag, let 
them; it is only singing, not fighting. I have never known a 
ferret hurt another in a bag. Always bag your ferret as soon 
as you have done with it; don't drag it about in your hand for 
half an hour, and don't put it in your pocket, as it will make 
your coat smell.

When I have done work and turned towards home, I have made it 
a rule always to put a dead rat into the bag, as I think it 
amuses the ferrets and breaks the monotony of a long journey; 
just as when I run down home I like taking a snack at Swindon 
Station, just to divert my mind from the racketing of the 
train and the thought of the hard seat. When you get home, 
give the ferrets a rat for every two of them, if you can 
afford it, for then they need only eat the best joints. If you 
have not many dead rats and want to save some for the morrow, 
one rat for three ferrets is enough for twenty-four hours; but 
don't forget to give them water or milk.

I think I have said enough as to the management of ferrets, 
and will go on to speak of the necessary tools. The chief 
thing is a good ratting spade. What the musket is to the 
soldier, the spade is to the rat-catcher. You may get on 
without it, but you won't do much killing. I have tried many 
shapes, but the one I like best is on the pattern of the 
drawing in the frontispiece. It should not be too heavy, but 
yet strong; and, therefore, the handle should be made of a 
good piece of ash, and the other parts of the best tempered 
steel, and the edge should be sharp enough to cut quickly 
through a thick root. The spike should be sharp, so as easily 
to enter the ground and feel for a lost hole. This will 
constantly save a long dig and much time; besides, one can 
often bolt a rat by a few well-directed prods in a soft bank —
not that I approve of this, as there may be more than one rat 
in the hole, and by prodding out one you are contented to 
leave others behind. No, I think the ferret should go down 
every hole challenged by the dogs, as then you are, pretty 
sure of making a clean job of it.

Besides the spade, I have always kept a few trap boxes. These 
are to catch a ferret should one lay up and have to be left 
behind. I bait them with a piece of rat and place them at the 
mouth of the hole, and it is rare I don't find the ferret in 
it in the morning. I also take one of these traps with me if I 
am going where rats are very numerous; then, if a ferret stops 
too long in a hole, I stick the mouth of the trap over the 
hole and pack it round with earth and stop up all the bolt 
holes, and then go on working with the other ferrets. When the 
sluggard is at last tired of the hole, it walks into the trap, 
shoving up the wire swing door, which falls down behind it, 
and there it has to stop till you fetch it.

If I am going to ferret wheat stacks where rats have worked 
strong, I take with me half a dozen pieces of thin board about 
a foot long. I do so for this reason. The first thing rats do 
when they take possession of a stack is to make a good path, 
or run, all round it just under the eaves; and when disturbed 
by ferrets, they get into this run and keep running away round 
and round the stack without coming to the ground. Therefore, 
before putting in the ferrets, I take a ladder, and going 
round the eaves of the stack I stick the boards in so as to 
cut off these runs, and when a rat goes off for a gallop he 
comes to "no thoroughfare," and feeling sure the ferret is 
after him, he in desperation comes to the ground, and then the 
dogs can have a chance. I once killed twenty-eight rats out of 
a big stack in twenty minutes after the ferrets were put in, 
all thanks to these stop-boards; and though I ran the ferrets 
through and through the stack afterwards, I did not start 
another, and so I believe I had got the lot.

I think I have enumerated all the tools required for rat-
catching. I need not mention a knife and a piece of string, as 
all honest men have them in their pocket always, even on 
Sundays. Some rat-catchers take with them thick leather gloves 
to save their getting bitten by a rat or a ferret; but I 
despise such effeminate ways, and I consider he does not know 
his profession if he cannot catch either ferret or rat with 
his naked hands.

I must now turn to the subject of dogs—one far more important 
than either ferrets or tools, and one so large that if I went 
on writing and writing to the end of my days I should not get 
to the end of it, and so shall only make a few notes upon it 
as a slight guide to the student, leaving him to follow it up 
and work it out for himself; but in so doing I beg to say that 
his future success as a rat-catcher will depend on his 
mastering the subject.

But, before proceeding further, I am anxious to say a few 
words in parenthesis for the benefit of the Head Masters of 
our schools. Admirable as their academies are for turning out 
Greek and Latin scholars, I cannot help thinking a proper 
provision is seldom made in their establishments for acquiring 
a real working knowledge of the profession of a rat-catcher; 
and I wish to suggest that it would be as well to insist on 
all those students who wish to take up this subject keeping at 
school at least one good dog and a ferret, and that two 
afternoons a week should be set apart entirely for field 
practice, and that the cost of this should be jotted down at 
the end of each term in the little school account that is sent 
home to the students' parents. I know most high-spirited boys 
will object to this and call it a fresh tyranny, and ever 
after hate me for proposing it; but I do it under a deep sense 
of duty, being convinced that it is far better they should 
perfectly master the rudimentary knowledge of such an honest 
profession as that of rat-catcher, than that they should drift 
on through their school life with no definite future marked 
out, finally to become perhaps such scourges of society as 
M.P.s who make speeches when Parliament is not sitting. 
Judging from the columns of the newspapers, there must be many 
thousands who come to this most deplorable end; and if I can 
only turn one from such a vicious course, I shall feel I have 
benefitted mankind even more than by killing rats and other 
vermin.

Now I must return to the subject of dogs, and in doing so I 
will first begin on their masters, for to make a good dog, a 
good master is also absolutely necessary. Anybody that has 
thought about it knows that as is the master, so is the dog. A 
quiet man has a quiet dog, a quarrelsome man a quarrelsome 
dog, a bright quick man a bright quick dog, and a loafing idle 
ruffian a slinking slothful cur.

First of all, then, the dog's master must understand dog talk; 
for they do talk, and eloquently too, with their tongues, 
their ears, their eyes, their legs, their tail, and even with 
the hairs on their backs; and therefore don't be astonished if 
you find me saying in the following pages, "Pepper told me 
this," or "Wasp said so-and-so." Why, I was once told by a 
bull terrier that a country policeman was a thief, and, 
"acting on information received," I got the man locked up in 
prison for three months, and it just served him right. Having 
learnt dog language, use it to your dog in a reasonable way: 
talk to him as a friend, tell him the news of the day, of your 
hopes and fears, your likes and dislikes, but above all use 
talk always in the place of a whip. For instance, when 
breaking in a young dog not to kill a ferret, take hold of the 
dog with a short line, put the ferret on the ground in front 
of him, and when he makes a dash at it say, "What are you up 
to? War ferret! Why, I gave four and sixpence for that, you 
fool, and now you want to kill it! Look here (picking the 
ferret up and fondling it), this is one of my friends. Smell 
it (putting it near his nose). Different from a rat, eh? 
Rather sweet, ain't it? War ferret, war ferret! Would you, you 
rascal? Ain't you ashamed of yourself? War ferret, war 
ferret!" Repeat this a few times for two or three days, and 
when you first begin working the dog and he is excitedly 
watching for a rat to bolt, just say "War ferret" to him, and 
he will be sure to understand. Should he, however, in his 
excitement make a dash at a ferret, shout at him to stop, and 
then, picking up the ferret, rub it over his face, all the 
time scolding him well for what he has done; but don't hit 
him, and probably he will never look at a ferret again.

In my opinion there is nothing like a thrashing to spoil a dog 
or a boy; reason with them and talk to them, and if they are 
worth keeping they will understand and obey. Mind, a dog must 
always obey, and obey at the first order. Always give an order 
in a decided voice as if you meant it, and never overlook the 
slightest disobedience. One short whistle should always be 
enough. If the dog does not obey, call him up and, repeating 
the whistle, scold him with a scold in your voice. Don't shout 
or bawl at him for all the country to hear and the rats too, 
but just make your words sting. If he repeats his offence, put 
a line and collar on him and lead him for half an hour, 
telling him all the time why you do so, and he will be so 
ashamed of himself that the chances are he will obey you ever 
after.

Put yourself in the dog's place. Fancy if, when you have 
"kicked a bit over the traces" at school, the headmaster, 
instead of thrashing you, made you walk up and down the 
playground or cricket-field with him for half an hour; but no, 
that would be too awful; it would border on brutality! But you 
would not forget it in a hurry.

We humans often behave well and do good, not because it is our 
duty so to do, but for what the world will say and for the 
praise we may get. Dogs are not in all things superior to 
humans, and in this matter of praise I fear they are even 
inferior to us. They most dearly love praise, and a good dog 
should always get it for any and every little service he 
renders to man. Remember, he is the only living thing that 
takes a pleasure in working for man, and his sole reward is 
man's approbation. Give it him, then, and give it him hot and 
warm when he deserves it, and he will be willing to do 
anything for you and will spend his life worshipping you and 
working for you; for better, for worse, for richer, for 
poorer, he is yours, with no sneaking thoughts of a divorce 
court in the background.

There is another thing a master should always do for his dog 
himself and do it with reason. See to his comfort; see that he 
has good food and water and is comfortably lodged. Don't let 
him be tied up to a hateful kennel in a back yard, baked by 
the sun in summer and nearly frozen in winter; often without 
water, and with food thrown into a dish that is already half 
full of sour and dirty remains of yesterday's dinner. This is 
not reasonable and is cruel. When he is not with you, shut him 
up in a kennel, big or little, made as nearly as you can have 
it on the model of a kennel for hounds. Let it be cool and 
airy in summer and snug and warm in winter; keep all clean—
kennel, food, dishes, water and beds. Don't forget that 
different dogs have different requirements; for instance, that 
a long thick coated dog will sleep with comfort out in the 
snow, while a short-coated one will shiver in a thick bed of 
straw. Picture to yourself, as you tuck the warm blankets 
round you on a cold winter's night, what your thin-coated 
pointer is undergoing in a draughty kennel on a bare plank 
bed, chained up to a "misery trap" in the back yard, which is 
half full of drifted snow. Think of it, and get up and put the 
dog in a spare loose box in the stable for the night, and have 
a proper kennel made for him in the morning.

I once had a favourite dog named "Rough" that died of 
distemper. A small child asked me a few days afterwards if 
dogs when they died went to heaven, and I, not knowing better, 
answered, "Yes"; and the child said, "Won't Rough wag his old 
tail when he sees me come in?" When you "come in" I hope there 
will be all your departed dogs wagging their tails to meet 
you. It will depend upon how you have treated them here; but 
take my word for it, my friend, you will never be allowed to 
pass that door if the dogs bark and growl at you.

Don't suppose I am a sentimental "fat pug on a string" sort of 
man. Next to humans I like dogs best of all creatures. Why, I 
have made my living by their killing rats for me at twopence 
per rat and three pound a farm, and I am grateful: but I like 
dogs in their proper place. For instance, as a rule, I dislike 
a dog in the house. The house was meant for man and should be 
kept for him. I think when a man goes indoors his dog should 
be shut up in the kennel and not be allowed to wander about 
doing mischief, eating trash, learning to loaf, and under no 
discipline. Now and then I do allow an old dog that has done a 
life's hard work to roam about as he likes, and even walk into 
my study (I mean kitchen) and sit before the fire and chat 
with me; but, then, such dogs have established characters, and 
nothing can spoil them; besides, they are wise beasts with a 
vast experience, and I can learn a lot from them. It was from 
one of these I learnt all about the prigging policeman.

A young dog is never good for much who is allowed to run wild; 
every one is his master and he obeys no one, and when he is 
taken out he is dull and stupid, thinking more of the kitchen 
scraps than of business. No, when I go to work, I like to let 
the dogs out myself, to see them dash about, dance around, 
jump up at me and bark with joy. I like to see the young ones 
topple each other over in sport, and the old ones gallop on 
ahead to the four crossways, and stand there watching to see 
which way I am going, and then, when I give them the direction 
with a wave of the hand, bolt off down the road with a wriggle 
of content. You might trust your life to dogs in such a joyful 
temper, for they would be sure to stand by you.

Thank you, young gentlemen; that is enough for this morning's 
lesson. You may now amuse yourselves with your Ovid or Euclid.

 

CHAPTER III. 
Aristocratic versus Plutocratic—Come-by-Chance—Chance's 
Friend—Nondescript Tinker—Grindum—How I got Grindum—Grindum's 
Friends—Jack and his Sister—"Jack Took Me"—End of an Ugly 
Story—Grindum's First Rat—Pepper and Wasp .

I AM a working man, or rather have been till I got the 
rheumatics, and as such I naturally stick to my own class and 
prefer associating with those of my own sort, and therefore I 
always keep working dogs.

I have often bred aristocratic dogs, dogs descended from great 
prize-winners and with long pedigrees, and among them I have 
had some good ones, honest and true; but as a rule I must say 
my experience proves that the shorter the pedigree the better 
the dog, and now if I could get them I should like to keep 
dogs that never had a father. Some people I know call me a 
cad, a clod, a chawbacon, etc., and they call my dogs curs and 
mongrels. Such men talk nonsense and should be kept specially 
to make speeches during the recess. I don't care to defend 
myself, but I must stand up for my dogs against all comers; 
and I assert boldly that, nine times out of ten, a dog with no 
pedigree is worth two with a long one. When I get a new dog I 
never ask who he is, or who his father was, but I go by his 
looks and his performances. There are dogs like men in all 
classes, who have either a mean, spiteful, vicious look, or a 
dull, heavy, dead one; such I avoid both in dog and man, for I 
find they are not worth knowing. Any other dog will do for me, 
and even now, though I don't often go ratting, I have as good 
a lot as ever stood at a hole, and I don't think I can do 
better than describe them as a guide to students when they 
come to getting a kennel together.

First of all, I never give a lot of money for a dog—how can I 
with rats at twopence each?—but, if I can, I drop on a likely-
looking young one about a year old who was going to be "put 
away" on account of the tax. I got the oldest I have now in 
the kennel in this way. It followed George Adams, the carrier, 
home one night, and to this day has never been claimed; and 
when the tax-collector spoke to him about it, he offered it to 
me, and I took it and gave it the name of "Come-by-chance," 
but in the family and among friends she is now called 
"Chance."

If Chance is of any family I should think her mother was a 
setter and her father a bobtail sheep-dog; but, then, I can't 
make out where she got her legs! She is red and white, with a 
perfect setter's head. She has the hind parts of a sheep-dog 
and evidently never had a tail; and her legs, which are very 
thick, would be short for a big terrier. Such are her looks, 
which certainly are not much to speak of; but if I had the pen 
of a Sir Walter Scott I could not do credit to the perfection 
of her character. For seven years she has been the support of 
my business, and I can safely say she has caused the death of 
more rats than all my other dogs put together. I say caused, 
for she is slow at killing and leaves this matter of detail to 
younger hands. If another dog is not near she will catch a rat 
and even kill it; but she has a soft mouth, and all the other 
dogs, except quite the youngest, know this, and, against the 
rule, will always dash in when she has a rat in her mouth and 
take it from her, and she gives it up without a struggle.

No, her forte is to find a rat. She is always in and out, up 
the bank, through the hedge, down the bank; not a tuft of 
grass escapes her, and she would hunt down each side of Regent 
Street and in and out of the carriages if she found herself 
there. She lives hunting. Nothing ever escapes her; one sniff 
at the deepest and most turn-about hole is enough. If the rat 
is not in, on she goes in a minute; but should it be ensconced 
deep down in the furthest corner, she stops at once and just 
turns her head round and says quietly to me, "Here's one." 
Then, whilst I am getting out a ferret, over the bank she 
goes, in and out the hedge in all directions, and never fails 
to find and mark every bolt-hole for the other dogs to stand 
at that belongs to the one where the rat is. As soon as I 
begin to put in the ferret, she will come over the hedge, give 
herself a shake, and sit down and watch the proceedings, not 
offering to take a part herself, as she feels there are more 
able dogs ready, and that this is not her strong point. 
Suppose a rat bolts and is killed and the ferret comes out, 
Chance will never leave the hole till she has taken a sniff at 
it to make sure all the rats have been cleared out. I have 
never known her make a mistake. If she says there is a rat in, 
there is one without, any doubt; if she says there is not, it 
is no good running a ferret through the hole. Should I be 
alone, with no one to look out for the ferret when it comes 
out on the other side of a bank, Chance without a word being 
said to her will get over and look out, and directly the 
ferret appears will come back to me and give a wriggle, 
looking in the direction of the ferret, and then I know I must 
get over and pick it up.

She has one peculiarity. When she followed George Adams home, 
seven years ago, she was shy and scared; but, as it was a cold 
night, George, being a kind-hearted fellow, invited her to 
step indoors, an invitation she accepted in a frightened sort 
of way. On the hearth sat a little girl of three years old, 
eating her supper, and Chance, doubtless feeling very hungry, 
came and sat down in front of her and watched her with a 
wistful look. The child was not afraid and soon began feeding 
the dog, who took the pieces of food most gently from her 
fingers. When the child was taken up to bed, Chance secretly 
followed, and getting under the crib slept there all night. 
Only once since then has Chance failed to sleep in that same 
place, and that was the first night I had her. She was shut up 
in the kennel and never stopped barking all night. Since then 
she has always followed me home, eaten her supper at the 
kitchen door, and then gone off to her bed under the crib. 
Early in the morning she is again at my door and never goes 
near George's house till bed-time.

If Chance has no tail, the next dog on the list, "Tinker," 
makes up the average. He is a little black, hard-coated dog, 
with the head of a greyhound and tail of a foxhound. His head 
is nearly as long as his body, and his tail is just a little 
longer. In all ways he is a proficient at rat-catching, except 
that he has been known to mark a hole where there was no rat; 
but his strong point is killing. He will stand well back from 
a hole, and it does not matter how many rats bolt, or how 
fast, each gets one snap and is dead and dropped without 
Tinker having moved a foot. I named him Tinker, for a tinker 
gave him to me "cos he warn't no sort of waller."

Then on my list next comes "Grindum," a mongrel bull-terrier, 
just the tenderest hearted, mildest dispositioned dog that 
ever killed a rat. He has but a poor nose and is not clever, 
but he has one strong point, which he developed for himself 
without being taught. It is this: when I am ferreting a thick 
hairy bank with a big ditch, Grindum always goes some ten 
yards off and places himself in the ditch, and, let the 
excitement be what it will, he never moves; and should a rat 
in the thick grass escape the other dogs and bolt down the 
ditch, it is a miracle if it does not die when it reaches him. 
I have better and cleverer dogs, I know; but I think Grindum 
brings in as many twopences as any of them, and we are not 
going to part! The way I got Grindum is quite a little 
history, and I will tell it, though if you boys like, you can 
skip it and go on with a more serious part of your lesson.

Not far from where I lived there was, in a most out-of-the-way 
corner on a common, an old sand-pit, and in this a miserable 
dilapidated cottage, consisting of two rooms. This for some 
years had been empty, but one fine morning was discovered to 
be inhabited by a man, his wife and two children—a boy of 
twelve and a girl of seven—and a bull-terrier. No one knew 
anything about them or where they had come from, and when the 
landlord of the hut went to eject them, he found them in such 
a miserable half-starved condition that he left them alone.

Our parson called on them three times—the first time the wife 
told him they did not like strangers and parsons in 
particular; the second time the husband told him to clear out 
sharp, or he would do him a mischief; and the third time the 
man took up a knife and began sharpening it, preparatory, he 
said, to cutting the parson's throat!

Two months after this the man, after sitting drinking in the 
village pot-house all the morning, stepped round to an old 
midwife and asked her "to come and lay his wife out." The 
woman went and did her work and said nothing at the time, but 
later on it was whispered about that she had told some of her 
pals that "the poor crittur was black and blue, and that it 
was on her mind that the husband had murdered her!" After 
this, as I .passed the cottage, I often saw the two children 
sitting on a log of wood outside, with the bull-dog sitting 
between them. None of the three ever moved out; all blinked 
their eyes at me as I passed, as if they were unaccustomed to 
the sight of a fellow-creature.

Two or three months passed, during which the man was 
constantly drinking at the village public-house; but he always 
left at sundown—"to look after the kids, "he said. Then there 
was a poaching fray on a nobleman's estate near. Six keepers 
came on five poachers one moonlight night. There was a hard 
fight, and at last the keepers took two of the men and the 
other three bolted, but one was recognized as the man from the 
sand-pit and was "wanted" by the police.

A few nights after this I was walking down a lane in the dark 
near my house, when the sand-pit man stepped out of the hedge, 
leading his dog by a cord, and turning to me said, "Here, 
master, if you want a good dog, here is one for you; I am off 
to give myself up to the police, and I am going to turn 
queen's evidence against my pals." I replied that I did not 
want such a dog, so he said, "All right, then I'll cut his 
throat, "and then and there prepared to do so. This was more 
than I could stand, so I took the cord and led the dog away, 
but before doing so, I asked, "How about your children?" He 
gave a short laugh, and said, "They would be properly provided 
for." It afterwards turned out that soon after leaving me he 
walked straight into the arms of two policemen, who saved him 
the trouble of giving himself up by taking him into custody.

I led my new dog home and tied him up in the corner of an open 
wood-shed, giving him a bundle of straw and a dish of bones, 
and by the starved look of him I should say this was the 
biggest meal he had ever had in his life.

I sat up late that night reading, and all the time in a remote 
corner of my mind the sand-pit man, the two children and the 
dog kept turning about, till at last, about midnight or later, 
I thought I would go to bed; but before doing so I made up my 
mind that I would see if my new dog was all right. I lit a 
lantern and stepped out of the door and found it was blowing 
and snowing and biting cold. Mercifully I persevered and 
reached the wood-shed, and what I saw there by the light of my 
lantern did startle me. There was the bull-dog sure enough 
lying curled up in the straw blinking hard at me, but—could I 
believe my eyes?—there lying with him, with their arms 
entwined round each other and round the dog, were the two 
children from the sand-pit fast asleep, but looking so pale 
and pinched I thought they must be dead.

I will give place to no man living at rat-catching and minding 
dogs, but here was a pretty mess, for I am no good with little 
children; so putting down my lantern, I hurried back to the 
house and got two rugs and with them wrapped the children and 
dog up snugly. Then I went in and woke up my wife, who had 
already gone to bed, and called some other women who were in 
the house, and after telling them what I had found, I made up 
a big fire in the kitchen and put on some water to boil. In a 
very few minutes my wife was downstairs and battling her way 
with me off to the woodshed. I untied the dog and moved him 
away from the children. This woke them both, and they sat up 
and rubbed their eyes, and the poor boy appeared almost scared 
to death, but the little girl was quite quiet, and only 
watched his face with a sad careworn old look which I pray I 
may never see on a child's face again.

My wife is really smart with little children, and in half no 
time she was on her knees crooning over them, and soon she had 
the girl in her arms; but when I attempted to pick up the boy 
he only screamed and struggled, and kept calling out, 
"Grindum, Grindum! I won't leave Grindum. I shall be killed if 
I leave Grindum. Let me stay with Grindum." I assured him he 
should not be separated from Grindum "never no more," and at 
last I partially quieted him, and he allowed me to carry him 
into the kitchen and place him on a stool in front of the fire 
with his sister, while his beloved Grindum sat by his side 
blinking as if nothing unusual had taken place, and as if he 
had done the same each night for the last three months and 
felt a little bored by it.

The first thing to be done, my wife said, was to feed the 
children, and while she and the other women busied about 
getting it ready, I sat and watched them. Both were remarkably 
pretty; both dark, with finely cut features, big eyes and 
thick soft black hair; but yet in different ways both had 
something sad about them. The boy never sat still for a 
moment, but kept glancing fearfully at me, then at the women, 
and then at the door, as if he expected something dreadful to 
happen, and all the time kept grasping the arm of his little 
sister with one hand as if for protection, and clinging to the 
soft skin of Grindum's neck with the other. If he caught my 
eye, or if I spoke to him, he flinched as if I had struck him, 
and turned livid and tugged so hard at Grindum's skin that the 
poor dog's eyes were pulled into mere slits, through which I 
could see he yet went on blinking at the fire. The girl sat 
half turned round to the boy and never took her eyes off his 
face, looking the very essence of womanly pity and love. Now 
and then when he suffered from a paroxysm of fear, she would 
softly stroke his face, which appeared to soothe him 
instantly; but nothing she could do could ever stop the wild 
restless look in his eyes or prevent his glancing about as if 
watching for some dreadful apparition. It was a sad, sad 
picture, made doubly striking by the utter stolidity and 
indifference of that awful dog, Grindum.

Soon hot basins of bread and milk were prepared, which both 
children eat ravenously, and then they were put into steaming 
hot baths, washed, dried, combed, and wrapped in blankets; but 
when we attempted to take them up to the nice warm beds that 
had been prepared for them, there was the same wild terrified 
cry from the boy for Grindum; and to pacify him the dog had to 
be taken upstairs with them, and half an hour later, when my 
wife and I peeped into the room, we saw the two children 
locked in each other's arms fast asleep, with Grindum curled 
up on the bed next to the boy, yet blinking horribly, but 
perfectly composed and making himself at home.

How those two children found their way that night through a 
blinding snow-storm to their only living friend, the dear 
blinking Grindum, I never could find out. All I could ever get 
from the boy was, "Oh, I always go where Grindum goes!" and 
the little girl could only say, "Jack took me." My wife says 
angels guided them. Maybe she's right, but I hardly think 
angels would be likely to go about on such a night; still my 
wife went out in the snow and wind to the shed and got out of 
her snug bed to do it, but then she put on a pea jacket and 
clogs, and that makes a difference.

This is a tiring long story to write, and I have not quite 
done it yet, for I must finish with the sand-pit man. He was 
tried, convicted and got three years. A year after he had been 
in prison he tried to escape by getting over a high wall, but 
in doing so he fell from the top and broke his back. He 
lingered some days and seemed to find a pleasure in telling 
the prison parson of all his misdeeds and in boasting of them. 
There was a long list, but only the last part of his story 
will serve for "the use of schools." It appears from what he 
said that, after he had given me the dog, he had intended to 
steal back to his house and take the two children to a deep 
pond and there drown them. Then, free from family ties, he 
hoped to get away and ship himself off to America. He also 
said that in a fit of rage he had thrashed his wife to death 
with his fists, and that his boy from having seen him do it 
had gone mad with fear, and was so bad, especially at night, 
that if he had not got a bulldog sleeping with him as a sort 
of friend, he would go into a fit with fear and was often 
unconscious for hours.

It was an ugly story, and I am glad to say with the death of 
the sand-pit man the miserable part of the children's life 
ended. The girl is now twelve years old and has never left us. 
She is as sharp as a needle and as honest as old Chance and as 
good. She is having a good education, thanks to our Rector's 
wife, and could if need be earn her own livelihood, but we are 
not going ever to part with her.

The boy Jack was a great trouble to us at first. For months he 
would not be parted for a moment, day or night, from Grindum, 
and the dog actually had to go to school with him; but the 
master utterly failed to teach the boy even as far as A B C in 
his alphabet, and the dog not to blink; and so, one fine day, 
I had both returned on my hands as hopeless ignoramuses. I 
could not keep a blinking dog at home in idleness, so I took 
him with me ratting, and as Jack would, not be parted from the 
dog, he had to come too. Everyone says the boy is "cracked." 
He is queer, I will allow, but if you will find me a better 
hand at rat-catching in all its branches, I should like to 
look at him; and besides, if Jack is cracked, then I like 
cracked boys, for I never came across one more obedient, more 
truthful, or more steady, and I find him a perfect treasure on 
the other side of the bank at the bolt holes.

Jack never mentions the past, and I should be inclined to 
think he had forgotten it, only if he is parted from Grindum 
for a short time he becomes wild looking about the eyes again 
and restless. At such times his sister, who mothers him much, 
will sit by him and stroke his face softly, when he will 
quickly recover himself. I don't know what will happen when 
Grindum "blinks his last," but the boy begins to follow me 
about and seems to cling to me, and by that time I hope I 
shall be so well liked by him that I may take Grindum's place.

Just two words more about Grindum and I have done. One is that 
the first time Grindum caught a rat, he picked it up by its 
hind leg, and the rat made its teeth meet through his nose. He 
softly put the rat down and it escaped, and I made my sides 
ache and greatly astonished all the other dogs by laughing at 
this great soft beast as he sat on his haunches licking the 
blood as it trickled from his nose, and staring up into the 
sky with a far-off vacant look, blinking worse than ever.

The other word is this. Though Grindum is a bull-dog with an 
awful "Crush your bones, tear your flesh" look, he is just the 
gentlest-hearted beast out, and there is not a puppy in the 
kennel, nor a child in the village, who does not know this and 
impose on him shamefully. Only last Sunday I had to stop a 
small child of five from driving off in a four-wheeled cart, 
using Grindum as a horse. Once, and once only, Grindum showed 
his temper. A big lout in the village threw a stone at him. 
Grindum only blinked, but Jack saw it and hit the lout, who 
being twice Jack's size turned upon him and knocked him down. 
In half a minute Grindum's teeth had met three times in the 
lout's calves and his trousers required reseating, and in 
three-quarters of a minute Grindum was sitting down with a 
bland expression of countenance, blinking with both eyes at 
the sky.

Now to continue my lesson on ratting dogs. I have two others, 
Pepper and Wasp—one a badly bred spaniel, and the other a 
terrier of doubtful parentage. They are both nice cheerful 
young dogs that it is a pleasure to see either at play or 
work, but they are yet young and too apt to get excited and 
wild. They will, when a rat is out of his hole, in a hedge, 
dash up and down the entire length of the field, making 
enormous jumps in the air, during which time they listen 
keenly for the rustle of the rat in the grass; and once, but 
only once,, Pepper gave a yap when so rushing about, but I 
spoke to him so severely about this disgustingly low habit 
that he has never done it again.

Wasp is specially good at water, and I have taught him to come 
to me directly a rat is bolted with a plunge into a pond, and 
I carry her high up in my arms round the pond, and when the 
rat approaches the side, Wasp from her high vantage ground 
will dive down upon it and have it in an instant. Both dogs 
are quick killers and will, I am sure, in time be perfect; but 
as yet I do not think myself justified in putting them into a 
higher class with such dogs as Chance and Tinker.

There! that is all for to-day, young gentlemen. Resume your 
Cicero, and, while you are preparing it, I will go to my room 
and look over the impositions I set you yesterday. It is 
understood that for "look over impositions" we may read, 
"Smoke cavendish in a short black pipe."

 

CHAPTER IV. 
A Day's Ratting—An Autumn Walk—"Steady, Dogs, Steady"—A Ferret 
Disabled—Rats up a Pollard—A Rat-catcher's Picnic—Rats in a 
Drain—A Weary Walk Home—" Kennel, Dogs, Kennel"

WHAT do you say, boys? Shall we drop this and have a day's 
outdoor practice? To tell the truth, I don't think much of 
book-learning, especially if the book is written by myself; 
but I do believe in practice. Come along! It is the middle of 
October—just the nicest time of the year and the very best for 
ratting, for the vermin are yet out in the hedges, fine and 
strong from feeding in the corn, and with few young ones 
about. Come, Jack, we'll get the ferrets first; and off I go 
with the boy to the hutch, while the dogs in the kennel, 
having heard our steps and perfectly understanding what is up, 
bark and yap at the door, jump over each other, tumble and 
topple about like mad fiends. Before I get to the box I hear 
the ferrets jumping up at the sides, and when I open the lid 
half a dozen are out in a moment, and these I bag as a reward 
for their activity. I throw the others a rat to console them 
for being left at home, and, giving the ferrets to Jack, I 
strap on a big game bag, take up my spade, return and let the 
dogs out, and off we start.

Step out quick, Jack; there are three miles to go before we 
get to work, and it is 8 a.m. and I expect a big day. Yes, 
Chance, old lady, a fine day—a perfect day—a day to make both 
the feet and the heart light and every human sense rejoice. 
There has been just a little frost in the night: you can see 
that by the way the elms have spread a golden carpet under 
their branches in the lane and by their leaves that yet keep 
falling slowly one by one in the fresh, but dead still, air, 
and by the smell of the turnips, the fresh stubble and the 
newly turned earth behind yonder plough. The sun shines, 
cobwebs are floating through the air and get twisted round 
one's head, and far and near sounds such as a cart on the high 
road, a sheep dog barking, a boy singing, birds chirping, 
insects humming, the patter of our own feet, and the 
whispering of the brook under the bridge, all form part of a 
chorus heaven-sent to gladden the heart of man. I have heard 
tell, Chance, or I have seen it in a book, or I have felt it 
myself, I don't quite know which, that those who in youth have 
had such a walk as this, and have heard the music, smelt the 
perfumes and seen the sights (that is if they were blessed 
with eyes to see, ears to hear, and hearts to take in), have 
never forgotten it. The memory appears for a time to pass away 
amidst the struggles of life, but it is never dead; to the 
soldier in battle, to the statesman in council, or the priest 
in prayers, to those in sorrow or in joy or in sickness, there 
may come, no one knows from where, no one knows why, a golden 
memory of such days, of such a walk. Perhaps it is only a 
gleam resting but a second upon the mind, and perhaps leaving 
it saddened with a longing for days that are past, but yet I 
think making one feel a better man, giving one courage and 
hope, reminding one that, hard as the battle of life may be to 
fight, dark and gloomy as the days may be just now, another 
morning may arise for us, far, far more bright and glorious 
and joyful, one that will not be shadowed over by a returning 
night; but then that is only for the brave, the honest, the 
truthful—for those who are up early and strive late, never 
beaten, never doubting, always pressing forward.

But, come out of that, Wasp! Don't you know that cows kick if 
you sniff at their heels? Tinker, old man, keep your spirits 
up; Pepper, come back from that wood, for it is preserved. 
Yes, Jack, I think I'll fill my pipe again. Baccy does taste 
good on a day like this; but what doesn't? I feel like a ten-
year-old and as fit as a fiddler. Grindum, give over blinking 
and don't look so benevolent. No, Chance, no, old lady, I 
can't pull your tail, for you haven't got one. What, Jack, you 
say I haven't spoken for the past mile? Well, I suppose I have 
been thinking, and my thoughts have not been wholly sad ones. 
Open the gate; here we are; and you get over on the other side 
of the hedge and don't talk or make a noise, for I can see by 
the work the rats s-w-a-r-m. Steady, dogs, steady! And so we 
start.

The hedge is just what it should be, and if it had been made 
for ratting it could not be better. A round bank of soft 
earth, a shallow ditch with grass, little bush or bramble, and 
a gap every few yards. There is a gateway in the middle, which 
will make a hot corner later on when Grindum has taken his 
stand there; and there is a pipe under the gateway, the far 
end of which I shall close. The rats have never been 
disturbed, for the runs are as fresh as Oxford Street, and I 
have already seen one or two rats run into the hedge lower 
down from out the wheat stubble, and, there! that whistle has 
sent a lot more in. Steady, Wasp! Well done, Chance; you have 
marked one in that hole near you, or more than one, is there? 
Well, the more the merrier! Stand, dogs, stand! Are you ready, 
Jack? And in goes a ferret as lively as quicksilver and as 
fierce as a tiger.

For a minute all is quiet; then a slight stir on the other 
side and two snaps of Tinker's lantern-jaws, and two rats 
dead; three others out of a side hole are killed by Wasp, and 
three others accounted for by Grindum, and that fool Pepper is 
racing and jumping down the hedge a mile off. Whistle! 
whistle! and back he comes, and at that moment Jack picks up a 
ferret on the other side, it having gone through the hole. 
Chance sniffs at it and says it is swept clear, and I block it 
up with my heel, and Jack does the same to the bolt-hole, so 
that if a rat does come back later on the dogs will have a 
chance; and then on we go a few yards to the next hole which 
Chance marks. This time the ferret went in like a lion and 
came out like a lamb, with the blood running out of the side 
of its face; and whilst I am examining the bite, a real 
patriarch rat bolted at a side hole near Pepper, who strikes 
at it, misses taking a proper hold and gets it too far back, 
and the next moment the blood is pouring from a bite above his 
eye; but the rat is dead, and Pepper but little the worse.

I thought it was too late in the year for young ones, but it 
was not, for at the next hole we came to the ferret got into a 
nest, killed a lot of young ones and "laid up," and, as I had 
not a box-trap with me, I had to dig it out. This took some 
time, as I lost the hole, and Jack, whilst down grubbing with 
his hands, broke into a wrong one in which the old rat was 
ready for him, and at once bit him through the end of his 
finger. Jack sucked it well and did not mind, but I did not 
much like the appearance of things, for in half-an-hour I had 
had a ferret laid up, and a dog and a boy bitten badly by 
rats, and these bites are often very poisonous. Fortunately 
this time Jack took no harm and was soon well. As soon as Jack 
pulled his hand out of the rat's hole, Pincher put his long 
nose in, and all was over in a minute. Soon after I came on 
the ferret curled up in a nest of young rats, all minus their 
heads; and so that ferret, from being gorged with food, was no 
more good for work, and had to be put away with the bitten 
one.

After this we got on much faster; the holes were close 
together, and even with the greatest care lots of rats bolted 
and went forward, but I would not allow the dogs to disturb 
fresh ground by following them. Some went back, and Pepper and 
Wasp had a good time, for I let them follow and work them 
alone, having stopped all back holes after ferreting them. Now 
and then, Jack and I had to go back, as there was an old 
pollard tree covered with ivy, and many of the rats got up 
that, and Pincher had to be lifted up into the crown to 
displace them, and then when they jumped down, three or four 
at a time, there was a grand scrimmage.

When we had got twenty yards or so from the gateway, Grindum 
went forward and stood there and killed a dozen rats that 
tried to pass, and a lot more went into the pipe under the 
roadway. These we left alone, only after we had passed we 
stopped up the open end and opened the shut one, so that in 
future rats going back might wait quietly in the arch till we 
were ready for them. By the time we had got as far as the gate 
it was just noon, so we called the dogs back to a tree we had 
passed, and then Jack and I sat down and paid attention to the 
game bag, which was well provided with cold meat and bread and 
cheese and a bottle of beer.

I am not a good hand at picnics and never was. I mean those 
big gatherings with ladies, lobster salad, hot dishes, plates, 
knives, spoons, champagne, etc. I find the round world was 
created a little too low down to sit upon with comfort; my 
knees don't make a good table; flies get into my beer and 
hopping things into my plate. I have to get up and hand 
eatables about; things bite me, and more creep about me, and 
it does not look well to scratch. The hostess looks anxious 
about her glass and plate; someone has forgotten the salt, and 
someone else the corkscrew. The host, be he ever so sad, makes 
fun, and made fun is magnified misery to me. No, I don't like 
picnics; I would rather be at home and feed upon a table; and 
yet a snack at noon-day, after hard work, sitting under a 
tree, with your hands as plates, with a good "shut-knife," a 
silent companion and the dogs all round you, is pleasant. 
Double Gloucester then equals Stilton, and bottled beer 
nectar; and then the pipe in quiet, while Jack takes the dogs, 
after they have finished the scraps, to the pond to drink. 
Talk of Havanas! Well, talk of them, but give me that pipe as 
I loll, half asleep, resting against the tree, my legs spread 
out, and my hat tipped over my nose. I half close my eyes and 
go nearly to sleep, but keep pulling at the pipe, and half 
unconsciously hear the leaves whispering above, the insects 
humming, the stubble rustling, the trembling of a thrashing 
machine, and the rush of a train in the far distance. Jack 
returns from the pond, throws himself on the ground on his 
face, kicks his legs in the air and whistles softly, with the 
gentle Grindum blinking beside him. Chance and Tinker lie out 
full length on their sides and go to sleep. Wasp stretches on 
the ground, with her legs out behind her, and drags herself 
about with her front feet. Pepper sits down, scratches his 
ear, and then dashes at a passing bumble bee, and all becomes 
a pleasant jumble of sights and sounds; but, with a start, I 
recover myself, drop my pipe, topple my hat off and lose my 
temper, for that everlastingly restless, volatile, good-for-
nothing, ramshackly beast, Pepper, has been and licked me all 
up the side of the face! The dream, the quiet, the rest is all 
broken, so, jumping up, I tip my pipe out on the heel of my 
boot, give a stretch, grasp the spade, and off we go to finish 
our job.

For three hours we work our way on, and a line of dead rats on 
the headland marks our progress, till at last we reach the 
bottom of the field and our bank is done. Pepper has got three 
more bites, another ferret is done for by a nip on the nose, 
and Jack has torn his trousers and is very dirty; but there is 
yet the drain pipe under the gate to attend to, and it is 
getting on in the day. I cut three or four long sticks and tie 
them tightly together, and then to the end of this fasten a 
good hard bunch of grass, and back we go to the drain. I go to 
one end with Grindum and Pincher, whilst Jack takes the 
sticks, Pepper and Wasp to the other end, and gently and 
slowly shoves the sticks through. Two venturesome rats bolt at 
my end and are killed. When the sticks appear I grasp them and 
gradually draw the wisp of grass into the drain. It fits tight 
and takes some pulling, but it comes steadily along, wiping 
all before it. Faster and faster the rats bolt and are killed, 
and even old Chance, who began by watching us, gets excited 
and joins the sport. Pepper and Wasp dash in for a last worry, 
which is over in a few minutes, when twenty-four rats are cast 
by Jack up on to the bank. Well done, dogs! well done, good 
dogs! Woo-hoop, woo-hoop! Good dogs! That's the way, my boys! 
Woo-hoop! woo-hoop! And the dogs roll on the ground, stretch, 
wipe the dirt out of their eyes with their paws, and rub their 
faces in the grass.

Jack goes backwards and forwards and collects the spoil, and 
we count up seventy-three real beauties, a few of which I 
really think should be fourpenny beasts, they are so big. 
Never mind, seventy-three rats at twopence each comes to 
twelve and twopence—not such a bad day's work; and, Jack, you 
shall have a hot supper to-night; and oh, you dogs, you dogs, 
think of the supper I will give you! Bones with lots of meat 
on, oatmeal and such soup! Think of it, dogs! think of it! And 
so the work ends, and all are happy and contented.

Three miles down turning twisting lanes to reach home, Grindum 
and I first, then Jack, and the rear brought up by the long 
and now a little drooping tail of Tinker. All have had enough; 
even the volatile young Pepper trots slowly, and therefore 
looks ever so much more business-like.

Before we start the shades are falling, and as we trudge along 
nature's evening vespers speak of the closing day. Workmen 
sitting sideways on quiet harnessed cart-horses stump past 
with a friendly "Good night, neighbour, good night!" Women 
with children in "go-carts" bustle past in a hurry to get home 
and fetch up the supper. Farm horses are drinking in the pond 
or browsing on the rank grass at the side; sparrows are 
chattering in the old alder bush before going to bed in the 
ivy on the church; pigs in the homestead are calling for their 
supper; the cows pass us coming home to be milked; rooks fly 
steadily to the old elm trees near the Manor; and a robin 
pipes clear and shrill on the roof of the shed in the cottage 
garden. There are partridges calling out "cheap wheat" in the 
stubble, and peewits crying on the meadows. Cock pheasants 
noisily flutter up to roost in the firs, and the old doctor 
standing at his door makes soft music with his violin.

The parson joins us and has a cheery word for all, especially 
the dogs, who are all his personal friends; and so we jog on 
and reach the village, where the wood smoke rises straight in 
a blue cloud from the cottage chimneys, and the fire-light 
sends a ruddy gleam across the roads. Groups of men and boys 
stand about resting, little children race and play, and oh, 
such a delicious whiff of something stewing, with a little bit 
of onion in it, comes from the open door of the village ale-
house! And this reminds us all that our suppers are near, and 
we finish the evening's walk quite briskly.

No need to say, "Kennel, dogs, kennel!" All go in of their own 
accord, and in five minutes are busy at their savoury-smelling 
hot supper. The ferrets are fed and locked up, and then, 
unlacing our boots at the back door and kicking them off, the 
day is done. Supper, rest and quiet, a pipe, a book, bed and 
happy dreams are all before us.

"Now, Croker, minor, you will go to the Doctor's study before 
school to-morrow. You have been most inattentive, and it is 
not the first time I have had occasion to speak to you. You 
can go now, but don't forget that this is tub night, as you 
all have done on the last four occasions. If I have further 
complaints on this head from the matron, I shall take you all 
out for a long day's rat-catching, so I advise you all to be 
very careful." Five minutes later this master is smoking in 
his room and says to another master who is doing the same, "I 
say, Potts, do you knew I think these new lessons on rat-
catching are all very well; but I think they are beyond the 
capacity of schoolboys. Why, they strain my mind, and I think 
they should only be taken up at the universities and during 
the last term; and then the boys do so hate them," etc.

 

CHAPTER V. 
A Poor Day's Ratting—A Rat in a Queer Place—Rats in my Lady's 
Chamber—Rats in a House—Slaughter in a Cellar—Dead Rats in a 
House.

"CROKER, minor, have you been up to the head-master? Yes? Then 
sit still and don't fidget. Boys, pick up your books on rat-
catching, and we will resume yesterday's task."

The last chapter treats of a prime day's rat-catching, where 
rats  were numerous and known to be numerous; but don't 
suppose all days are like this, for if you do you will be 
sadly disappointed, and you will have a lot to learn, for 
there are days, and very pleasant days too, when you will have 
to walk mile after mile to find a rat, and even then not be 
successful; but you will be out of doors in the fresh air, 
with devoted companions and something fresh to see at every 
step, if you keep your eyes open. Don't get disheartened, and 
above all things never say, "Oh, it is no good looking here or 
looking there for a rat; there is sure not to be one. Come on 
and don't waste time." You often find them in the most 
unexpected places.

I once went three times to the house of an old lady, being 
sent for because there was a rat that came each night and took 
her hen's eggs and carried off young ducks and chickens. I 
spent hours looking for it in hedges, ditches, sheds, out-
houses and stable, and even put Tinker up on the roof of all 
the buildings, thinking the assassin might be under the tiles; 
but it was no go.

Night after night the plunderer came, and I began to see that 
the old lady did not think much of me. At last, one afternoon, 
I called again and began operations by asking to have a dog 
that was tied up to a kennel in a back yard led away, as his 
barking disturbed my dogs. This was done, and a minute 
afterwards Chance was sidling round the kennel, staking her 
reputation upon the rat being under it. I got out a ferret and 
looked round the kennel, and was utterly disgusted to find it 
was placed firmly on hard ground without a vestige of a hole. 
I am sorry to say I went so far as to sneer at Chance and tell 
her she did not know the difference between a dog and a rat. 
She herself for a moment seemed in doubt, but the next she 
went inside the kennel and stood at a hole in the plank floor. 
I put the ferret back in the bag and, taking hold of the 
kennel, tilted it up, and in an instant the dogs had a 
vicious-looking old monster dead.

Now the only possible way that rat could have got in and out 
of his house was by passing the dog as he slept, and yet the 
old lady and her gardener assured me that the dog was as keen 
as mustard after rats.

I once killed a rat inside a church. I found it during a long 
sermon, but for the life of me I can't remember what that 
sermon was about. I was sitting in a seat opposite about a 
score of village school children, and suddenly I was struck by 
their appearance, and the thought passed through my mind, "How 
like humans are to dogs! Why, those children look just like my 
dogs when they find a rat, especially that flaxen-haired girl 
with a front tooth out." Then I noticed that they were all 
looking in one direction, and so I looked there too and saw a 
rat sitting with just its nose out of a hole which ran under 
the brick floor, apparently listening to the sermon. The next 
morning the parson and I went to the church. I took one ferret 
and only Tinker. I chose Tinker because he was black and 
rather clerical looking. The rat was at home, and we had it in 
five minutes. This was one of the few times I ever did rat-
catching with my hat off, and it felt very queer.

Again, I once killed a mother rat and a lot of young ones 
which I found in the stuffing of a spring sofa in a spare 
bedroom at an old manor-house. There were rats in the walls, 
and "Mary Ann" had often seen a rat in the room when she went 
in to dust, and it had given her "such a turn." This time I 
took all the dogs with me, and we were followed by the lady of 
the house, four dreadfully pretty daughters and "Mary Ann." 
Madam and Mary Ann got on the sofa, standing, and the four 
daughters stood on four chairs round the room. All six clasped 
their clothes tight round their ankles—why, I never could 
think. This was the only time in her life that I ever found 
Chance a fool. Directly she got into the room, she wriggled 
and twisted, turned her head this way and that, threw herself 
on her back and fairly grovelled. Wasp, Pepper, and the long-
tailed Tinker were nearly as bad, and it was plain to see they 
were shy and bashful in such a gorgeous room and surrounded by 
such a galaxy of beauty. It was the soft-hearted Grindum who 
saved us; he blinked much, but directly I said, "Hie round, 
dogs! Hunt him up! Search him out!" he went to work—up on the 
bed, round the room, behind the furniture, and at last began 
sniffing round the sofa. I got hot all over, for I thought he 
was mistaking an aristocratic lady and her hand-maid for rats; 
but no, at last he went under the sofa, and turning over on 
his back began to scratch at the underside of it up above him. 
Madam and Mary Ann jumped off, and the latter felt another 
"turn"; then both took refuge on chairs and again clasped 
their clothes tight round them. I turned the sofa up on its 
back, and there through the sacking near a leg I found a nice 
round hole into the interior among the springs. I put a ferret 
in, and in a minute there was a rush and scuffle, the sofa 
seemed alive, and then three or four small rats bolted out and 
were accounted for; another squeak and rush, and out came the 
mother and was quickly dispatched; then, as the ferret did not 
come out, I ripped the sacking and found it eating a 
deliciously tender young rat. I bagged the ferret, and while I 
did so, Grindum killed three or four small ones. I afterwards 
found that the rats had eaten through the wainscot and so got 
into the room. The rest of the afternoon was spent in turning 
over all sorts of furniture, including beds, and hunting 
through each room with the dogs; but we found no more rats as 
inside lodgers.

Three or four months after this episode, rats swarmed in the 
walls of this same house and behind the wainscoting, and my 
professional services were called in to get rid of them. How 
they got into the house I never discovered, for there were no 
holes from the outside, and no creepers on the walls for them 
to mount by and get on to the roof; the drains did not appear 
to communicate with the inside of the house, and all the doors 
fitted tight. Equally puzzling was it, now that they were 
inside, to get them out, for I dare not put ferrets in, for 
fear they should kill a rat and leave it to decay and smell 
for months.

I tried various plans. I got a live rat, tied a ferret's bell 
on it, and turned it loose, and for days after it was 
constantly heard tinkling inside the walls; but it did not 
drive the rats away. I singed the coat of a rat, put tar on 
the feet of another and turned them loose; but it was no good. 
At last I took possession of a wood-house in a cellar down in 
the basement, from which a short passage led to other cellars, 
and in the walls of these there were many open holes. First of 
all I went carefully over the wood cellar and made sure there 
were no holes in it; and then, putting in a few faggots to 
give shelter to any nervous young rat, I started each night to 
feed them with delicious balls of barley-meal, which were made 
up with scraps. In this way I gave a rats' supper-party each 
night for three weeks, and each morning I found clean-swept 
dishes. At last the fatal day arrived. A string was tied to 
the handle of the door leading up into the kitchen, the food 
was placed in the dishes as usual about ten p.m., and all the 
household, except myself, went to bed. I sat over the kitchen 
fire reading my paper till a distant clock struck midnight, 
and then I gave a sharp pull to the string and heard the door 
bang to and the fastening fall, and I knew I had them. I lit a 
big glass lantern, went round to the stables and let out all 
the dogs, took them to the cellar window and slipt them 
through quickly, squeezing myself through after them and 
shutting the window again. In half no time fifty rats were 
killed, and all the dogs, except Tinker, pretty badly bitten; 
but they were used to that and did not care. Then I locked the 
back door behind me, taking the key home to bring back in the 
morning when I called to be paid eight and fourpence for my 
night's work. Three times in the next three months I went 
through a similar performance, and the first time I killed 
twenty-eight rats, the second seven, and the third time only 
two, and these were old bachelors. Then every hole in the 
walls was filled up with a cement made up with broken glass, 
and I have never heard of a rat in that house since.

Before I forget it, let me tell you that if a rat dies in the 
wall, or under the floor of a house where it can't be got at, 
its whereabouts can be discovered in this way, provided the 
weather is warm. Take a butterfly net over to the butcher's 
shop, and there catch a dozen bluebottle flies, and, taking 
care not to hurt them, slip them into a glass jar and tie a 
rag over it. Return to the room where the smell is, and, 
shutting the door after you, let your pack of flies loose and 
sit down to watch them, and in half-an-hour you will find they 
are all buzzing round one spot. Have this spot opened out, be 
it wall or floor, and there the dead rat will be found. Has 
the bell rung? Yes, half a minute! Put your books away, form 
two and two outside, and I will take you for our usual walk. 
We will resume this task in the morning. Croker, minor, the 
top part of Jones' leg was not made to stick pins into. If I 
see you do it again, I shall give you a rat to catch, so be 
careful!

 

CHAPTER VI. 
A November Day—A Laid-up Ferret—A Tramp Home in the Wet—A Snug 
Evening—Things Students should Know—Muzzling Ferrets—Sucking 
Blood—A Strange Use for a Dog's Tail.

I TRUST that, in the five chapters I have written, I have said 
enough to give some of my scholars a slight taste and liking 
for the profession I am advocating, and in some small degree 
have weaned their young affections from such pernicious 
pastimes as studying classical authors, doing sums, and 
cutting their names on their desks. If I have not done this I 
have written to little purpose, and I fear the next chapter 
will damp off a few who have only followed me and my dogs on 
fine days in pleasant paths; but I may as well tell you at 
once that life is no more all beer and skittles in rat-
catching than it is in such minor professions as the Army, the 
Church, the Bar, school-keeping, etc.; and just to see if you 
are "real grit," boys, I will show you another picture.

Jack, get the ferrets while I let the dogs out. We must go and 
see if we can find a few rats, for it is a week since the 
ferrets had flesh, and we shall have them getting ill; and, 
Jack, bring four in the little bag, and put that inside your 
game-bag, for it looks like rain, and I don't like to see them 
half-drowned. Yes, it does look like rain, though as yet it is 
only a dull, misty, chilly day in mid-November down here in 
the country, but in London it is a thick black fog, and all 
work is being done by gaslight. It is bad and depressing here, 
but ever so much worse there; so cheer up, dogs, and step out, 
Jack. We will go down by the beck and home by the clay-pits, 
for I know of no other place near where we are so likely to 
find a few rats, and I don't want to make a long day of it.

Go over the bridge, Jack. You take that side with Chance and a 
young one, and I will do this side with the other dogs. Hie 
in, dogs! Search him out, lads! And on we go, but in two miles 
we only kill a water-hen that Pepper catches as it rises out 
of some sedges, and which goes into my bag to replenish the 
ferrets' larder. The mist hangs low, the bushes are wet, the 
ground soft, and there is a dreary sigh in the wind. The 
cattle are eating fast, as they always do before rain; and the 
sheep, startled by the sight of the dogs, caper and jump as 
they gallop all down the meadow; and again their playfulness 
warns me of a wet tramp home. Some young colts stand at the 
door of an open shed, dull and depressed looking, and the 
horses ploughing on the sides of the hill send up a thick 
steam. No birds twitter or sing, no insects hum, distant 
sounds are muffled and indistinct. The teams in the waggons on 
the road hard by creep along and take little notice beyond a 
toss of the head at the carter's whip as he walks beside them 
with a heavy step cracking it. The only brisk thing to be seen 
is the doctor's gig as it whisks past.

"Hie up, dogs! shake yourselves and don't go to sleep! Come 
over, Jack; I have had enough of this brook; and if we don't 
find at the clay-pits, home we go." And we trudge off to some 
ponds half a mile further away. They are well-known to both 
men and dogs, and the latter bolt on ahead and arrive first; 
and when we come up we find them all clustered round a hole in 
a high bank 'midst thick dripping bushes. In goes a ferret, 
but not in the way I like to see. There is no hurry, no 
ecstatic wriggle of the tail as it slowly draws itself into 
the hole. Then all stand round expecting to see a rat take a 
header into the pond; but no, five minutes pass, and Pepper 
begins to move, and is told "stand." Ten minutes pass, and 
Jack gets restless. Fifteen minutes, and I begin to shift my 
feet, which are planted deep in sticky mud by the side of the 
pond, and just then the first drops of rain appear. Ah, there 
is the ferret! Jump up and get it, Jack. But before he can do 
so, it has drawn itself into the hole backwards, which means 
that it has killed a rat inside and that it only came out to 
tell us so, and that it was going back to have a good long 
sound sleep curled up by the rat's warm body. There is nothing 
for it but to dig it out; and oh, what a dig, all among roots 
and thorns on the sloping sides of the pond, in thick sticky 
clay, with the rain coming down in a steady pour! Jack hunches 
his back and leans against a tree, Pepper and Wasp wander away 
down a ditch and scratch for an hour at a drain that has a 
rabbit in it, and the old dogs sit and watch me and drip and 
shiver. I dig here, I dig there; I slip and fall on the bank; 
the water mixed with yellow clay runs up my arm from the 
spade, and yet that beastly ferret sleeps peacefully in its 
warm bed. I lose the hole, come down on roots as thick as my 
leg and stones that strike fire as the spade strikes them; and 
so two hours of discomfort to all drift by, and I am just 
feeling about for the last time with the spike end of the 
spade, when I again hit off the hole and, opening it out, come 
upon a nice warm rat's nest made of leaves, with the ferret 
curled up snugly with a dead rat.

"Home, dogs, home! Cheer up, Jack! Cold are you, and wet? 
Well, never mind; only two miles, and we will walk fast. 
Pepper, Pepper, Wasp, Wasp, where on earth have you got to? 
Ah, there you are, and a nice mess you have made of yourselves 
trying to scratch out a hole five hundred yards long. Come 
along all! "And off we tramp, Jack and I in the middle of the 
road, splish splash at every step, the water squirting high up 
our gaitered legs, and the dogs, with drooping tails, dripping 
coats and woe-begone looks, coming along behind us in Indian 
file close under the shelter, such as it is, of the hedge.

We pass the postman, who only nods, and meet a flock of sheep 
all draggled and dirty. An empty cart with a sack over the 
seat stands at the pot-house, and pigs wander listlessly about 
the yard with their backs arched up. Under the waggon-shed 
some cocks and hens stand each on one leg, with their tails 
drooping, apparently too disgusted to prune their feathers and 
fly up to roost in the rafters. The smoke beats down from the 
chimneys and gets lost in the wind and rain which buffets and 
pelts at our back. Cold spots begin to be felt at the bend of 
our arms and knees; then a shiver runs down the back, which 
develops into a trickle of water that at last gets into our 
boots and goes squish, squish, at every step, and at last 
oozes over the tops; and our teeth chatter with cold, for now 
here and there among the rain-drops appear a few flakes of 
snow, which rest on the mud of the road for a second, and then 
melting, add to the deep slush that trickles down the hill by 
our side. At every open shed the dogs shelter a minute, shake 
themselves like dripping mops, and with arched backs stand on 
three legs and shiver; but we whistle them on and at last 
reach home. After throwing a good bundle of dry straw on the 
kennel benches and feeding dogs and ferrets, Jack and I get 
under shelter and soon find ourselves in dry clothes before a 
good fire, feeling a little swollen and stiff about our faces 
and hands, and much inclined for forty winks.

The wind howls in the chimney, lashes the bare branches of the 
trees, rattles the window frames, and appears angry that it 
cannot get at us, and the rain drives in fitful gusts against 
the windows, and hisses in the big wood fire on the hearth; 
and as I sit in my snug arm-chair, I dimly feel that the 
external storm adds greatly to the internal comfort, and then 
I fancy I nod off to sleep, for I think no more till supper is 
announced, and hunger and my wife stir me up to consciousness 
again.

Having finished a good supper and got my pipe drawing 
beautifully, I remember one or two things that I think the 
student should be told. The first is, never put a line on a 
ferret when ratting. It hampers a ferret in a narrow, 
twisting, turning rat's hole, and cutting into the soft earth 
at the turns soon brings the ferret to a dead stop. Then rats' 
holes are chiefly in hedge-banks, which are full of roots, and 
the line is pretty sure to get twisted round some of these, 
and then it will be a long dig to free it. Remember, too, a 
ferret has to go down the hole and face a beast nearly as big 
as itself, with teeth like lancets and with courage to use 
them, and so should be as free as possible; and lining a 
ferret is about equal to setting a student with the gloves on 
to fight against another without them. Then some way back I 
mentioned ferrets' bells. They are little hollow brass balls 
with an iron shot in them that make a pretty tinkling sound, 
and are supposed to be tied round the ferret's neck. In my 
opinion, if you put a bell on it, you may as well put the 
ferret in the bag and keep it there. The theory about bells 
is, that a ferret running down a hole jingling its bell will 
fill a rat with fear and make it bolt, but this is all 
nonsense; rats are not so easily frightened. Again, it is said 
that if a ferret comes out of a hole in a thick hedge unseen, 
the bell will let you know where it is; but I must say I never 
lost a ferret in a hedge or felt the want of a belled one. I 
consider a bell a useless dead weight on a ferret, and the 
cord that goes round its neck to fasten it is apt to get 
hitched on to a root and hold the ferret a prisoner. A bell is 
only good for a sharp shopman to sell to a flat.

I need hardly say, never muzzle a ferret when rat-catching. It 
would be brutal not to let the ferret have the use of its 
teeth to protect itself with. Muzzling ferrets appertains 
solely to rabbiting, but it is useful to know how to do it. 
Take a piece of twine a foot long, double it, and tie a loop 
at the double. Tie the string round the ferret's neck, with 
the loop on the top; bring the two ends down under the chin 
and tie them together there; pass them over the nose and tie 
them there, shutting the mouth tight; pass one string along 
the nose, between the eyes, through the loop on the top of the 
neck, and bending it back, tie it to the other loose string 
from the knot on the top of the nose. Cut the ends off, and, 
provided you have not made a lot of "granny" knots, your 
muzzle will keep on all day. There are other ways of doing the 
trick, such as passing the string behind the ferret's dog-
teeth, bring it under the jaw, then over the nose, on the top 
of the neck; tie it there and again under the neck. I hate 
this plan, and have seen a ferret's mouth badly cut by the 
string. I have heard of another plan which is too brutal to 
mention. Cut the muzzle off directly you have done with it, 
for I don't suppose a ferret likes having its mouth tied up 
any more than you or I should.

Never wantonly hurt any animal, especially those that work for 
you and suffer in your service. Just think of the amount of 
pluck a ferret shows each time you put it into a rat's hole. 
Fancy yourself in its place, going down a lot of dark crooked 
passages that you don't know, only just wide enough to allow 
you to pass, and have to face a beast somewhat like yourself 
and as big, that you know will attack you. Why, if ferrets got 
V.C.'s, they would, on high days and holidays when they wished 
to display them all, have to employ a string of sandwich-men 
walking behind them with the boards covered with V.C. Three or 
four times in my life I have had ferrets die of the wounds 
they have received from rats. I have had them in hospital for 
weeks, and I have had them blinded. Speaking of blind ferrets, 
I am not much of an oculist, but I don't believe a ferret can 
see in the dark. I never could find any difference between the 
way my blind ferret worked in a hole and that of one with good 
eyes; in fact, my blind ferret was as good a little beast as 
ever killed a rat, and she did kill many a score after she 
lost both eyes. I believe a ferret when in a hole uses a sense 
we don't possess—I mean the sense of touch with the long nose 
whiskers.

Some years ago the Field opened its pages to a long discussion 
on the subject of ferrets sucking the blood of their victims 
after they have killed them. Writers pretending to know all 
about it said they did do so. These men are to be pitied, not 
laughed at, for you see in the days of their youth "Rat-
catching for the Use of Schools" was not written, and 
therefore they had not learnt better. A ferret no more sucks 
the blood of the things it kills than a dog does. If you doubt 
this, give a fresh-killed rat to a ferret, let it fasten on 
it, and then peep at the corners of its mouth, and you will 
find an opening there into the mouth, out of which blood would 
flow if the ferret had it in its mouth; and look down its 
throat, you will not find blood in it, nor will there be blood 
on the portion of the rat that has been held in its mouth. No, 
people are misled by a ferret sending its teeth deep home in 
the flesh and making a sucking sound as it with difficulty 
breathes through its nose and the corners of its mouth. If you 
watch a ferret after it has killed a rat, it will, as soon as 
it is sure the rat is dead, begin chewing at the skin of the 
head or throat till it has made an entrance, and will then eat 
the flesh.

To finish this chapter, I will tell you a story which you are 
never to put into practice. Some long time ago I found myself 
far from home in a country village, and having nothing to do, 
I went for a walk, and soon came upon a brother professional 
rat-catcher; and thinking I might learn a wrinkle from him 
that would come in useful, I joined him and carefully watched 
him and his dogs.

I saw at once that three of the latter were very good and up 
to their work; but there was a fourth, a nondescript sort of 
beast with a long tail, that appeared quite useless; and I 
observed with amusement that directly the man put a ferret 
into a hole, the dog tucked its tail tight between its legs 
and went and stood well out in the field. I asked the man why 
he kept such a useless beast, and with a chuckle he answered, 
"Well, mate, I'll own up he ain't much to boast on for rat-
killing, nor yet for looks, but he has his use like some other 
of we h-ugly ones. You see, sir, I've got one or two ferrets 
as won't come out of a 'ole, but stand a peeping at the h-
entrance and waste a lot of time. Then that 'ere dawg comes in 
useful. I catches him, lifts him up, and sticks his bushy tail 
down to the ferret, who catches tight hold, and I draws it 
out. Nothing ain't made for nothing, and I expect that dawg 
was made for drawing ferrets." The man may have been right, 
but I was quite sure the unfortunate dog did not take an 
active pleasure in his vocation.

There, young gentlemen, if you have well digested that chapter 
and forgotten the story at the end, you can put up your books 
and form up for your usual walk to the second milestone and 
back again; but before leaving, let me point out to you, 
Croker, minor, that if that caricature I have observed you 
drawing behind your book is meant for me, it is, like most 
things you do, incorrect; my nose is not so long, and I part 
my hair on the left side, not the right.

 

CHAPTER VII. 
Rabbit Catching—Tools for Rabbit Catching—An Easy Day's 
Rabbiting—Ferreting a Bank—A Deep Dig in the Sand—A Day with 
the Purse Nets—Necessity of Silence—Ferrets without Muzzles—
How to Kill Rabbits.

RAT-CATCHING and rabbit-catching are two distinct professions, 
but the greater part of the stock-in-trade that serves for one 
will answer for the other, and it is as well for the 
professional to be master of what I think I may call both 
branches of his business. A rat-catcher who did nothing but 
kill rats and refused a day's work with the rabbits would be 
like a medical man who would cut off limbs but would not give 
a pill, or a captain of a sailing-vessel who would not go to 
sea in a steamer; besides in these days it is the fashion to 
jumble up half a dozen businesses under one head and name. 
Just look at what the engineer does. Why, he is nowhere if he 
is not (besides being ready, as the engineer of the old 
school, to make railways, etc.) a chemist, an electrician, a 
diplomat, a lawyer, a financier and a contractor, and even 
sometimes an honest man. If you are not in the fashion you are 
left behind as an old fogey, and so in this chapter we will 
discuss the art of rabbit-catching; and I trust all 
schoolmasters will furnish you, their students, with the 
opportunity of putting in practice in the field what you learn 
from this book at your desks.

Well, now for the requirements. We have got the dogs, we have 
got the ferrets, spade, bag, etc.; but for rabbiting we must 
have a much more costly stock-in-trade if we are to do a big 
business. We shall require an ordinary gardener's spade for 
digging in soft sandy ground, where the rabbit burrows 
sometimes go in for yards, and as much as ten feet deep down; 
also another spade, longer in the blade than our ratting one, 
the sides more turned in, and with a handle ten feet long, 
with a steel hook at the end instead of a spike. With this 
spade we can sink down many feet after the hole is too deep 
for the ordinary spade, and the turned in sides will hold the 
soft earth and allow you to bring it to the surface. If you 
dig down on the top of a rabbit—as you will do when you know 
your work—the hook at the end will enable you to draw first it 
and then the ferret up by the string. We must have a piece of 
strong light supple cord, marked by a piece of red cloth drawn 
through the strands at every yard, so that one can tell 
exactly how far in the ferret is; and it is as well to have a 
second shorter cord for work in stiff heavy ground, where the 
holes are never deep. Next, we must have two or three dozen 
purse-nets, which are circular, about two feet in diameter, 
with a string rove round the outside mesh fastened to a peg. 
These are for covering over bolt holes to bag a rabbit when 
driven out by the ferrets. The nets should be made of the very 
best string, so as to be as light and fine as possible. The 
mesh should be just large enough to allow a rabbit's head to 
pass through.

Like the postscript to a lady's letter, the chief item I have 
saved till the last, and I fear it will be some time before 
the ordinary rabbit-catcher will be able to afford it. I refer 
to long nets, which are used for running round or across a 
piece of covert to catch the rabbits as they are bustled about 
by the dogs. A rabbit-catcher in full swing should have from 
eight hundred to a thousand yards of this, for with a good 
long net he will often kill as many rabbits in a few hours as 
he could do with the ferrets in a week.

I myself keep no special dog for rabbit-catching, chiefly 
because I have a neighbour who will always let me have a 
cunning old lurcher that he keeps, which is as good as gold, 
and as clever as a lawyer, and desperately fond of a day with 
me and my dogs.

I have three male ferrets, real monsters, strong enough to 
trot down a burrow and drag five or six yards of line after 
them with ease.

Having described all the tools, etc, necessary for work, I 
will now jot down, as an exercise for you students, a nice 
easy day's rabbiting that actually took place a few weeks ago—
a sort of day that quite a young beginner might work with 
success. There had been a sharp rime frost in the night, which 
still hung about in shady spots at eight o'clock in the 
morning, as Jack and I marched off with my dogs and ferrets, 
accompanied by old Fly, the lurcher. By nine a.m. we began 
working field hedge-rows and banks, where rabbits were pretty 
plentiful and had been established for years in every 
description of burrow. There had been a lot of partridge and 
other shooting going on over this farm for the last month, and 
most of the rabbits had got a dislike to sitting out in the 
open, and were under ground, so we began at the burrows at 
once, the dogs driving every rabbit that was sitting out in 
the hedge back to their burrows as we walked along. We began 
work in a stiff clay bank far too hard for the rabbits to make 
deep holes in, and here we got on fast. I took the ditch side—
in fact, I took the ditch itself—with a big ferret with a 
short line on, and I ran it into each hole I came to. Jack on 
the other side looked out for the bolt holes, and always laid 
down a little to one side, as much as possible out of sight, 
but with a hand just on the bank over the hole ready to catch 
a bolting rabbit. Fly and the other dogs took charge of the 
other holes, and all kept as quiet as possible.

In went the ferret, slowly dragging the line after him till I 
count two yards gone by the red marks on the line; then there 
is a halt for half a minute, then a loud rumbling and the line 
is pulled fast through my fingers. Jack moves quickly, and the 
next instant a rabbit is thrown a little way out into the 
field with its neck broken. Jack says, "Ferret out," then 
picks it up, draws the line through the hole, passes the 
ferret over to me, and we go on to the next, having filled up 
the entrance of the hole we have just worked. Hole after hole 
was ferreted much in the same way. Sometimes Jack bagged the 
bolting rabbit, sometimes the dogs, and now and then one 
bolted and got into the hedge before it could be caught and 
went back, but it was little use, for the dogs with Fly at 
their head were soon after it, and in a few minutes Fly was 
sure to have it, and would retrieve it back to Jack.

As we worked round a big field, we got into softer ground, a 
red sand and soil mixed; and here the holes were much deeper 
and often ran through the bank and out for yards underground 
into the next field. Here Jack and I changed places, Jack 
doing the ferreting, and I going to his side with the garden 
spade. One, two, three, four, five yards the ferret went and 
stopped, and all was quiet. I listen, but not a sound. Jack 
pulls gently on the line and finds it tight, and for a minute 
we wait, hoping a rabbit may bolt from the hole the ferret 
went in at. But no such luck. I take the small ratting-spade, 
and with the spike end feel into the ground at the foot of the 
bank, and at once come upon the hole; this I open out and 
clear of earth, and Jack, who has crept through the hedge, 
kneels down and finds the line passing this hole in the 
direction of the field and going downwards. At that moment 
there is a sound like very distant thunder, and the line is 
pulled quickly four yards further into the hole, and the marks 
show six yards are in. I go about this distance out into the 
field, lie down and place my ear close to the ground. I shift 
about in all directions listening intently, and at last hear a 
faint thudding sound. I shift again a few inches in this 
direction, and lose it; in that, and recover it; again a few 
inches, and the sound is directly under my head, but pretty 
deep down. I take the big spade and open out a hole a yard 
square, and dig down as far as I can reach. I get into the 
hole and sink deeper. I have to enlarge it a foot all round to 
get room, and then I dig down again till only my head appears 
above ground when I stand up. Then I take the long spade, and 
with that sink two more feet, and plump I come on the top of 
the hole, and the ferret shoves a sand-covered head up and 
looks at me. I reverse the long spade and catch the line with 
the hook and pull the ferret up, and then calling Jack, I send 
him head first into the well-like pit, holding on to one of 
his feet myself as I lie flat on the ground to allow him to go 
deep enough. In a minute a dead rabbit is taken out and two 
live ones, whose necks Jack breaks as he hangs suspended, and 
then I pull him up with his plunder, and he rights himself on 
the surface, very red in the face, very sandy, spluttering and 
rubbing his eyes. Then the ferret is swung down again by the 
line, it goes a little way into the hole and returns, and so 
we know we have made a clean sweep. The big hole is filled up 
and stamped down, and after filling a pipe and resting a few 
minutes, on we go with our work.

On the high sandy part of the field we have several deep digs 
like the above, with varying success, and we rejoice when we 
reach the last side of the field and get into clay again, 
where holes are short and most of the rabbits bolt at once. 
During all the day we only stopped once for half-an-hour to 
get a snack of bread and cheese, and by the time the cock 
partridges began to call their families together for roost, 
and the teams in the next field to knock off ploughing, we are 
all, man, boy, dogs and ferrets, fairly tired, and are glad to 
tumble seventeen couple of rabbits into the keeper's cart that 
has been sent out for them, and trudge off home ourselves.

Now for another day's sport that was quite different. No dogs 
with us, only a bag of ready-muzzled ferrets, a bundle of 
purse nets and a spade. Success will depend on perfect quiet, 
and even the patter of the dogs' feet would spoil our sport, 
so they are at home for once, and Jack and I are alone.

It is one of those soft mild dull days that now and then 
appear in mid-winter, a sort of day to gladden the heart of 
foxhunters and doctors, and to make wiseacres shake their 
heads and say "most unseasonable." It is a good day for Jack 
and me, and we feel confident as we steal into a plantation of 
tall spruce firs, placed so thick on the ground that beneath 
them is perpetual twilight, and not a blade of grass or 
bramble to hide the thick carpet of needle points. Softly we 
creep forward to a lot of burrows we know of in the corner of 
the wood, and then I go forward alone and spread a net loosely 
over every hole, firmly pegging it down by the cord. This done 
I stand quietly down-wind of the holes, and Jack comes and 
slips the six ferrets all into different holes, and then 
crouches down on his knees. All is quiet; only the whisperings 
of the tree-tops, the occasional chirp of a bird, or the 
rustle of a mouse in the dead leaves. Five minutes pass, and 
then out dashes a rabbit into a net, which draws up round it. 
Jack moves forward on tip-toe, kills the rabbit and takes it 
out of the net, and covers the hole again. While he is doing 
this, three more rabbits have bolted and got netted, one has 
escaped, and a ferret has come out. The captured ones are 
killed, the ferret sent into another hole, and for an hour 
this work goes on, and during all the time neither of us have 
spoken, for we know there is nothing that scares wild animals 
more than the human voice, unless it is the jingle of metals, 
such as a bunch of keys rattling. They dread the human voice 
because they have had too much experience of it, and the 
rattle of metal because they have not had experience enough of 
it, for it is a sound they have never heard, and nothing like, 
in the quiet woods and fields. On the other hand, animals pay 
but little attention to a whistle, for in one shape or another 
they are constantly hearing it from their feathered 
companions.

But to go back to our netting. An hour over, we pick up the 
ferrets as they come out and bag them, and then I go off to 
some fresh holes and spread the nets again, and we repeat the 
same performance; and during the day we kill, without any 
digging or hard work, about twenty-two couple of rabbits. In 
the above account I have written of a day's sport that took 
place in a fir plantation in a little village in Norfolk, 
where it would have been madness to work the ferrets without 
muzzling them, for they would have been sure to kill some 
rabbits in the holes and then have laid up; but I should 
mention that I have killed many rabbits in the same way on the 
Cotswold Hills in Gloucestershire, and I was much astonished 
when I first got there to find men who thoroughly understood 
their business working their ferrets under nets without 
muzzling them. I adopted the plan myself, and have rarely had 
a ferret kill a rabbit underground. For some reason that I 
could never find out, a Cotswold rabbit will always bolt from 
a hole with a ferret in if it can. It is well known in Norfolk 
that if a rabbit is run into a hole by dogs, you may ferret it 
if you like, but it will never bolt, and it must be dug out. 
But in Gloucestershire I have seen the same rabbit bolt out of 
a hole, get shot at, be run by dogs, go to ground, and again 
bolt at once from a ferret. Few professionals ever use a line 
on a ferret on the Cotswold, one reason being that the burrows 
are nearly all in rocky ground, and there would be danger of 
the line being caught in the numerous cracks; besides it is 
not required, for a rabbit there is sure to bolt, and for this 
reason it is twice as easy to kill rabbits in Gloucestershire 
as it is in Norfolk, especially in the sandy or soft soil of 
the latter county.

Let me here beg of all my readers, especially students, never 
to keep a poor rabbit alive in their hands a second. I don't 
suppose any who read this book could be so unsportsmanlike and 
brutal as to keep a rabbit alive to course and torture over 
again with dogs, or for the fun of shooting at the poor little 
beast. Such ruffians should never be allowed a day's sport on 
a gentleman's property. They are only fit to go out mole-
catching. No, directly you have a live rabbit in your hand, 
take it by its hind legs with your right hand, and the head 
with your left, with two fingers under its face; with these 
fingers turn the head back, and give the rabbit a smart quick 
stretch, and in an instant all its sufferings are over. Never 
hit it with your hand or a stick behind the ears: first, 
because you are not quite sure to kill it with the first blow; 
and secondly, if you do, half the blood in the rabbit will 
settle in a great bruise at the spot where it was struck, and 
make that portion unfit for table.

That is sufficient for this morning, and you may now turn to a 
little lighter work with some algebra.

 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Trip to the Seaside—Surveying the Hunting Ground—A View from 
the Cliffs—A Sea View—The Rector's Daughter—Doctoring the 
Burrows—Running out Nets—"Hie in, Good Dogs".

FORTUNATELY I don't live by the sea. I say fortunately, 
because I look upon the sea as a swindler, for it robs one of 
just half one's little world and upsets all calculations by 
forcing one to live in a mean semicircle. I actually know a 
rat-catcher who is stupid enough to live in a village on the 
east coast, and half his time he and his dogs are at home in 
idleness and are half starved, because the ever-restless 
tiresome sea rolls about and disports itself over all that is 
east of the village, so the poor man can only go rat-catching 
in one direction. Now and then I go to the sea-side, but when 
I go there it is on business—not in my Sunday clothes and with 
a "tripper's" return ticket, but with my dogs, ferrets, nets 
(the long ones) and the boy Jack; he and I dressed in our 
well-worn corduroys, gaiters, and navvy boots; and instead of 
choosing a town to visit with Marine Parade, Esplanades, 
Lodgings to let, Brass Bands, Nigger Minstrels and spouting 
M.P.'s, we go to a little village unknown to "trippers," and 
put up at a small inn for a week or ten days. We sleep in a 
room not unlike a hay-loft, and take our meals and rest in the 
common kitchen, with its rattling latticed windows and sanded 
floor.

We go there twice each winter to kill rabbits on what are 
called the "Denes," which are great, wide, down-like lands on 
the top of the steep earth cliff, partially covered with the 
ever-flowering gorse, a cover dear to rabbits and all sorts of 
game. We reach the inn in time for an early dinner; and after 
we have housed the ferrets in a big tub and the dogs in a warm 
dry shed with heaps of straw to sleep on, Jack and I despatch 
our food and then start off to inspect the field of our future 
operations. We have not far to go. First down the street, past 
two or three dozen flint-pebble cottages; past the church, 
with its square tower so high that it makes the really big 
church look small in proportion; past the rectory; past the 
schools, where some forty or fifty future fishermen and 
sailors have just finished their tasks for the day and come 
rolling out, dressed all alike in dark, sea-stained, canvas 
trousers and thick sailor jerseys; past the low one-storied 
cottage where the old retired naval captain has lived for many 
years, and then up a sandy lane between high crumbling banks 
and out on to the open Denes. We take a path that runs close 
along on the top of the cliff, mounting a steep hill as we go 
till we reach a spot half a mile further on, where the sea 
cliff is four hundred feet high and nearly perpendicular; and 
here among the ruins of an old church, part of which has 
fallen with the slipping cliff into the sea many years ago, 
Jack and I halt and take a look round. We are on the highest 
spot within miles, and spread out in front of us, as we face 
inland, are, first, the down-like hills, dotted over with 
patches of gorse and with turf between as fine and soft as a 
Persian carpet; then cultivated fields intersected by thick 
hedges; and in the distance we could distinguish a clustering 
village here, a homestead there, an old manor-house in its 
well-kept garden and park-like grounds, and in all directions 
the square, solid, picturesque towers of village churches 
peeping from among the trees, that became thicker and thicker 
the further the eye travelled from the sea. Close to our left, 
just under the shoulder of a hill which protects it from the 
keen east wind off the sea, is a tiny village of some ten 
cottages, all different, all neat and snug-looking, each in 
its own garden. There is a stand of beehives in one, a 
honeysuckle-covered porch to another, and, though it is mid-
winter, there is a warm home-like look about all. Then there 
is the one farm-house, well kept and well cared for, but old 
and belonging to other days, as its gables and low windows 
denote; and from our high hill we look over the house into a 
garden and orchard beyond, both enclosed by grey lichen-
covered walls. On either side in front of the house are the 
farm buildings, all, from the big barn to the row of pigsties, 
thatched with long reeds, which give the whole a pleasant 
English home appearance.

There are big yards filled with red and white cattle up to 
their middle in straw, others full of horses or young calves; 
cocks and hens are everywhere, ducks and geese swim in the big 
pond by the side of the road, and turkeys, so big and plump 
they make one long for Christmas, mob together in the yard, 
and the turkey-cocks "gobble-gobble" at a boy who is 
infuriating them by whistling. A man crosses the yard with two 
pails on a yoke, evidently going a-milking; and another passes 
with a perfect hay-stack on his back, and a dozen great heavy 
horses come out of the stable in Indian file and stump off to 
the pond to drink. Beyond the farmstead, in a field on the 
right of the road, is a double row of heaped up mangels and 
swedes; and a little further on are a number of stacks, so 
neatly built and thatched that it seems quite a pity they 
should soon be pulled down and thrashed, but all showing signs 
of prosperity and plenty.

Beyond this stands a tiny church, with reed-thatch roof. It is 
all, church and tower, built of round flint stones as big as 
oranges, cleverly split in two and the flat side facing 
outwards; and from the dog-tooth Saxon arch over the door one 
knows it has seen many generations pass away and find rest 
from the buffets and storms of the world in the peaceful, 
carefully-tended "God's acre" that surrounds it. If one passed 
down the red gravel churchyard path, and on in front of the 
south door to the far corner, under the big cedar, a small 
door would be found, which would lead through a well-kept, 
old-fashioned garden to the Rectory: a good old Elizabethan 
house, covered with thick creepers up to the very eaves, the 
model of one of England's snug homes—homes that have turned 
out the very best men the dear old land has produced, to 
fight, struggle, conquer or die in all professions, in all 
parts of the world; men who in such shelters learned to be 
honest and true, brave and persevering, lions in courage, 
women in gentleness; who could face hardships and poverty 
without a moan, and prosperity and riches without swagger; and 
through all the difficulties of life thought of the old home, 
and when success arrived, be they ever so far away, packed up 
and came back to finish their days in just such another home 
and such surroundings.

Turn round now, Jack; turn round and take a look at the 
restless sea rolling its big waters on the smooth strip of 
sand there below on this side; and on the other, Jack, far, 
far away over there in the south, on the other side of the 
world, laving the roots of the palm and the mangrove, beneath 
the burning rays of tropical suns; and away round here, Jack, 
far in the north, dashing its storm-driven waves against the 
face of frost-bound rocks and treacherous icebergs. There on 
the dancing waters, with all sails set, chasing the lights and 
shadows as they flit before it, sails a boat bound south to 
sunny climes.

There on the horizon, against wind and wave, steams a collier, 
taking fuel to lands where the snow lies deep on the ground 
for four months in the year; and right and left, outward bound 
or coming home, are various white sails dotting the waters. 
But, Jack, how about supper? I ordered eggs and bacon for 
supper, and those chimney corners at the inn looked as if they 
might be snug and warm to smoke a pipe in afterwards before 
turning in. Step on, Jack, and have supper ready in half an 
hour, while I go round by the Rectory and see if the two young 
gentlemen are at home. They are the right sort, and as keen as 
Pepper after the rabbits, and they always have half a dozen 
good terriers as fond of the sport as they are.

At the Rectory I received a kindly welcome from Miss Madge 
Ashfield, the rector's only daughter and the sister of the two 
lads I came to enquire for; and I was told that they were not 
yet back from school, but were expected in three days, and 
that only that morning a letter came from them asking when I 
was likely to come and work the Denes. I comforted Miss Madge, 
who at first feared the pick of the sport might be over before 
her brothers arrived, by telling her that for the next four 
days Jack and I should be busy "doctoring" holes, and that 
during that time we could not "away with" boys or dogs, as 
both were too noisy for the work.

Miss Madge took me round to the kennels to see some rough 
wire-haired terriers, old friends; also three new ones, all 
supposed to be wonders; and she told me she would arrange for 
her brothers to bring one day five small beagles belonging to 
a friend.

Jack and I did our duty by the ham and eggs that night at the 
inn, and the pipe in the old-fashioned chimney corner was very 
sweet; and if the beds were a bit hard and knubbly, we did not 
keep awake to think of them, for we had both been up since 
daybreak. By eight o'clock the next morning we had finished 
breakfast, given the dogs a few minutes' run to stretch their 
legs, fed the ferrets that were not wanted, and were on our 
way to the Denes, each with two strong male ferrets, a spade, 
and game-bag with cold meat and bread in it. We were on our 
way to "doctor" the burrows, and this is done by running a 
muzzled ferret that has first been smeared with a little 
spirits of tar down every hole, with a line on it. It is 
necessary to keep very quiet, so as to get the rabbits to 
bolt. We don't want to kill a single rabbit, but only to 
disturb hole after hole, bolt what rabbits we can, and leave a 
nice sweet smell of tarred ferret behind us. No time is lost. 
Jack goes one way and I another, and every hole is visited 
till evening shades stop us; then back home to supper and bed, 
and at it again in the morning; but on the second day we begin 
by visiting each hole we ferreted the day before, stopping 
them tight down with sods, and sticking a piece of white paper 
on the top of such stopped holes. No fear of shutting in a 
rabbit, as the smell of the tarred ferret will keep them out 
for days; and no fear of their opening the stopping, as the 
paper will drive them away. For four days this work goes on, 
and we are ready to wager there is not a hole in the cliffs or 
Denes that is not doctored, and not a rabbit that is not above 
ground.

It was Wednesday night when we had finished, and that evening 
the two boys from the Rectory came down to the inn to see us 
and get instructions for the morrow; but I was glad they did 
not stay long, for we wanted to go to bed early, so as to get 
a good night and yet be up betimes. By eight o'clock next 
morning, Jack and I were already back from the Denes, after 
having run out one thousand yards of long nets. The nets are 
in lengths of about one hundred yards, and two feet six inches 
high, made of fine string, and each of the top and bottom 
meshes knotted on to a cord that runs the entire length. To 
set these nets, they are threaded on to a smooth stick, four 
feet long, and the stick with the nets on is thrown over a 
man's shoulder. The man walks off with the nets along the 
border of the piece of ground to be enclosed, while another, 
after fixing the end of the first net fast to a starting 
stick, follows behind. As the man with the net proceeds, he 
lets the net slip slowly off the stick on his shoulder, piece 
by piece; and, as it comes down, the man behind picks up the 
top line, gives the net a shake, and

CH. V1H.1	Running out Nets.	143

twists the line round the top of stakes previously placed in 
the ground about fifty yards apart, taking care as he goes 
that the bottom of the net lies for a few inches on the 
ground. In this way squares of gorse of about two hundred 
yards can be entirely enclosed, and every rabbit inside them 
surrounded like sheep inside a fold.

Our breakfast over, we were soon out again with all our dogs 
(except old Chance, who had been left at home on account of 
her age, and also on account of her trick of always liking to 
go up to the carrier's each night to sleep), and we had also 
two real good lurchers. At the foot of the Denes we met the 
boys from the Rectory, with a friend about their own age, and 
the curate of the next parish with a business-like ash stick 
under his arm; and among them they had mustered a pack of ten 
terriers, some of which wanted to begin work by a fight with 
my dogs; but it takes two to make a quarrel, and my dogs knew 
better than to waste their strength in fighting when there was 
a day's work in front of them.

In a few minutes we were at the first piece of netted gorse—a 
real tearer, close, compact and a mass of thorns; but what 
dogs or boys care for gorse thorns when rabbits are on foot? 
So it is, "Over you go, boys!" "Hie in, dogs! Roust them out 
there!" and the old dogs spring the nets and are at work in a 
minute, while the young ones blunder and struggle in the nets, 
and have to be lifted over. The curate, Jack and I, and the 
man who drove the cart with the nets, and who will carry off 
the dead rabbits, stand at the nets and take out and kill the 
rabbits that get caught; and for the first hour we have as 
much as we can do, and work our hardest. Many rabbits do get 
through the nets, and others go back, and these latter it is 
difficult to get into the nets a second time, and they are 
killed by the dogs in the thick gorse. Yap! yap! yap! "Hie in, 
good dogs! hie in, young ones! Ah! back there! back! no going 
over the nets! Would you? Look here! hie there! in you go!" 
Yap! yap! yap! all scurry, rush and bustle; and the Rectory 
boys and their friend are all over the square at once, and in 
ten minutes so tingle from innumerable pricks from the gorse 
that they are benumbed and feel them no more. "Go, Fly, go!" 
and a big hare dashes out, with Fly after it, and both jump 
the net and make for another clump of gorse; but Fly has never 
been beaten since she was a puppy, and soon returns with the 
hare in her mouth. "Hie in, dogs! hie in!" There are more yet, 
and we are bound to make a clean sweep; and so the work goes 
on.

First one patch, and then another, till lunch-time, which said 
lunch, according to a long-standing custom, comes up in a cart 
from the Rectory; but after snatching a hurried bit, the man 
and I have to bustle away to shift the nets, a work that keeps 
us hard at it for an hour and more; but long before we have 
done, the boys, parson and dogs are at it again in one of the 
first patches we have surrounded, and it is night and the moon 
is up before we have finished and picked up the nets. We find 
on counting the bag that we have two hundred and seventy 
rabbits, and feel content with our day's work. On Friday and 
Saturday the same work, and when we turned homewards on this 
last night, it was as much as man, boys or dogs could do to 
drag themselves along; but we had killed six hundred and fifty 
rabbits in the three days and were well content.

 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Beginning of a Storm—A Ship in Distress—The Village 
Harbour—A Fisherman's Home—Little Jack, the Cripple—Waiting 
for the Boats—A Rough Old Fish-Wife—The Return of the 
Fishermen

SUNDAY was to us all a real day of rest, and we enjoyed every 
minute of it, and for once listened to a very long sermon 
without the fidgets. The Rectory boys came up for a chat in 
the afternoon, so we let the dogs out and went down to the 
beach and strolled quietly about, neither dogs nor humans 
indulging in anything like play—all were too stiff and sore to 
think of it.

We were all out again early on Monday morning, but without 
nets and taking only sticks; and we spent a short day, with a 
long lunch, looking up outlying rabbits in the hedges of the 
farm at the foot of the Denes; and here the two lurchers, who 
during the days at the nets had taken it easy and refused to 
face the gorse, had the chief of the work, for directly a 
rabbit was started by the other dogs, it made straight off 
across the open for the gorse on the Denes, and the lurchers 
were the only dogs fast enough to catch them. We finally had 
to give up work because the dogs of all sorts were too tired 
to move, and also because the weather, that had been fine and 
calm all the previous week, began to break, and before we 
reached shelter there was half a gale sending big green waves 
thundering on to the beach and carrying the salt spray far 
inland.

That night, after Jack was in bed and asleep, I. put on my hat 
and went out, called by the noise of the waters. I joined a 
group of weather-beaten hard-featured men dressed in thick 
blue jerseys and "sou-wester" hats, who stood with their hands 
tucked deep into their trouser pockets, watching the sea from 
behind the shelter of a boat stranded high up on the beach. I 
got a civil word of greeting as I came up, and then we all 
watched in silence, for by this time the "half gale" had 
become a storm, and it was only by shouting we could have made 
each other hear. It was a wild weird scene, awe-inspiring, but 
intensely attractive—at least I found it so; but then such 
scenes did not often come before me, and I daresay my 
companions, who were well used to being out on such a night, 
only felt thankful they were safe on shore, and thought with 
anxiety of those of their friends and neighbours who were out 
battling with the storm. The moon when I reached the beach was 
nearly at the full and high up in the heavens, but it shed a 
fitful light, as each few seconds dark clouds and veils of 
mist flew across its face. One moment the sea lay before us a 
dark black mass, only marked along the beach by a broad strip 
of breaking, foam-crested waves; and the next it was a 
dancing, tossing, roaring sheet of ever-changing liquid 
silver; or far away we would see the spray like pearls rising 
high in the air before the storm, and at our feet the waves 
curled up like huge furious monsters, dashing at the sands and 
shingle as if bent on destruction, and then with a swirl 
sliding back, a mass oil foam, to meet and join the next wave, 
and with its help again come on to the attack.

Over and over again I fancied I could hear the shrieks and 
groans of people in distress, and I turned for confirmation of 
my fancies to the faces of my companions; but all remained 
unmoved, but bore the quiet determined look that assured me 
that, had any unfortunate beings called for help from the 
midst of those wild waters, at the risk of those men's lives 
it would unhesitatingly have been given. Once for a moment, 
when a thin mist swept before the moon and made the light on 
the waters appear more like day than night, I clearly saw on 
the horizon the upper part of a ship's masts, with some sails 
bent to their yards, and all heeled over as if the ship were 
then about to founder, and I gave a loud exclamation; but an 
old sailor put his hand on my shoulder and called in my ear, 
"All right, master, all right! We have watched her for a 
quarter of an hour trying to make the point of the sands 
yonder, and she is now past them and has an open sea. She is 
as safe as you are now, thank God; but it was a near shave, 
and we thought she and all in her were gone." Often since then 
in my dreams I have seen that wind-tossed sea, and heard the 
roar of the waters and the screams of the storm, and seen 
those masts and sails heeling over, and have awoke with a 
start and dread fear in my heart.

I had been tired when I came in from work, and I had a snug 
warm bed waiting for me, and moreover I reasoned that watching 
a storm in the dead of night was no part of a rat-catcher's 
duty; but I was so fascinated I could not tear myself away, 
and I stood with my companions behind the boat till long after 
midnight. Then two other figures dressed like my companions 
joined us, and it was only when they spoke that I recognised 
one as the parson of the parish, and the other as the young 
curate who had helped us with the rabbits. Both asked a few 
questions of the sailors, who seemed eager to give them 
information; and then the rector, turning to me, said: "You 
will be perished by the cold if you stand here longer. Come 
with me, and I will show you a picture of a different sort, 
but yet one that I think will interest you." I readily 
accepted and followed my friend, who, though far from a young 
man, bore the buffeting of the storm manfully; and he led me 
up through the village street, and then turning down a short 
steep lane brought me to a little cove that was partly 
sheltered by a spit of rock that jutted out into the sea. 
There, such as it was, was the harbour of the village, and by 
the fitful light I could see some dozen fishing boats drawn up 
high on the beach above the force of the waves; and beyond, a 
cluster of low, one-storied cottages and sheds, with small 
boats, spars, timbers, windlasses, etc., all denoting the home 
of fishermen. From this cove, early that morning, two boats 
had sailed with their nets for the fishing grounds out beyond 
the sands, and it was for these my friends behind the boat 
were patiently watching, and it was to say a few words to 
cheer and comfort the wives and families of these men that the 
old rector had now come.

From a latticed window just in front of us a bright lamp shed 
its rays over the cove, and the rector took me straight to the 
door of this house, and having knocked and been told to come 
in, he lifted the latch and ushered me inside. The room was 
like hundreds of others along that coast, the homes of the 
toilers of the deep, and bore evident signs of being made by 
men more used to ships than stone or brick buildings. It was a 
good large room, very low, with heavy rafters overhead, which, 
with the planks of which the walls were constructed, had 
doubtless been taken from boats and ships that had served 
their time on the sea. The open fireplace at the end, with its 
wide chimney, was the only part of the building not made of 
old ship timbers and planks, and there was a strong smell of 
tar from these and from sundry coils of dark rope that were 
stowed away in a far corner. The long table down the middle of 
the room was of mahogany and had seen better days in a 
captain's cabin. The benches round the walls had served as 
seats on some big ship's deck; and there were swinging lamps 
and racks hung overhead from the rafters, with rudders, boat-
hook, snatch-block, belaying pins, and various things I did 
not know the use of; but all were neatly arranged. There was a 
large arm-chair made out of a barrel set ready by the side of 
the hearth, on which were spread clean flannel clothes to warm 
and air, in readiness for the home-coming of the wet and tired 
husband.

In front of the fire, attending to it and to three or four 
pots and kettles that simmered on the hearth, stood a woman 
about thirty years of age—just an ordinary fisherman's wife, 
strong and well shaped, without beauty of feature, but bright 
and intelligent looking; and when a smile lit up her face, it 
shed such a kindly ray that one felt that the husband in the 
little fishing boat on the storm-tossed deep might have his 
eyes fixed on the lantern burning in the window, but it would 
be the light of the wife's smile that kept his hand steady on 
the helm and guided the boat, and made him long to round the 
point and come to anchor.

On the other side of the hearth was another arm-chair, also 
made out of a barrel, but much smaller; and in this, packed 
tightly and snugly round with cushions, half-sat, half-
reclined a boy about ten years of age; but, alas! a pair of 
crutches leaning in the corner beside him at once told a sad 
tale. I know the points and beauties of all sorts of dogs, and 
always admire them, but I am not much of a hand at the good 
points and beauties of men and women, and as for boys, it is 
rare I see anything but mischief written in their faces; but 
somehow I could not take my eyes off the boy in the chair. I 
suppose because it was so different to any other young face I 
had ever seen, and so different to what one might expect to 
find amid the surroundings of a fisherman's cottage.

It was a dark, delicate, oval face, like a girl's, with finely 
cut features, and a complexion as fair as the petals of an 
apple blossom; but it was his great brown eyes and long 
eyelashes, black as night, that held the attention, together 
with a look of deep patient suffering, mingled with gentleness 
and love that lit all up, and filled even the heart of a rough 
old rat-catcher like me with a feeling of deep pity and an 
intense desire to protect and befriend a small creature who 
looked too fragile, too beautiful, and too good for this old 
work-a-day world of ours, and as if he were only tarrying for 
a short while before going to his eternal home, where his 
features will be beautified by perfect love, and will lose the 
look of suffering and pain.

The rector, taking off his "sou'-wester" as he entered, turned 
to the woman with a cheery voice, and said, "Well, Mary, how 
are you and the boy?—how are you, my man? I happened to be 
passing" (just as if it were quite a common thing for a parson 
to be out on the loose at one a.m. on a winter's night), "and 
I thought I would just call in to say that the men at the 
boats tell me that the bark of this gale is far worse than its 
bite, and that it is a fair, honest, rattling gale that such 
good sailors as your husband care nothing for, and that we may 
expect the boats in with the daylight, so you may keep the 
pots boiling. But why isn't that youngster snug in bed and 
asleep? Oh! he can't sleep when the wind howls, and Jack is 
away! Why, my boy, Jack will laugh at you when he comes home, 
and say he don't want such big, tired-looking eyes watching 
for him! Well, it will be morning soon, and, please God, Jack 
will be here, and will have popped you into bed himself before 
most of the world are up and about." At this Mary smiled; and 
the little boy, with a low laugh, said "Jack knows Mary and I 
are waiting for him. Jack says he can often see us, and all we 
are doing, when he is out at sea in a raging storm, and the 
night is ever so dark; and he'd feel bad, Jack would, if I was 
not up to see him eat his supper; and besides, Mary could not 
sit here alone and listen to the wind and sea, and I am never 
tired and sleepy when waiting for Jack. Besides, Jack says he 
must tell someone all he has done and seen while he gets his 
supper, and Mary is too busy after the nets and things, so I 
sit here, and Jack tells me of such wonderful things: it is 
just lovely to hear him."

The rector would not sit down, and soon hurried me off to 
another cottage, much such another as the first; but instead 
of Mary and the boy, we found a great, tall, gaunt old woman, 
sitting up before the fire, waiting for her two grandsons, who 
were away in the same boat with Jack; but to the rector's 
cheery, hopeful words, the woman answered with a bitter, 
sharp, complaining tongue: "I don't want no stop-at-home idle 
chaps to tell me what a storm is. Danger! who says there's 
danger? Danger with a little puff of wind like this? Not but 
what both of those boys will be washed ashore one day as their 
grandfather and father were. It's in the blood, and trying for 
a lone woman. Drat the boys! I told them not to go off with 
Jack. I could see plain for days that it was coming on to 
blow; but oh, no! they know better than me, who have lived to 
lose their father in such a storm as this, and to see his boat 
with my own eyes go to pieces on the Point as she came in, and 
not a man saved, and me left with them boys to keep. God only 
knows how I did it, and now they are that masterful they won't 
pay no attention to me." And then, as a hurricane of wind 
dashed at the door and windows and sent the smoke from the 
wood fire far out into the room, the poor old thing started 
and turned to the night outside with a look of terror; and, as 
the storm rushed on, and then there was a lull, she threw her 
apron over her head and sobbed for fear and deep anxiety for 
her grandsons.

The rector comforted her with gentle words and praise of her 
pluck and nerves; and as he and I returned to the beach, he 
told me that the old woman had once been the prettiest girl 
for many miles round, that when her boys were far too young to 
help her the father had been drowned by the upsetting of his 
boat on the Point, and from that day she had worked and 
toiled, mending nets and selling fish in fair weather and 
foul, often weary and half-starved, but succeeding in the end 
to keep her old cottage over her head, and to bring her boys 
up respectably and turn them out two of the smartest fishermen 
along the coast.

As we left the cottage the first tender light of the morning 
was paling the eastern sky far out to sea, and hastening on to 
the Point, we could just make out a distant sail appearing now 
and then out of the departing darkness of the night, and 
before half an hour was over the rector declared it to be 
Jack's boat coming in fast before the wind. All the village 
was astir in a minute, old men and young women and children 
hurrying to the cove and making ready for the homecoming; and 
in a few minutes the boat, with Jack holding the helm and the 
old woman's boys sitting crouched low down, dashed past the 
Point, turned sharp into the cove, and down in a moment fell 
the sail and the anchor-chain rattled out of the bows. There 
was no cheering or noisy welcome or rejoicing, for such scenes 
were the daily incidents in the life of the village; but 
everyone lent a helping hand, and in a few minutes Jack and 
his men were on shore. The old grandmother was there, but took 
no notice of her grandsons, who marched off to the cottage 
laden with oars, etc., where the old woman had just preceded 
them to put out the breakfast.

The rector and I turned to go home, and as I passed the 
cottage where Jack lived I glanced in and saw him standing on 
the hearth, tall, massive, weather-beaten and rugged, with the 
lame boy high up in his arms looking hard in his face, and 
both man and child had such a happy contented smile on their 
faces that it did me good to see, and I think may have 
rejoiced even the angels above.

When parting from me at the inn door, the rector said that if 
I liked to step up to the rectory that evening after my supper 
he would find me a pipe of tobacco, and tell me all that was 
known of the history of the little boy who had awakened such 
an interest in me, for, he added, "it is a very curious 
story."

 

CHAPTER X. 
The Rector's Story—A Ship in Danger Running Straight on the 
Rocks—To the Rescue—Watching the Boat—Breaking up of the Ship—
Beyond the Storms of Life—Life in the Little One—Nature's 
Gifts—What a Hodge-Podge.

AT eight o'clock, having fed my dogs and ferrets and left my 
boy Jack chatting in the harness-room with the rector's old 
coachman, I found myself in a snug arm-chair, pipe in mouth, 
my feet on the fender, and the rector sitting opposite me in 
his study, he also enjoying an after-dinner pipe; and after a 
chat over the events of the day and of the storm of the 
previous night, the rector began the history of the poor lame 
boy at the cottage thus-

"I dare say you remember that about eight years ago the Irish 
question was giving the authorities much trouble and anxiety 
owing to the active turn it had then taken. Hideous murders 
were of daily occurrence in that unfortunate country. Dynamite 
was being used in London to destroy our public buildings, and 
many of our statesmen were being tracked by paid assassins. 
Strict orders had been issued by the authorities to watch all 
our ports to prevent the landing from America of arms and 
infernal machines, and both the police and Customs officers 
were on the alert; and yet, in spite of all, bloodthirsty, 
cowardly dynamiters and assassins succeeded in sneaking into 
the country, and every now and then perpetrated some hateful 
outrage. Well, it was during this time that one November 
morning a queer-looking yacht-like vessel appeared in the 
offing, and for two days kept standing about. During the day-
time it was well out in the offing, but once or twice at night 
it was noticed by the coastguard and sailors to have come 
close in to land, and altogether its movements were so 
mysterious that our suspicions were fully aroused, and the 
officer of the coastguard telegraphed to the captain of the 
gunboat stationed at Brockmouth to put him on the alert.

"For some days after this nothing was seen of the yacht, and 
our suspicions were lulled, and life in our quiet little 
village had settled down to its usual routine, when early one 
stormy morning the strange vessel was again seen close off the 
land, and a boat manned by six men put off for the little 
harbour; and just as it rounded the Point and got into smooth 
water, a dog-cart, that we all recognised as one let out for 
hire in a town ten miles inland, drove down to the beach. 
Beside the driver sat a tall, thin, dark man, but the few 
people on the beach had only time to observe this and that he 
had the dress and appearance of a gentleman, when he sprang 
from the cart and hurried to where the boat lay, and without 
hesitating a moment or speaking to anyone he waded out through 
the low surf to the boat, which at once left the harbour and 
made the best of its way to the yacht, which as soon as all 
were on board hoisted all sail and was soon out of sight, 
driven along by a storm that became in the course of the day 
as fierce a one as that of last night. There was much talk on 
the beach among the fishermen and in the village among us all 
as to what the yacht could be and who the stranger was; and we 
gathered from the driver of the dog-cart, who had put up his 
horse at the inn to rest, that he had been called by the 
porter at the railway station to drive the gentleman over; but 
that he had not heard his name, or what business brought him 
here. The driver, who was a sharp old fellow, said the 
gentleman had chatted with him as he came along, but kept 
pressing him to drive faster and faster, and gave him five 
shillings above his fare to use his best speed, and he added I 
don't know who he is, or what his business may be, but I know 
one thing—he is an Irishman. I can tell it by his tongue, and 
by his queer-looking blue eyes and dark hair.

"Four and twenty hours passed, and during that time many 
people, I among the number, did not go to bed, for the storm 
which had sprung up with the departing yacht had blown itself 
into half a hurricane, and there were fishing boats out, which 
made us all anxious. As we did last night, or rather this 
morning, I went round to a few of the fishermen's houses where 
there were anxious wives and mothers waiting for the absent, 
and chatted with and cheered them, and I was leaving the two 
cottages that I daresay you noticed close under the rock 
towards the Point when the first streaks of morning began to 
appear in the east. I love to see the day break at any time, 
but I especially like to watch it over a stormy angry sea; and 
therefore sheltering myself a little behind a boulder, I stood 
gazing for a while, when presently, like a thing of life, came 
plunging and driving from the very gates of the morning the 
same yacht that had so puzzled us. On and on it came, close-
hauled to the wind, straight for the narrow rock-bound jaws of 
the cove; and I saw at a glance that, if it kept its course, 
it must strike on a group of rocks some half-mile out at sea; 
and, parson as I am, I knew, should she strike them, no human 
aid could save the lives of those on board.

"I hardly know what I did, except that I took off my coat and 
waved it frantically, and mounted the highest pinnacle on the 
rocky point to make myself seen by the fated crew; but though 
at last I could actually distinguish two men at the wheel 
holding the vessel close to the wind, yet they took no notice, 
and came on and on, leaping waves mountains high one minute, 
and lost to sight the next in the trough of the seas. Scores 
of fishermen soon joined me, and even their wives followed and 
crouched near, behind the rocks; and so fully was the ship's 
danger realized, that from time to time a deep groan, half of 
despair, half prayer, went up from all. There was but one 
hope—could the yacht be kept close enough to the wind to lead 
those steering her to believe they could make the entrance of 
the harbour? or would she be carried far enough to windward to 
make this impossible and so force those in charge to alter her 
course to avoid the stiff cliffs beyond? Ah, no! We saw as we 
watched that she was too good a vessel to fall off to leeward, 
and those handling her too good sailors to allow her to do so, 
for she flew over the waves like a beautiful bird for the 
entrance of the harbour, and the sunken rocks were in her 
direct line!

"Suddenly as we watched, with every sense strained to the 
utmost, and our eyes rivetted on the doomed ship, we heard 
away out to sea the boom of a big gun, and then another, and 
presently we saw emerging from the fast diminishing darkness a 
low, long steamer. At first we thought it was a ship also in 
deep distress, making signals; but the old sailors soon saw 
this was not so, and declared it was a gunboat firing at the 
yacht in the hope of driving her on to the rock-bound coast, 
and also to attract the attention of the coastguard, so that, 
should she reach the harbour, those on board might be 
prevented from escaping the hands of justice. It was a cruel 
service for British sailors to be employed on, however 
necessary, and hard to witness. Man hunting man to his death, 
when the wind and waves already held open the portals of 
eternity before him, and little short of a miracle could avert 
his doom!

"A few minutes, a few hundred yards, and the yacht is on the 
rocks! Gallantly she glides along the side of that green wave 
and dashes the foam from her crest ere she plunges deep into 
the sea. A monster wave rolls fast upon her as if to swallow 
her quivering form. High, high she rises, till half her length 
is in the air over the crest of the wave, and then down she 
sinks; then the crash comes. Waves dash over her, her masts 
fall, her boats are wrenched from her sides, and the next 
minute we see her, a tangled mass of wreck and cordage, firmly 
embedded on the pitiless rocks. Don't suppose our fishermen 
had been quietly watching this and doing nothing to help. From 
the first, preparations had been made. Our friend Jack, and a 
score of other active young men, had shoved off the only boat 
on the beach that had the faintest hope of living in a storm 
like this, and had been waiting in it close to the harbour 
mouth some minutes before the yacht struck. But so small was 
the chance of that frail boat living in such a sea, that many 
of the most experienced of the sailors made signals to prevent 
the men starting off to meet what they thought was certain 
death. Others thought it might be done, and waved contrary 
signals; and it was then that one saw what sort of women our 
sailors' wives are, for though many standing there with us had 
near and dear ones in that boat, and were suffering tortures 
of anxiety, not a word was spoken, but all was left for the 
men to do as they thought right.

"As the yacht struck, a deep, wailing shout went up from all 
on land, and those in the boat knew what had happened, and the 
next moment we saw the boat plunge into the green waves at the 
harbour mouth. For a moment it seemed to stagger and quail, 
and then, impelled by those hands and muscles of iron, it was 
driven forward through the blinding spray into the angry sea 
beyond. Shall I ever forget how we watched that boat, now 
mounted high on the top of a wave, now for moments lost to 
sight, the men all straining at their oars to the utmost, and 
always creeping forward yard by yard? All this time, we on the 
Point could see, with increasing fears, that the hope of the 
yacht holding together till reached by the rescuers was but a 
faint one. Each monster wave that rolled in lifted it from the 
rocks and left it to fall back with an irresistible force 
midst spray and foam, that constantly wholly hid it from our 
sight; and even before the boat started, portions of the wreck 
were being tossed about on the sea, making its passage even 
more precarious. At one time a group of human beings was seen 
on the deck clinging to some cordage; but when the next wave 
passed, most of them had disappeared, and we knew they had 
perished before our eyes. It was difficult to distinguish 
objects midst the turmoil, but it soon was whispered among us 
that some one or more persons were crouching behind the 
bulwarks, probably lashed there for safety, and from an 
occasional flutter of a red scarf or garment, we feared there 
was an unfortunate woman among them; and once, as the waves 
receded from the deck, we distinctly saw a man rise up from 
the group and look for a moment towards the approaching boat, 
and then sink again beside his companions, just as the 
incoming wave swept high over the poor shelter the stout 
bulwark afforded.

"If the yacht could only hold together a few minutes longer! 
But no! once more it rises from its bed like some agonised, 
dying monster, and then as it falls back it parts in two, and 
half of it is a drifting mass of planks and timber, washing 
forward as if to meet the boat and destroy it. A portion yet 
remained fixed on the rock, and now and then we could still 
see the group crouching behind the bulwark. On and on fought 
the boat, now a little out of the direct line to avoid the 
wreckage, till it was close behind the wreck and partially 
sheltered by the rampart it formed against the sea; but at 
that moment all that remained of it was again lifted high in 
the air and dashed forward; and when the wave had passed by, 
there was only the frail boat with its brave crew to be seen 
on the surface. We see it pause for a moment, and then the 
oars all dip together, and the boat dashes forward. Someone 
leans over the bows, and there is a moment's struggle; but the 
mist and foam prevent our distinguishing clearly what is going 
on. After a while they evidently find there is nothing further 
that can be done; the boat is put before the waves and comes 
dashing back towards land.

"All on the Point hurried down to the entrance of the harbour; 
and many of the men, with coils of rope in their hands, stood 
ready to give assistance. As each wave rolled under the boat, 
it flew through the water, and then sank back again hidden 
from our sight; but nearer and nearer it came on, till at last 
on the crest of a wave it darted sharp round the Point, and 
lay tossing in comparatively calm water. Steadily its crew 
rowed it up the little harbour, and as it approached the beach 
scores of ready hands seized it and ran it high up on to dry 
land, and a cheer rang out above the roar of the wind to 
welcome those snatched from the jaws of death. But this was 
not responded to by the men in the boat. They all looked stern 
and anxious; and then we saw that Jack, who was crouched in 
the bows, was supporting in his arms the slight form of a fair 
young girl, with long, soft, tangled hair falling around her 
and forming a frame to the most beautiful saint-like face my 
eyes had ever seen. Her lips were parted in a smile, and her 
eyes looked down on a small boy about two years old, who was 
bound in her arms by a red scarf. At first I thought she was 
fainting or falling asleep, but the next moment—merciful 
Heavens!—I saw that the back of her sweet young head was 
battered in and bleeding, and that she was already beyond the 
storms of life and the cruel raging of the destroying 
elements.

"Hard horny hands of rough women tenderly and deftly unwound 
the scarf from off the child; and Jack's wife, Mary, pressing 
him to her bosom, hastened with him to her cottage, while the 
fair dead form was carried to a fisherman's house close by, 
and a few days later was laid in its quiet grave in the old 
churchyard, within sound of the ruthless sea that had so 
cruelly beaten the young life out of it.

"You may easily find the grave, for the fishermen out of their 
deep pity had a plain cross put over it, with just the words 
'Jack's mother' and the date of her death carved upon it. To 
this day, and I fancy for ever, the only name she will be 
known by is Jack's mother,' for all connected with that ill-
fated yacht remains a mystery. Not a living creature escaped, 
except that frail little child. Many bodies were recovered 
during the next few days, and among them the remains of the 
man who had arrived the previous day in the dog-cart; but 
neither on any of the bodies, nor among the wreckage that came 
ashore, was anything found to lead to the identification of 
the yacht or its owners; and though the account of the 
disaster appeared in all the papers and was the talk of the 
county, yet no living soul has ever come forward to claim 
connection with the child or with any of those drowned.

"It was thought at the time that the owner of the yacht was 
one of those desperate ruffians of Irish extraction that have 
from time to time arrived here from America, and that when he 
so hastily joined the vessel he was in fear of detection and 
was about to sail for America. Anyhow the yacht was sighted by 
the gunboat sent to look after it, and chased and driven 
through the storm back to our little harbour, it being 
doubtless the intention of the fugitive to attempt his escape 
by land if he could once reach the shore. How miserably it 
ended you now know; but you don't know quite all, for I have 
not told you that, on reaching their cottage, Jack's wife 
found that the little one breathed. I have told you of the 
storm, and I have told you of the wreck; but words would fail 
to tell of all the love and care and attention that was 
bestowed for weeks—aye! for years, up to this day—on the 
little one. Only the recording angel can note such things, and 
only the God of love can reward them. Not that either Jack or 
his wife think of rewards either from earth or in heaven, for 
their love is wholly unselfish and all-satisfying; and were 
only the boy well and strong, I am sure that in all these 
realms there could not be found a more perfectly happy trio 
than Jack the fisherman, little Jack, and his adopted mother. 
Unfortunately it was discovered that in some way the child's 
back had been injured in the storm. For months he lay between 
life and death, at last to recover partially only in health, 
and without the use of his poor legs.

"Many friends have come forward with help, and great London 
doctors have seen and attended the boy. Till lately they gave 
little hope, but, thank God, there has been during the past 
year a slow but steady improvement, and they now think in time 
the boy may grow strong in health, but there is no hope of his 
ever walking without his crutches.

"Fortunately nature has bestowed many gifts on the poor child 
that compensate him somewhat for his loss—first, an intensely 
loving, unselfish nature; and secondly, a perfect voice and 
passionate love of music. Already he is carried each Sunday to 
church by his father, and his voice in the choir is celebrated 
for many miles round, and has so impressed the organist at the 
cathedral at Marshford that he either comes himself, or sends 
one of his pupils, to give the boy a lesson once a week, and 
there is not a better violinist within the bounds of the 
county than our little Jack is. His father is so proud of the 
boy's gifts that I have known him, when wind-bound in a 
harbour down the coast twenty miles away, walk over the whole 
distance on a Sunday morning and back at night rather than 
miss carrying the little fellow to church and hearing him sing 
there. But it is eleven o'clock, and we were up all last 
night. What, no grog? Well, good night! Come and see me when 
you can, and come and watch the sea with me in another storm, 
and we will see if I can't rake up another story of the doings 
of the rough heroes of our neighbourhood who go down to the 
sea in ships. Good night, good night!" 

And so one of the pleasantest evenings I had spent for a long 
while was over.

Oh, dear! oh, dear! What a muddle, what a hodge-podge I have 
made of this pen work! I sat down thinking it would be quite 
easy to write a book on "Rat-catching for the Use of Schools," 
and I have drifted off the line here, toppled into a story 
there, and been as wild and erratic in my goings on as even 
Pepper would be with a dozen rats loose together in a thick 
hedge. Well, I can't help it. I am not much good at books, and 
it ain't of much consequence, for during the last few days I 
have heard from half a dozen head-masters of schools that they 
find the art of rat-catching is so distasteful to their 
scholars, and so much above their intellect, and so fatiguing 
an exercise to the youthful mind, that they feel obliged to 
abandon the study of it and replace it once more by those 
easier and pleasanter subjects, Latin and Greek. Well, I am 
sorry for it, very sorry. I had hoped to have opened up a 
great career to many young gentlemen, but have failed; and I 
can only console myself with thinking that one can't make silk 
purses out of—you know what. Mind, in this quotation I am not 
thinking of myself and my failure.

THE END
